
East Lyme, CT Code of Ordinances


EAST LYME, CONNECTICUT
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Current through Local Legislation Ord. passed 6-6-2018










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF EAST LYME




Sec. 1.4 affects some of these ordinances and resolutions: Special acts and
ordinances or portions thereof inconsistent with this charter
and superseded by it shall have no further force or effect after the
effective date of this charter.





Revised 2016




CHAPTER 1 - INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS



Section




   1.1   Incorporation





   1.2   Rights and Obligations





   1.3   General Grant of Powers





   1.4   Effect of Charter; Existing Laws and Ordinances





   1.5   Definitions




1.1   Incorporation



   All of the inhabitants dwelling within the territorial limits of the
Town of East Lyme, as said limits now are or may hereafter be constituted by
law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of
“Town of East Lyme,” hereinafter called “the town,” and as such shall
have perpetual succession and may hold and exercise all powers and privileges
heretofore vested in said town and not inconsistent with the provisions of
this charter, the additional powers and privileges herein conferred and all
powers and privileges presently or hereafter conferred upon towns under the
general laws of the State of Connecticut.



1.2.   Rights and Obligations



   All property interest, both real and personal, all actions, rights and
causes of action and rights of every description and all securities and liens
vested or inchoate which the town possesses as of the effective date of this
charter shall be continued in said town. The town shall continue to be liable
for all debts and obligations of every kind for which the town shall be
liable on said date. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the right of
the town to collect any assessments, charge, debt or lien. If any contract
has been entered into by said town prior to the effective date of this
charter or any bond or undertaking has been given by or in favor of said town
which contains a provision that the same may be enforced by any commission,
board, department or officer therein named, which is abolished by the
provisions of this charter, such contracts, bonds or undertakings shall be in
no manner impaired but shall continue in full force and effect and the powers
conferred and the duties imposed with reference to the same upon any such
commission, board, department or officer shall, except as otherwise provided
in this charter, thereafter be exercised and discharged by the board of
selectmen of said town.



1.3.   General Grant of Powers



   In addition to all powers granted to the town under the constitution
and general statutes, the town shall have all powers granted by this charter,
all powers fairly implied in or incident to the powers expressly granted and
all other powers incident to the management, government, and affairs of the
town, including the power to enter into contracts with the United States or
any federal agency, the State of Connecticut or any political subdivision,
agency or instrumentality thereof for purposes not prohibited by law. The
enumeration of specific powers in this and any other chapter of this charter
shall not be construed as limiting this general grant of powers but shall be
considered as in addition thereto.



1.4.   Effect of Charter: Existing Laws and Ordinances



   This charter shall be the organic law of the town in the administration
of its local affairs. Special acts and ordinances or portions thereof
inconsistent with this charter and superseded by it shall have no further
force or effect after the effective date of this charter. Other special acts
affecting the town, and all other ordinances and resolutions duly adopted and
in force before the effective date of this charter, remain in force.



1.5.   Definitions



   1.5.1.   The term “board” or “boards” as used in this
charter shall be deemed to include all boards, commissions, agencies and
committees, except as otherwise specified.



   1.5.2.   The terms “prescribed by law” and “provided by law”
as used in this charter shall be deemed to mean prescribed or provided by the
general statutes, by charter, and by ordinance.



   1.5.3.   The term “enact” or “enactment” as used in Chapter
3 of this charter shall be deemed to include the adoption, amendment or
repeal of an ordinance.



   1.5.4.   The term “department” as used in Section 6.3. of this
charter shall be deemed to mean each board, commission, committee and agency
of the town for which an appropriation was made in the annual budget; each
official who is not a member of a board, commission, committee or agency for
whom an appropriation was made in the annual budget; each separate function
of the town for which the Board of Selectmen is responsible.



CHAPTER 2 - ELECTIONS AND ELECTIVE OFFICERS



Section




   2.1   Town Elections





   2.2   Voting Districts





   2.3   Eligibility





   2.4   Minority Representation





   2.5   Vacancies in Elective Offices





   2.6   Records





   2.7   Two-Year Term Offices





   2.8   Four-Year Term Offices; Organization; Compensation





   2.9   Board of Education





   2.10   Board of Finance





   2.11   Planning Commission





   2.12   Zoning Commission





   2.13   Board of Assessment Appeals





   2.14   Additional Elective Boards and Commissions





   2.15   Alternate Members of the Planning Commission





   2.16   Alternate Members of the Zoning Commission




2.1.   Town Elections



   2.1.1.   A meeting of the electors of the Town of East Lyme,
hereafter called “the regular town election”, shall take place on the
Tuesday following the first Monday in November, 1965 and biennially
thereafter. Special town elections may be called from time to time in
accordance with the general statutes.



   2.1.2.   All elective town officers shall take office on the first
Monday of December next succeeding their election and they shall continue in
office until their successors have been chosen and have qualified.



2.2.   Voting Districts



   The number of voting districts in the town shall be as determined by
the legislative body as provided by law.



2.3.   Eligibility



   No person who is not at the time of his election a resident elector of
the Town of East Lyme shall be eligible for election to any town office, and
any person ceasing to be a resident elector of the town shall thereupon cease
to hold elective office in the town and the office shall be deemed vacant.
All elective officers shall be sworn before taking office and the officer
administering the oath shall record such fact in the office of the town clerk.



2.4.   Minority Representation



   Membership on all boards provided for by this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the minority representation law as set forth in
the general statutes.



2.5.   Vacancies in Elective Offices



   2.5.1.   The Board of Selectmen shall fill by appointment a vacancy
in an elective office within thirty days from the time that the office
becomes vacant, except as otherwise provided by law.



   2.5.2.   A vacancy occurring on the Board of Education, Board of
Finance, Planning Commission, Zoning Commission and Board of Tax Review shall
be filled by vote of the remaining members, including alternate members duly
seated as provided by ordinance; but if the vacancy is not filled within
thirty days from the time that the office becomes vacant, the Board of
Selectmen shall fill the vacancy by appointment within thirty days thereafter.



   2.5.3.   Vacancies on the Board of Selectmen shall be filled in the
manner prescribed by the general statutes.



   2.5.4.   An appointee to a vacancy in an elective office shall serve
until a successor elected at a special election or at the next regular town
election qualifies. A person elected at either a special or regular town
election to fill an unexpired term shall serve the remainder of the term.



   2.5.5.   A vacancy occurring among the alternate members of the
Planning Commission or the Zoning Commission shall be filled until the next
special election or regular Town election by vote of the members of that
Commission including any alternate members then serving for absent or
disqualified commissioners; but if the vacancy is not filled within thirty
days from the time that the office becomes vacant, the Board of Selectmen
shall fill the vacancy by appointment within thirty days thereafter.



(As amended 12/2/04)



2.6.   Records



   Copies of all minutes taken by each board and the recorded vote of each
member thereof on all issues shall be filed with the Town Clerk and with the
First Selectman within fourteen days of the date on which such actions are
taken. The Town Clerk shall maintain files of such minutes, which shall be
public records.



2.7.   Two-Year Term Offices



   2.7.1.   At each regular town election there shall be elected a
Board of Selectmen, consisting of the First Selectman and five Selectmen. No
more than four members of such Board of Selectmen may be members of the same
political party. The votes cast for the unsuccessful candidate for First
Selectman shall not be counted as votes for him as a member of the Board of
Selectmen. These officers shall serve terms of two years and shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by law.



(As amended 12/2/04)



2.8.   Four-Year Term Offices: Organization: Compensation



   2.8.1.   At the regular town election in November of 1965 and
quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected a Town Clerk, a Tax
Collector, and a Treasurer. The Treasurer shall also exercise the function of
the agent of the town deposit fund. These officers shall serve terms of four
years and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



   2.8.2.   Following the transition period of each board, there shall
be elected at each biennial town election for terms of four years, one-half
of each board authorized by Sections 2.9 through 2.12 inclusive, of this
charter. Alternate members of the Planning and Zoning Commissions shall be
elected biennially in a ratio of one-third and two-thirds of the members,
respectively.



(As amended 12/2/04)



   2.8.3.   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all boards
authorized in this chapter shall meet within thirty days of taking office and
shall make regulations for the conduct of their meetings and the execution of
their duties. Such regulations and any amendments thereto shall be filed with
the Town Clerk, and shall be public records.



   2.8.4.   The members of the boards named in Sections 2.9 through
2.12 inclusive of this charter, shall serve without compensation except that
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties shall be paid
from an appropriation for that purpose.



   2.8.5.   At the regular election in November of 1990 and
quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected such number of Registrars of
Voters as may be required by the General Statutes, and such number of
Justices of the Peace as may be required by Ordinance, or in the absence of
an applicable Ordinance, by the General Statutes.



2.9.   Board of Education



   The Board of Education shall consist of ten members serving four year
terms. Such Board shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



2.10.   Board of Finance



   The Board of Finance shall consist of six members serving four year
terms. Such Board shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



2.11   Planning Commission



   The Planning Commission shall consist of six members serving four year
terms. Such Commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



2.12   Zoning Commission



   The Zoning Commission shall consist of six members serving four year
terms. Such Commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



2.13   Board of Assessment Appeals



   The Board of Assessment Appeals shall consist of five members serving
four year terms to be elected in accordance with the transition process
described in section 8.2.9.1. Such Board shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by law.



2.14   Additional Elective Boards and Commissions



   The Board of Selectmen may, by ordinance, create additional boards and
shall specify their powers and duties in such ordinance.



2.15   Alternate members of the Planning Commission



   Three alternate members of the Planning Commission shall be elected to
serve four year terms. Such members shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by law.



(As amended 12/2/04)



2.16   Alternate members of the Zoning Commission



   Three alternate members of the Zoning Commission shall be elected to
serve four year terms. Such alternate members shall not be members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Commission. Such members shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by law.



(As amended 12/2/04)



CHAPTER 3 - BOARD OF SELECTMEN



Section




   3.1   Compensation; Other Office-Holding





   3.2   First Selectman





   3.3   Board of Selectmen; General Powers, Duties and Procedures





   3.4   Enactment of Ordinances




3.1.   Compensation: Other Office-Holding



   3.1.1.   There shall be a Board of Selectmen consisting of the First
Selectman and five Selectmen. The compensation of the First Selectman shall
be included in the proposed budget of the Board of Selectmen. Any
compensation for the five Selectmen shall be included in the proposed budget
of the Board of Selectmen. Necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
the duties of the First Selectman and the five Selectmen shall be paid from
an appropriation for that purpose.



   3.1.2.   The First Selectman, during his term of office, shall not
hold any civil office which provides compensation, under the government of
the United States, the State of Connecticut, or any subdivision thereof,
except that of Notary Public.



   3.1.3.   No member of the Board of Selectmen, during his term of
office, shall hold or be appointed to any other office or employment in the
government of the town, except as provided hereinafter, and except as may be
prescribed by law.



3.2.   First Selectman



   3.2.1.   The First Selectman shall be the chief executive and
administrative officer of the town and shall have the powers and duties of
First Selectman prescribed by law. He shall be the official head of the town
for all ceremonial purposes, for military purposes and for the purpose of
receiving civil process. He shall establish and be responsible for the
administrative and personnel policies for town offices and employees, with
the approval of the Board of Selectmen, and shall execute or cause to be
executed the town ordinances, regulations, resolutions and policies voted by
the Board of Selectmen. The First Selectman, with the approval of the Board
of Selectmen, shall generally supervise the administration of the affairs of
the town, except those matters which by the general statutes, by charter, or
by ordinance, are exclusively committed to the Board of Education or other
boards. He shall preside over meetings of the Board of Selectmen.



   3.2.2.   Within thirty days after the Board of Selectmen takes
office, the First Selectman shall designate each of the other members of the
Board of Selectmen as an ex-officio member without vote, of one or more of
the town boards. The ex-officio members shall regularly attend the meetings
of the boards to which they have been appointed and shall report to such
boards and to the Board of Selectmen matters relating to the mutual interests
of such bodies.



   3.2.3.   The First Selectman shall hire and dismiss employees of the
town, except employees of the Board of Education and except employees whose
employment is otherwise provided by law, and shall give notice of each hiring
or dismissal to the Board of Selectmen at its next meeting. Such hiring or
dismissal may be overruled only by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen
at its next meeting following such notification.



   3.2.4.   The First Selectman shall have responsibility for the care,
maintenance and operation of all buildings, lands, apparatus and property
which are subject to the control of the Board of Selectmen.



3.3.   Board of Selectmen, General Powers, Duties and Procedures



   3.3.1.   The Board of Selectmen shall have the sole power, subject
to the requirements of the general statutes and of this charter:



      3.3.1.1.   to incur indebtedness in the name of the town and
to provide for the due execution of contracts and evidences of indebtedness
issued by the town;



      3.3.1.2.   to accept or abandon as a public highway any street
or highway situated in the town after approval by the Planning Commission;



      3.3.1.3.   to institute, prosecute, defend or compromise any
legal action or proceeding by or against the town;



      3.3.1.4.   to enter into contracts for any services and to
purchase or to contract to purchase any supplies, materials, equipment and
other commodities required by any town agency, except the Board of Finance
and except the Board of Education. However, the Board of Education may
request the Board of Selectmen to act for it in the making of such contracts
and purchases; and the Board of Selectmen may delegate its powers in this
Section 3.3.1.4. to any town agency or to the First Selectman;



      3.3.1.5.   with Board of Finance approval, to purchase real
estate, the price of which shall not exceed ten thousand dollars and accept
gifts of real estate;



   3.3.2.   The Board of Selectmen shall have such other powers and
duties as are provided for board of selectmen by the general statutes and
this charter. The Board of Selectmen shall be the legislative body of the
town except as otherwise provided by this charter and may exercise any of the
powers conferred on towns by the General Statutes to the extent that such
powers are not otherwise granted or limited by this charter.



   3.3.3.   The Board of Selectmen shall be responsible for
coordinating the activities of all the agencies of the town, and for keeping
under review the present and future needs of the town. It shall require such
reports and joint meetings as may be useful to it in the performance of its
duties.



   3.3.4.   At the first meeting after the Board of Selectmen takes
office, a majority of the members shall designate one of their number who
shall, until any vacancy is filled in accordance with the general statutes,
upon the absence or disability of the First Selectman, preside at meetings of
the Board of Selectmen and have such powers and perform such other duties of
an absent or disabled First Selectman as the Board of Selectmen may designate
by regulation.



   3.3.5.   The Board of Selectmen shall retain for six years from the
time of filing, all minutes and records of the boards which are filed with
the Board of Selectmen.



   3.3.6.   A majority of the Board of Selectmen shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of any business. The Board of Selectmen shall make
regulations for the conduct of its meetings and for the execution of its
duties, and shall hold regular meetings. Such regulations shall be filed with
the Town Clerk and shall be public records.



   3.3.7.   The Board of Selectmen may, by resolution, delegate to the
First Selectman, its obligation to sign the orders of the Board of Selectmen
on the Town Treasurer for payment of the expenses of the town. Such
delegation may be limited in such manner as the Board of Selectmen may deem
advisable.



3.4.   Enactment of Ordinances



   3.4.1.   The Board of Selectmen shall have the power to enact
ordinances consistent with the General Statutes and this charter on any
matter which the General Statutes or this charter permit to be regulated by
ordinance, and in general for the preservation of the order, health, welfare
and safety of the town and its inhabitants.



   3.4.2.   At least one public hearing shall be held by the Board of
Selectmen before enacting any proposed ordinance. Notice of a hearing shall
be given by publication of the proposed ordinance and of the time and place
of the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town, not
less than ten days before the date of such hearing.



   3.4.3.   Upon enactment of an ordinance, notice thereof shall be
given by publication of the official title of the ordinance and its effective
date in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town, and by filing
with the Town Clerk. Such ordinance shall not become effective sooner than
ten days after publication. If, within ten days after such publication,
petitions are filed with the clerk carrying the signatures and street
addresses of two hundred or more electors requesting a town meeting to act
upon overrule of such ordinance, the effective date of such ordinance shall
be suspended until such action to overrule is resolved. If such petitions are
so filed and verified by the Town Clerk, the Board of Selectmen shall call a
special town meeting to be held within twenty days after the date of receipt
by the Town Clerk of such petitions, by publication of notice of the time and
place of such special town meeting and the full text of such ordinance in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the town, not less than five days
before the date of such special town meeting. Two hundred electors shall
constitute a quorum at such special town meeting, and such ordinance shall be
overruled, void and of no effect if a majority of the electors voting at such
special town meeting, or if a quorum is present and a majority of the
electors present does not vote to overrule such ordinance, such ordinance
shall become effective upon publication of the official title of such
ordinance in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town.



   3.4.4.   Wherever publication is required by this section, such
publication shall be the responsibility of the First Selectman.



CHAPTER 4 - APPOINTIVE BOARDS AND OFFICERS



Section




   4.1   Appointments





   4.2   Terms





   4.3   Minority Representation





   4.4   General Powers and Procedures; Records, Compensation





   4.5   Appointive Boards





   4.6   Appointive Officers





   4.7   Removal for Cause




4.1.   Appointments



   4.1.1.   The Board of Selectmen, within thirty days of taking office
shall appoint, as required in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 of this charter, unless
otherwise provided by ordinance, the members of all boards and all officers
authorized by this chapter. During the last sixty days of their term, the
Board of Selectmen may only make appointments to expire on the first Monday
of January next succeeding.



   4.1.2.   Except as provided by law, no person who is not at the time
of his appointment a resident elector of the Town of East Lyme shall be
eligible for appointment to any town office, under this chapter and any
person ceasing to be a resident elector of the town shall thereupon cease to
hold appointive office in the town and the office shall be deemed vacant. All
appointive officers shall be sworn before taking office and the officer
administering the oath shall record such fact in the office of the Town Clerk.



4.2.   Terms



   4.2.1.   The terms of appointment to any board shall be four years,
commencing the first Monday of January in the even-numbered years and shall
expire at staggered biennial intervals.



   4.2.2.   The terms and appointment and qualifications for constables
shall be determined by ordinance. The Board of Selectmen may appoint such
number of special constables as it deems necessary, in accordance with the
General Statutes.



   4.2.3.   Any appointment to the office of Town Director of Emergency
Management for the Town of East Lyme shall be for a term of four years.



   4.2.4.   The terms of appointment of all other officers shall be
four years, unless otherwise specified, commencing the first Monday of
January, 1966 and quadrennially thereafter.



   4.2.5.   Any vacancy shall be filled within thirty days by the Board
of Selectmen for the unexpired term, unless otherwise provided by ordinance.



4.3.   Minority Representation



   Membership on all boards named in section 4.5.2. of this charter shall
be determined in accordance with the minority representation law as set forth
in the general statutes.



4.4.   General Powers and Procedures: Records: Compensation



   4.4.1.   All boards and officers shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by law.



   4.4.2.   All boards shall make regulations for the conduct of their
meetings and the execution of their duties. Such regulations and any
amendments thereto shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be public
records.



   4.4.3.   Copies of all minutes taken by each board and the recorded
vote of each member thereof on all issues shall be filed with the Town Clerk
and with the First Selectman within fourteen days of the date on which such
actions are taken. The Town Clerk shall maintain files of such minutes, which
shall be public records.



   4.4.4.   Board members shall serve without compensation except that
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties shall be paid
from an appropriation for that purpose. The compensation of individual
officers shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen, subject to the
provisions of necessary appropriation. The compensation of officers on fee
basis shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen in the absence of
provision by the General Statutes.



4.5.   Appointive Boards



   4.5.1.   Effective on the first Monday of January, 1966, there is
constituted a seven member Parks and Recreation Commission which shall assume
all powers, duties and obligations of the McCook Point Park Commission, also
known as the Town Park Commission, and the Veterans Memorial Park Committee.
Effective on said date, the McCook Point Park Commission and the Veterans
Memorial Park Committee are abolished.



   4.5.2.   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint members to the boards
as follows:



 



Zoning Board of Appeals, five members;


Alternate Zoning Board of Appeals, three members;


Water and Sewer Commission, three members;


Flood and Erosion Control Board, five members;


Parks and Recreation Commission, seven members;


Economic Development Commission, seven members;


Redevelopment Agency, five members;


Building Code Board of Appeals, five members.




 



   4.5.3.   The following committees as presently constituted shall
continue as agencies of the town:



 

Town Building Committee


Committee on the Care of Graves and Cemeteries.



 



   4.5.4.   The Board of Selectmen may, by ordinance, create boards and
specify their powers and duties. The Board of Selectmen may, by ordinance,
abolish or consolidate boards and may likewise by ordinance, alter their
powers and duties and change their membership.



4.6.   Appointive Officers



   4.6.1.   The Board of Selectmen shall provide for the appointment of
the following officers:



 

Constables


Special Constables (as required)


Dog Warden


Tree Warden


Town Director of Emergency Management



 



   4.6.2.   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint such other officers as
are required by law and may appoint such other officers as are or may be
permitted by law, subject to the provision of necessary appropriation.



4.7.   Removal for Cause



   4.7.1.   An appointed officer or a member of an appointive board may
be removed only for cause by the Board of Selectmen.



   4.7.2.   No such removal for cause shall be effected unless the
officer or member has received a statement in writing of the reasons why he
should be removed. This statement shall be prepared by the Board of
Selectmen. Not less than fifteen days after the delivery of the statement of
reasons, an opportunity for a public hearing before the Board of Selectmen
must be provided at which time the appointed officer or member may appear
with counsel.



CHAPTER 5 - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS, AGENCIES AND EMPLOYEES



Section




   5.1   Terms and Compensation





   5.2   Town Counsel





   5.3   Assessor





   5.4   Director of Health





   5.5   Building Official





   5.6   Building Inspector





   5.7   Fire Marshal





   5.8   Town Meeting Moderator





   5.9   Other Administrative Officers




5.1.   Terms and Compensation



   All administrative officers, unless otherwise provided in this charter,
shall hold office for a term of four years commencing on the first Monday of
January in the even numbered years. Their compensation shall not be
diminished during their term of office.



5.2.   Town Counsel



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint town counsel to furnish such legal
services to the town and its agencies as the Board of Selectmen may authorize.



5.3.   Assessor



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint for a four year term, commencing
on the first Monday in October of an even-numbered year, an assessor who
shall have the qualifications, powers and duties prescribed for assessor by
the General Statutes, by special act and by ordinance.



5.4.   Director of Health



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Director of Health for a term of
four years, who shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law or
alternatively the Board of Selectmen may vote to join a District Department
of Health as authorized by the Connecticut General Statutes.



5.5.   Building Official



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Building Official for a term of
four years, who shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



5.6.   Building Inspector



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Building Inspector for a term of
four years, who shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



5.7.   Fire Marshal



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint for a term of four years, a Fire
Marshal and may appoint for the same term, Deputy Fire Marshals. They shall
have the powers and duties prescribed by law.



5.8.   Town Meeting Moderator



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint for a term of two years, a Town
Meeting Moderator and a Deputy Town Meeting Moderator who shall have the
powers and duties prescribed by law. Said appointees shall not be of the same
political party.



5.9.   Other Administrative Officers



   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint such other officers as are
required and may appoint such other officers as are, or may be permitted by
law, subject to the provisions of necessary appropriation.



CHAPTER 6 - FINANCE AND TAXATION



Section




   6.1   Preparation of the Budget





   6.2   Laying and Collection of Taxes





   6.3   Special Appropriation and Transfers of Appropriations





   6.4   Accounting and Expenditures




6.1.   Preparation of the Budget



   6.1.1.   At such time and in such manner as the Board of Selectmen
may require, but not less than ninety (90) days prior to the annual town
meeting, every agency and department supported wholly or in part by town
revenues, or for which a specific appropriation is or may be made shall
present to the Board of Selectmen an itemized estimate of the expenditures to
be made by that agency or department and all the revenue, other than town
appropriations, fees and contributions to be received by it during the
ensuing fiscal year. The Board of Selectmen may direct that any of such
agencies or departments furnish such additional reports and information as
the Board of Selectmen deems advisable with respect to any of such estimates.
The Board of Selectmen shall examine such estimates and such additional
reports and information as shall be furnished by such agencies and
departments. The Board of Selectmen, after considering the financial
condition of the town and the appropriateness and amount of the proposed
expenditures, may eliminate, reduce, or increase any estimated expenditure of
any agency or departments except the Board of Education.



   6.1.2.   At such time and in such manner as the Board of Finance may
by regulation require, but not less than sixty (60) days prior to the annual
town meeting, the Board of Selectmen shall present to the Board of Finance
the itemized estimates of the expenditures to be made by the Board of
Education and the revenue, other than town appropriations, fees and
contributions to be received by the Board of Education, in the same form as
said estimates were presented to the Board of Selectmen, together with such
comments and recommendations as the Board of Selectmen deems advisable with
respect to any of such estimates. At that time and in such manner as the
Board of Finance may by regulation require, the Board of Selectmen shall also
present to the Board of Finance the itemized estimates of the expenditures to
be made by each agency and department except the Board of Education, as
adjusted by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to Section 6.1.1. of this
charter, and the revenue, other than town appropriations, fees and
contributions to be received by each such agency and department.



   6.1.3.   The Board of Finance shall upon request afford each agency
and department an opportunity for a hearing on the proposed budget of such
agency or department, first giving notice to the Board of Selectmen with
respect to the hearing on the proposed budget of each agency and department.



   6.1.4.   The Board of Finance shall hold one or more public hearings
concerning the proposed town budget, one of such hearings to be held not less
than fourteen (14) days before the annual town meeting, at which hearings any
person qualified to vote at the annual town meeting shall have an opportunity
to be heard. The Board of Finance may then revise the proposed town budget as
it deems advisable, and it may, by a vote of two-thirds of its members,
restore any itemized expenditures eliminated or reduced by the Board of
Selectmen. The proposed town budget may include a contingency fund
established in accordance with the general statutes and, an appropriation to
any fund for capital and non-recurring expenditures which may be established
in accordance with the general statutes, and may provide for the payment of
any part of the debts of the town. The proposed town budget shall also
include estimates of the revenue to the town from all sources for the ensuing
year, including taxes to be raised on the last completed grand list. The
Board of Finance shall present the budget to the annual town meeting.



   6.1.5.   The Board of Finance shall make available copies of the
proposed town budget in the office of the First Selectman not less than four
(4) days before the public hearing. It shall, before the annual town meeting,
publish the proposed town budget in a newspaper of general circulation in the
town and make available the proposed town budget and any other reports
prescribed by law.



   6.1.6.   The adoption of the annual town budget shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Section 7.3. of this charter.



6.2.   Laying and Collection of Taxes



   6.2.1.   Within thirty (30) days after the Board of Assessment
Appeals has completed its duties and the grand list has been completed, or
within thirty (30) days after adoption of the town budget if a uniform fiscal
year has been adopted by the town in accordance with the General Statutes,
the Board of Finance shall meet and shall lay such tax on the last completed
grand list as is required by the General Statutes.



   6.2.2.   The Tax Collector shall then collect the tax in accordance
with the General Statutes. The due date shall be July 15th unless otherwise
provided by the town in accordance with the General Statutes.



6.3.   Special Appropriations and Transfers of Appropriations



   6.3.1.   The Board of Selectmen, when requested by any town
department and after approval by the Board of Finance, may make special
appropriations from cash surplus or any approved contingency fund in amounts
not to exceed in the aggregate in any one fiscal year, ten per cent of the
amount appropriated for such department in the current town budget or ten
thousand dollars, whichever shall be less. The Board of Selectmen, when
requested by any town department and after approval by the Board of Finance,
may also transfer unexpended balances from one appropriation to another in
accordance with the General Statutes. The Board of Education may transfer
unexpended balances from one appropriation to another in accordance with the
General Statutes.



   6.3.2.   Any request by any town department for a special
appropriation which shall exceed the amount which the Board of Selectmen is
empowered by Section 6.3.1. of this charter to appropriate for that
department in any one fiscal year, shall be acted upon by town meeting after
approval by the Board of Finance, which approval shall include the authority,
by a two-thirds vote of all its members to restore any request eliminated or
reduced by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to Section 6.3.4. of this charter.



   6.3.3.   Special appropriations other than those from cash surplus
or any approved contingency fund may be acted upon only by a special town
meeting after approval by the Board of Finance.



   6.3.4.   All requests for special appropriations and transfers of
unexpended funds shall be made in writing to the Board of Selectmen. The
Board of Selectmen shall, within ten (10) days after receipt thereof, forward
such requests together with such comments and recommendations as the Board of
Selectmen deems advisable, to the Board of Finance; provided, however, that
with respect to requests from departments other than the Board of Education,
the Board of Selectmen may, after considering the financial condition of the
town and the appropriateness and amount of the request, eliminate, reduce or
increase the amount of the request after prior notices to the department
making the request and an opportunity for the department to submit such
reports and information as it deems advisable, and for that purpose may delay
for a reasonable time but not more than twenty (20) additional days the
forwarding of the request to the Board of Finance. The Board of Finance shall
act on all requests for special appropriations or transfers of unexpended
funds within thirty (30) days after receipt thereof and shall immediately
after acting advise the department making such request and the Board of
Selectmen of its action. The Board of Selectmen shall act on such requests
within ten (10) days after notice of approval of such requests by the Board
of Finance and shall immediately advise the department making such requests
of its action.



   6.3.5.   The provisions of Section 6.3 of this charter shall not be
a limitation on the power of the town to issue bonds or other obligations for
appropriations or indebtedness in accordance with the general statutes and
Section 7.5. of this charter. The Board of Finance shall recommend the
methods for financing a capital expenditure.



6.4.   Accounting and Expenditures



   6.4.1.   The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July 1st and end
on June 30th. The fiscal year may be adjusted by town meeting action in
accordance with the General Statutes.



   6.4.2.   The system of accounts used by the town agencies and
departments shall be that prescribed by the General Statutes as supplemented
by the regulations of the Board of Finance. All regulations of the Board of
Finance shall be consistent with this charter and the powers and duties of
other town agencies and departments, and shall be complied with by all town
agencies and departments.



   6.4.3.   The Board of Finance shall provide for an annual audit of
the books and accounts of the town as required by the General Statutes.



CHAPTER 7 - TOWN MEETING



Section




   7.1   Annual and Special Town Meetings





   7.2   Organization and Procedure





   7.3   Annual Budget (Automatic Referendum)





   7.4   Special Appropriations





   7.5   Appropriations and Borrowing





   7.6   Overrule of an Ordinance Enactment





   7.7   Sale or Purchase of Real Estate




7.1.   Annual and Special Town Meetings



   7.1.1.   The annual town meeting, which shall also be the annual
budget meeting, shall be held on the second Monday in May. It may be
adjourned from time to time, or the date may be changed by ordinance. Special
meetings shall be called by the Board of Selectmen in the manner provided by
the General Statutes whenever they deem it necessary, or on application by
persons qualified to vote in town meetings, the number of such persons to be
not less than two percent (2%) of the total electors of the town as
determined from the official list of electors most recently filed with the
Town Clerk by the Registrars of Voters.



   7.1.2   The matters which the applicants for a special town meeting
desire to be acted upon shall, if proper subjects for town meeting action, be
put in proper form for the call of the meeting and for a town meeting
resolution with the assistance of Town Counsel, and those matters shall be
the first items in the call of the meeting. The Board of Selectmen may, at
its discretion, add other matters to the call of the meeting.



   7.1.3   Five hundred or more persons or five percent (5%) of the
total number qualified to vote in town meetings, whichever is less, may
petition the town clerk, in writing, at least twenty-four hours prior to any
town meeting, requesting that any item or items on the call of such meeting
be submitted to the persons qualified to vote in such meeting not less than
seven nor more than fourteen days thereafter, on a day to be set by the town
meeting or, if the town meeting does not set a date, by the town selectmen,
for a “Yes” or “No” vote on the voting machines. Except as provided
herein, the manner of conducting such adjourned town meeting shall be as
provided by the General Statutes.



(As amended 12/2/04)



7.2.   Organization and Procedure



   7.2.1.   The Moderator, or in his absence, the Deputy Moderator,
shall preside at town meetings. If both are absent, the meeting shall choose
a moderator. The Town Clerk or Assistant Town Clerk shall serve as clerk. In
their absence the meeting shall choose a clerk.



   7.2.2.   Electors of the town and other persons qualified by the
General Statutes, may vote at town meetings, unless otherwise provided by
this charter. Town meeting action shall be by majority vote of those present
and voting unless otherwise provided by this charter.



7.3.   Annual Budget (Automatic Referendum)



   The annual budget meeting shall be limited to a public presentation of
the town of East Lyme Budget by the Board of Finance, Board of Selectmen and
Board of Education with an opportunity for public participation by comments
and questions. After reasonable discussion, the moderator shall adjourn the
meeting to a referendum on the voting machines. The budget resolution will be
submitted to the persons qualified to vote in a town meeting by referendum by
machine vote which shall take place on the Thursday in May which is ten days
after the annual budget meeting. At least five (5) days prior to such
referendum, the Board of Selectmen shall publish in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the town a notice of such referendum, setting forth
the date on which, the hours during which, and the location at which the
referendum will be held and the text of the questions as they will appear on
the voting machines.



   The text shall provide for approval/disapproval of the Budget of the
Town of East Lyme.



      1.   Shall the budget for the fiscal year July 1, ______ to
June 30, ______as recommended by the Board of Finance be adopted.

         Yes                  No



   Should the budget fail to be approved by a majority of those voting
thereon, the Board of Finance shall forthwith revise estimated expenditures,
without altering estimates of revenue except for omissions, clerical errors,
or revisions of revenue to be received from the state, to arrive at revised
spending levels and automatically submit the revised budget to a referendum
14 days following the date the initial budget referendum was defeated. The
Board of Finance shall hold at least one (1) public hearing upon five (5)
days legal notice prior to submitting the revised budget for consideration.
This process shall be repeated at two (2) week succeeding intervals until
such time as the budget is adopted.



   In the event said budget is not adopted by the third Wednesday in June,
business shall be conducted in accordance with Section 7-405 and 12-123 of
the General Statutes, as amended.



7.4.   Special Appropriations



   A special appropriation or a payment into or appropriation from any
reserve fund for capital and non-recurring expenditures, requiring town
meeting approval in accordance with Section 6.3. of this charter, may be
decreased by the town meeting, but may not be increased. A town meeting may
make no special appropriation not recommended by the Board of Finance.



7.5.   Appropriations and Borrowing



   Any request by any town department for a special appropriation which
shall exceed the amount which the Board of Selectmen is empowered by Section
6.3. of this charter to appropriate for that department in any one fiscal
year, and any resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds or notes shall be
placed on the call of a town meeting for action thereon.



7.6.   Overrule of an Ordinance Enactment



   A special town meeting shall be called on application, as provided in
Section 3.4.3. of this charter, to consider the overrule of an ordinance
enactment. Two hundred electors shall constitute a quorum at such special
town meeting and such ordinance shall be overruled, void, and of no effect if
a majority of the electors voting at such special town meeting vote to
overrule such ordinance.



7.7.   Sale or Purchase of Real Estate



   The sale of real estate or the purchase of real estate the price of
which is over ten thousand dollars, shall require approval of a town meeting.



CHAPTER 8 - TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS



Section




   8.1   Effective Date





   8.2   Transition





   8.3   Financial Interest Prohibited





   8.4   Amendments to the Charter





   8.5   Savings Clause




8.1.   Effective Date



   The effective date of this charter shall be July 1, 1965. Between the
effective date of this charter and the first Monday of December, 1965, all
officers and boards shall have those powers and duties which they had prior
to the adoption of this charter, unless otherwise specified.



8.2.   Transition



   8.2.1.   During the transition period, all elective terms that
expire in October of any year shall, unless otherwise specified in Section
8.2. of this charter, be extended to the first Monday in December of that
year, when their successors, who have been elected in November of that year,
will take office.



   8.2.2.   The terms of the Board of Selectmen elected at the town
election in October 1963 shall be extended until the first Monday in December
1965 and the members shall have only those powers and duties which they had
prior to the adoption of this charter.



   8.2.3.   The terms of the Town Clerk and the Town Treasurer elected
at the town election in November 1965, which begin the first Monday of
January 1966, shall continue until the first Monday in December 1969.



   8.2.4.   The term of the Tax Collector elected at the town election
in October 1963 shall be extended until the first Monday in December 1965.



   8.2.4.   The term of the agent of the town deposit fund elected at
the regular town election in October 1963 shall be extended until the first
Monday in December 1965. Effective on the first Monday in December 1965, such
office is abolished and the functions of that office shall thereafter be
exercised by the Town Treasurer.



   8.2.5.   The term of the Assessor holding office on the effective
date of this charter shall continue until the first Monday of October 1966.



   8.2.6.   The three terms of the Board of Education that expire in
October 1965 shall be extended until the first Monday in December 1967. One
additional member shall be elected in November 1965 for a two year term, to
expire on the first Monday in December 1967. The three terms that expire in
October 1967 shall be extended until the first Monday in December 1967. The
seven terms that expire in December 1967 shall be filled in the following
manner: in November 1967, five members shall be elected for a four-year term
and two members for a two-year term. The three terms that expire in October
1969 shall be extended to the first Monday in December 1969. The five terms
that expire in December 1969 shall be filled by election in November 1969 for
four-year terms.



   8.2.7.   The two terms of the Board of Finance that expire in
October 1965 shall be extended to the first Monday in December 1965 and shall
be filled in the election in November 1965 in the following manner: one
member shall be elected for a four-year term and one member for a two-year
term. The two terms that expire in October 1967 shall be extended to the
first Monday in December 1967. The three terms that expire in December 1967
shall be filled in the election in November 1967 by election for four-year
terms. The two terms that expire in October 1969 shall be extended to the
first Monday in December 1969. The three terms that expire in December 1969
shall be filled in the election in November 1969 for four-year terms.



   8.2.8.   The one term of the Board of Tax Review that expires in
October 1965 shall be extended to the first Monday in December 1967. The two
terms which expire in October 1967 shall be extended to the first Monday in
December 1967. All terms which expire in December 1967 shall be filled by
election in November 1967 for four-year terms.



   8.2.9.1.   Upon the increase of the membership of the Board of Tax
Review to five members, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint two additional
members to serve until the first Monday of December 1991. At the election in
November 1991 all five terms shall be filled, the two terms which were filled
by the Board of Selectmen shall be filled for two-year terms and the three
other terms shall be filled for four-year terms. Upon the expiration of each
of the terms thereafter, it shall be filled for a four-year term.



   8.2.10   The terms of the Zoning Commission and the terms of the
Planning Commission shall each be filled in the following manner: the one
term expiring in October 1965 shall be extended to the first Monday in
December 1965 and shall be filled by election in November 1965 for a
four-year term. One additional member shall be elected in November 1965 for a
two-year term. The one term expiring in October 1966 shall be extended to the
first Monday in December 1967. The one term expiring in October 1967 shall be
extended to the first Monday in December 1967. The three terms that expire in
December 1967 shall be filled by election in November 1967 for four-year
terms. The term expiring in October 1968 shall be extended to the first
Monday in December 1969. The term that expires in October 1969 shall be
extended to the first Monday in December 1969. The three terms that expire in
December 1969 shall be filled by election in November 1969 for four-year
terms.



   8.2.11.   The terms of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled
by appointment in the following manner: the term expiring at the annual town
meeting in 1965 shall be extended to January 1966. The term expiring in
January 1966 shall be filled by appointment to January 1968. The term
expiring at the annual town meeting in 1966 shall be filled by appointment to
January 1968. The term expiring at the annual town meeting in 1967 shall be
extended to January 1968. All terms expiring in January 1968 shall be filled
by appointment for four years. The five-year term that expires at the annual
town meeting in 1969 shall be extended to January 1970. The terms expiring in
January 1970 shall be filled by appointment for four years.



   8.2.12.   All terms of the Alternate Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be filled by appointment in the following manner: the term expiring at the
annual town meeting in 1965 shall be extended to January 1966. The term
expiring in January 1966 shall be filled by appointment for four years. The
terms expiring at the annual town meetings in 1966 and 1967 shall be extended
to January 1968. The terms expiring in January 1968 shall be filled by
appointment for four years.



   8.2.13.   All terms of the Building Code Board of Appeals shall be
filled by appointment in the following manner: the term expiring in 1966
shall be filled by appointment to January 1968: The term expiring in 1967
shall be extended to January 1968. All terms expiring in January 1968 shall
be filled by appointment for four years. The term expiring in 1968 shall be
filled by appointment to January 1970. The term expiring in 1969 shall be
extended to January 1970. All terms expiring in January 1970 shall be filled
by appointment for four years.



   8.2.14.   All terms of the Water Commission shall be filled by
appointment in the following manner: the term expiring at the annual town
meeting in 1965 shall be extended to January 1966 and shall be filled by
appointment for four years. The terms expiring at the annual town meetings in
1966 and 1967 shall be extended to January 1968. The terms expiring in
January 1968 shall be filled by appointment for four years.



   8.2.15.   The terms of the Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be
filled by appointment in the following manner: the term expiring at the
annual town meeting in 1965 shall be extended to January 1966. The term
expiring in January 1966 shall be filled by appointment to January 1968. The
term expiring at the annual town meeting in 1966 shall be filled by
appointment to January 1968. The term expiring at the annual town meeting in
1967 shall be extended to January 1968. All terms expiring in January 1968
shall be filled by appointment for four years. The five-year term that
expires at the annual town meeting in 1969 shall be extended to January 1970.
The terms expiring in January 1970 shall be filled by appointment for four
years.



   8.2.16.   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be appointed in
the following manner: in January 1966, three terms shall be filled by
appointment for two years and four terms shall be filled by appointment for
four years. The three terms expiring in January 1968 shall be filled by
appointment for four years.



   8.2.17.   The terms of the Industrial and Development Commission
shall be filled by appointment in the following manner: the three terms that
expire in January 1966 shall be filled by appointment for two years. The term
that expires in January 1967 shall be filled by appointment for three years.
The four terms that expire in January 1968 shall be filled by appointment for
four years. The term that expires in January 1969 shall be filled by
appointment for one year. The three terms that expire in January 1970 shall
be filled by appointment for four years.



   8.2.18.   The Board of Selectmen shall, by ordinance, provide for
the orderly transition of the terms of members of the Redevelopment Agency to
comply with Section 4.2.1. of this charter.



   8.2.19.   The terms of the constables elected in October 1963 shall
be extended until the first Monday in April 1966.



   8.2.20.   The term of the Tree Warden that expires in October 1965
shall be extended to the first Monday of January 1966.



   8.2.21.   The term of the Dog Warden which is filled in April 1966,
shall be filled for a term ending on the first Monday of January, 1970.



8.3.   Financial Interest Prohibited



   No town officer shall derive any financial benefit from any transaction
with the board of which he is a member or with the office which he holds,
unless he disqualifies himself from discussion and decision thereon; if such
officer is not a member of a board, he shall notify in writing the Board of
Selectmen of such benefit.



8.4.   Amendments to the Charter



   This charter may be amended in the manner prescribed by the General
Statutes.



8.5.   Saving Clause



   If any section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidation shall not affect the remainder of
this charter nor the context in which such section so held invalid may
appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be
inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of
section to which such invalidation shall directly apply.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Continuation of existing law; ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of East Lyme shall
be designated as the Code of East Lyme and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and
usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      BOARD or BOARD OF SELECTMEN. The governing body of the Town of
East Lyme subject to the limitations of the East Lyme Charter.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      CONN. GEN. STAT. or GENERAL STATUTES. The revision of 1958 of the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and all amendments thereto.



      COUNTY. New London County, Connecticut.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in these cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission or department of the municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, with right of survivorship, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK. Any portion of the street, usually lying on either side
thereof, between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Connecticut.



      STREET. Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys,
lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public
thoroughfares in the town and means all that part thereof from the property
line of the premises abutting thereon.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT, OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, mean any person
who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone or
with others.



      TOWN. The Town of East Lyme, Connecticut.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to
the words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of the municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



   (E)   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three
or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a
majority of the persons or officers unless otherwise specifically provided.



   (F)   If any definition herein conflicts with a definition in the
town’s planning, zoning, inland wetlands, water and sewer or other
regulations, the definition in the regulation shall control.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within the municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  CONTINUATION OF EXISTING LAW; ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   The provisions appearing in this code, insofar as they are the
same as those of the ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this
code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.



   (B)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring
publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof,
unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the Board of Selectmen shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. passed
5-13-1960; Ord. passed 1-1-1970; Ord. passed 1-1-1980; Ord. passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example: (Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-340)  (Ord. passed 1-17-1980; Ord.
passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



      § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:



         Inspection of public records, see Conn. Gen. Stat. § 1-19



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code, or in any other ordinance, rule or
regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the town under authority
vested in him, her or it by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or
declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure
to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty, including
a referral to community court, is provided therefor either by this code or
state law, the violation of any provision of this code, or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.



   (B)   Each day any violation of this code or any ordinance, rule or
regulation of the town continues shall constitute a separate offense.



Statutory reference:



   Maximum statutory penalty for ordinance violations, see Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 7-148(c)(10)(A)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



      32.   LAW ENFORCEMENT



      33.   ELECTIONS



      34.   TAXATION



      35.   TOWN POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Resolution authorizing town officials to covenant and agree
on behalf of the town to comply with the Securities and Exchange Commission
Exchange Act Rule 15c2-12



   30.02   Setting date for annual town meeting



   30.03   Salary for Town Clerk



   30.04   Assessor



   30.05   Restriction imposed on salaried town officials and employees




Fees




   30.20   Establishing fees for use of geographic information system



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING TOWN OFFICIALS TO COVENANT AND AGREE ON
BEHALF OF THE TOWN TO COMPLY WITH THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
EXCHANGE ACT RULE 15c2-12.



   The First Selectman, the Director of Finance, and the Town Treasurer,
or any two of them, are hereby authorized, on behalf of the town, to enter
into agreements or otherwise covenant for the benefit of bondholders to
provide information on an annual or other periodic basis to nationally
recognized municipal securities information repositories or state based
information repositories (the “repositories”) and to provide notices to
the repositories of material events as enumerated in Securities and Exchange
Commission Exchange Act Rule 15c2-12 (“Rule 15c2-12”), as amended, as may
be necessary, appropriate or desirable to effect the sale of the bonds and
notices heretofore or hereafter authorized to be issued by the town. Any
agreements or representations to provide information to repositories made
prior hereto are hereby confirmed, ratified and approved. The town may also
provide for agreements, representations or covenants to be made on behalf of
the town to comply with Rule 15c2-12 in bond authorizations as may
hereinafter be enacted.



(Res. passed 6-21-1995)



§ 30.02  SETTING DATE FOR ANNUAL TOWN MEETING.



   The annual town meeting and the annual budget meeting shall be the
second Monday in May each year, commencing with the annual town meeting to be
held May 8, 1978 for the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1978.



(Ord. passed 12-5-1977)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 38



§ 30.03  SALARY FOR TOWN CLERK.



   (A)   The Town Clerk shall receive a salary in lieu of all fees and
other compensation provided for in the General Statutes, commencing September
1, 1976.



   (B)   The salary of the Town Clerk shall be fixed by the Board of
Selectmen, subject to necessary appropriation.



   (C)   Commencing September 1, 1976, all fees and other compensation
which the General Statutes provide should be paid to the Town Clerk, shall be
collected by the Town Clerk and deposited in the General Fund of the town.



(Ord. passed 9-1-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 272



§ 30.04  ASSESSOR.



   House Bill No. 102 of the General Assembly of the state, which Bill
provides for the appointment of an Assessor and for the filing of assessment
lists in the town, is accepted.



(Res. passed 6-7-1951)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 6, page 295



§ 30.05  RESTRICTION IMPOSED ON SALARIED TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.



   No salaried town official or employee shall receive from the town
compensation for the use of equipment owned by said official or employee in
town work or sale of material.



(Ord. passed 9-26-1932)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 5, page 38



FEES



§ 30.20  ESTABLISHING FEES FOR USE OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by Conn. Gen. Stat. §
7-148s, as amended, the following schedule of fees is established for the
town’s geographic information system data:



 



Digital data in CD format including the following layers:
 

$150




   Parcels w/CAMA data




   Zoning




   Street centerlines-with address points




   5 ft. contours (developed from 2004 DEP LIDAR)



Paper maps (color)
 

8-1/2 x 11

 

11 x 17

 

24 x 36

 

36 x 72




   Published map

 

$2

 

$5

 

$15

 

$45




   Custom map - $10/layer plus

 

$2

 

$5

 

$15

 

$45



Prints from Public Access Terminal
 

8-1/2 x 11

 

11 x 17

 

24 x 36

 

36 x 72




   Black and white

 

$0.50

 

$1

 

N/A

 

N/A




   Color

 

$2

 

$5

 

N/A

 

N/A



Shipping and handling (if applicable)
 

$10





 



   (B)   Fees shall be paid at the time a request for data is submitted.



(Ord. passed 7-1-2008)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 787



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   31.01   Commission for the Conservation of Natural Resources



   31.02   Niantic River Gateway Commission



   31.03   Route 11 Greenway Authority Commission



   31.04   Town Building Committee



   31.05   Board of Education; election of members



   31.06   Civil Preparedness Agency



   31.07   Commission on Aging



   31.08   Smith-Harris House Commission



   31.09   Board of Finance



   31.10   Youth Services Commission




School Building Committees




   31.25   School Building Committee (East Lyme Elementary Schools)



   31.26   School Building Committee (East Lyme Middle School)




Zoning and Planning Commissions




   31.40   Designating Zoning Commission as Aquifer Protection Agency



   31.41   Providing for election of alternate members of Zoning
Commission



   31.42   Providing for election of alternate members of Planning
Commission



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  COMMISSION FOR THE CONSERVATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES.



   (A)   Effective July 1, 2008, there is constituted a five member
Commission for the Conservation of Natural Resources, with all the authority,
powers and responsibilities of local conservation commissions as set forth in
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-131a, as amended from time to time.



   (B)   The members of the Commission shall be appointed in the
following manner: three terms shall be filled by appointment until the first
Monday of January, 2010, at which time they shall be filled by appointment
for four years. Two terms shall be filled by appointment until the first
Monday of January, 2012, at which time they will be filled by appointment for
four years.



   (C)   There shall be two alternate members of the Commission. The
term of one alternate member shall be filled by appointment until the first
Monday of January, 2010, at which time it shall be filled by appointment for
four years. The term of the other alternate member shall be filled by
appointment until the first Monday of January, 2012, at which time it will be
filled by appointment for four years. Such alternate members shall, when
seated, have all the powers and duties of a member of the Commission.



(Ord. passed 7-1-2008)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 787A



§ 31.02  NIANTIC RIVER GATEWAY COMMISSION.



   (A)   As authorized by Public Act 87-512 of the Connecticut General
Assembly, and subject to a final determination by the Board of Selectmen,
pursuant to § 4(b) of said Act as to whether the town shall be governed by
the provisions of said Act, the town hereby acts to establish the Niantic
River Gateway Commission.



   (B)   The Niantic River Gateway Commission shall have the authority
and responsibility provided for said Commission in said Act.



   (C)   There shall be six members of said Commission, three of whom
shall be electors of the town who shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The East Lyme members shall be appointed within 60 days from the
date that the Town First Selectman receives notice from the Waterford First
Selectman that the Town of Waterford has adopted an ordinance establishing
the Commission. The East Lyme members shall be appointed for terms to expire
on the first Monday in January of the next even-numbered year following their
appointment. Upon the expiration of said terms, one member shall be appointed
for a term of two years, and two members shall be appointed for terms of four
years. Thereafter, each of said terms shall be filled upon its expiration for
four years. Any vacancy that may from time to time occur among East Lyme
members shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen.



   (D)   The town reserves the right to vote not to be governed by the
provisions of said Act in accordance with § 7 of this Act.



(Ord. passed 10-21-1987; Ord. passed 1-22-2001)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 123



   TM Volume 22, page 60



§ 31.03  ROUTE 11 GREENWAY AUTHORITY COMMISSION.



   (A)   Pursuant to § 40 of Public Act No. 00-148, the town hereby
establishes a Route 11 Greenway Authority Commission, which shall be deemed
to be established at such time as the last of the four towns of East Lyme,
Montville, Salem and Waterford has adopted an ordinance consistent with
Public Act 00-148, § 40, subsections (a), (b) and (c).



   (B)   The membership of said commission shall consist of the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection or said Commissioner’s designee,
the Commissioner of Transportation, or said commissioner’s designee, a
member and alternate member from each of the towns of East Lyme, Montville,
Salem and Waterford, appointed by the First Selectman of said towns, and a
member and alternate member of the Southeastern Connecticut Council of
Governments appointed by said agency.



   (C)   Each member and alternate member of the Commission shall serve
for a term of two years and until such member’s successor is appointed and
has qualified. Such appointments shall take effect when the last of the four
towns has adopted an enabling ordinance. An alternate member shall be
empowered to vote on said Commission in the absence of the member for whom
such person is an alternate. The initial terms of members shall commence when
the last of the four towns adopting such ordinance has appointed a member and
an alternate member. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the unexpired
term. No appointed member shall receive any compensation for service on said
commission. Said Commission shall elect from its members a Chairperson and
such other officers as it deems necessary and shall establish its own rules
and procedure.



   (D)   The Commission shall be an autonomous body within the
Department of Transportation for administrative purposes only. The Commission
may employ experts and such other assistants as it judges necessary and may
accept funds from any source. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
General Statutes, any funds appropriated to the Commission received by the
Commission from any other source shall be held in the custody of the
Commission and expended by the Commission for the purposes set forth in § 40
of Public Act No. 00-148.



   (E)   The Commissioner of Environmental Protection and the
Commissioner of Transportation, not later than 60 days after the effective
date of the enabling ordinance adopted by the last of the four towns to adopt
such an ordinance, shall call a meeting of the Commission which shall, within
90 days thereafter:



      (1)   Hold public hearings for the purpose of developing
standards for:



         (a)   Defining the boundaries of the Route 11 Greenway;



         (b)   Planning the design, the construction, maintenance
and management of the Route 11 Greenway trail system and intermodal
transportation access system;



         (c)   Identifying and prioritizing land that should be
added to the Route 11 Greenway;



         (d)   Recommending land use within the Route 11
Greenway; and



         (e)   Acquiring land and securing conservation easements
for the Route 11 Greenway, except that nothing in the Act shall be construed
to prohibit the acquisition of land within the Route 11 Greenway by a
municipality.



      (2)   Establish bylaws by which the Commission shall:



         (a)   Conduct its meetings, including a provision
specifying that no action by the Commission shall be effective except by the
concurring votes of at least four members;



         (b)   Protect and preserve lands under its custody;



         (c)   Supervise staff;



         (d)   Maintain its records; and



         (e)   Report to the General Assembly, as required by §
40 of Public Act No. 00-148.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of § 40 of Public Act No.
00-148 or the General Statutes, the Commission may:



      (1)   Acquire or convey by purchase, gift, lease, devise,
exchange or otherwise, any land or interest therein including, but not
limited to, conservation easements, located wholly or partly in the
conservation zone, provided such acquisition does not utilize funds furnished
by the state;



      (2)   Transfer, with the approval of the Commissioner, any
land or interest therein to the state with or without consideration, provided
any funds received therefore shall not be deemed funds furnished by the state
for purposes of this section; and



      (3)   Contribute or transfer funds to, and enter into
agreements with, land trusts or other conservation organizations, to carry
out the purposes of § 40 of Public Act No. 00-148.



   (G)   The Commission shall report to the General Assembly, on or
before February 15 annually, on its activities of the preceding year and on
its finances.



   (H)   The existence of the Commission shall terminate at such time
as all of its member towns have withdrawn or is abolished by the General
Assembly.



(Ord. passed 10-4-2000)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 54



§ 31.04  TOWN BUILDING COMMITTEE.



   (A)   There is constituted a seven member Town Building Committee
which, as instructed and to the extent authorized by the Board of Selectmen,
is empowered to obtain plans and cost estimates for new town buildings and
additions to existing town buildings, other than school buildings, including
such furnishings and equipment as may be required, and to enter into such
contracts and expend such funds as may be hereafter authorized and
appropriated for such purposes.



      (1)   As instructed and to the extent authorized by the Board
of Education, the committee is empowered to obtain plans and cost estimates
for new school facilities, and additions, alterations and major repairs to
existing school facilities, including such furnishings and equipment as may
be required, and to enter into such contracts and expend such funds as may be
authorized and appropriated for such purposes. The Superintendent of Schools
shall be an ex officio member without vote of the Committee when it is acting
under the instructions and with the authorization of the Board of Education.



      (2)   Two residents of the Town of Salem, appointed by the
Salem Board of Selectmen, shall be ex officio members without vote of the
Committee when it is acting under the instructions and with the authorization
of the Board of Education on the East Lyme High School expansion and
improvement project.



   (B)   Members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen in the following manner.



      (1)   All seven terms shall be filled by appointment within 30
days from the effective date hereof, four terms to expire on the first Monday
of January, 1970 and three terms to expire on the first Monday of January,
1972.



      (2)   All said terms shall be filled upon their expiration for
four years.



(Ord. passed 7-2-1968; Ord. passed 7-1-1977; Ord. passed 4-2-1997)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 10, page 40, 59; TM Volume 12, page 341, Amended; TM Volume
21, page 376, Amended



§ 31.05  BOARD OF EDUCATION; ELECTION OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 9-204b are adopted.



   (B)   Subject to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 9-167a
regarding minority representation, whether the number of members to be
elected to the Board of Education at any election is odd or even, any elector
may vote for all of that number and the persons receiving the greatest number
of votes shall be elected.



   (C)   Each political party shall have the right to nominate as many
persons as there are vacancies on the Board of Education, and those names
shall be placed upon the ballot.



(Ord. effective 8-1-1995)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 23



§ 31.06  CIVIL PREPAREDNESS AGENCY.



   (A)   There is constituted a Civil Emergency Management Agency which
shall perform such civil preparedness functions in the town as the State
Director of Emergency Management prescribed, and shall perform such functions
outside the town as are prescribed by the State Emergency Management Plan and
Program and by the terms of any mutual aid agreements to which the town is a
party.



   (B)   Each Selectman shall be a member of the Agency. The Board of
Selectmen may appoint additional members in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 4 of the Charter.



   (C)   The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Town Director of
Emergency Management for a term to expire on the first Monday of January,
1980. Said term shall be filled upon expiration for four years.



   (D)   The Director shall be responsible for the organization,
administration and operation of the Agency, subject to the direction and
control of the State Director, and subject to the provisions of division (E)
below. He or she may, with the approval of the State Director, collaborate
with other public and private agencies within the state and develop or cause
to be developed mutual aid agreements for civil preparedness aid and
assistance in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. He or
she may, with the approval of the State Director, enter into such mutual aid
agreements with civil preparedness agencies or organizations in other states.
Such agreements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Preparedness
Plan and Program and, in time of emergency, the Agency shall render
assistance in accordance with the provisions of such agreements to which it
is a party unless otherwise ordered by the State Director.



   (E)   In the event of a serious disaster or a sudden emergency, the
Agency shall be under the direction and supervision of the First Selectman,
and the Director shall act as his or her advisor and Chief of Staff. In that
event, the First Selectman may declare a state of emergency for the town if,
in his or her opinion, such a declaration is necessary, whereupon he or she
shall immediately call an emergency meeting of the Board of Selectmen which
shall confirm or revoke the declaration. In such an event, the First
Selectman is empowered to apply to the state and the federal government for
disaster assistance.



(Ord. passed 8-15-1979; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 249; TM Volume 16, page 298, Amended



§ 31.07  COMMISSION ON AGING.



   (A)   There is constituted a seven member Commission on Aging, which
shall cooperate with the Connecticut Commission on Aging, the Area Agency on
Aging and other agencies as appropriate in assisting the elderly persons of
the town in those matters which distinctively relate to elderly persons.



   (B)   The Commission on Aging shall:



      (1)   Review and analyze the needs and conditions of the
elderly persons of the town in relation to housing, nutrition, employment,
health, recreation, social services, transportation and other matters and
problems with the jurisdiction of the Commission;



      (2)   Plan, coordinate, develop and implement programs to meet
the needs and to improve the conditions of the elderly persons of the town,
upon its own initiative or on the recommendations of the Senior Citizen
Administration; and



      (3)   Through the Senior Citizen Administrator and others, as
necessary, provide coordination of such plans and programs among all related
services.



   (C)   The terms of the members shall be for four years. Three terms
shall expire on the first Monday of January, 1986 and four terms shall expire
on the first Monday of January, 1988.



   (D)   The First Selectman shall appoint a Senior Citizen
Administrator who shall be the Municipal Agent on Aging for the town.



      (1)   The Senior Citizen Administrator shall serve for a term
of two years, to expire on the first Monday of January in even-numbered years.



      (2)   The Senior Citizen Administrator shall be under the
administrative control of the First Selectman.



   (E)   The Senior Citizen Administrator shall:



      (1)   Serve as an ex officio member of the Commission on Aging;



      (2)   Disseminate information to the elderly and assist them
in learning about the community resources available to them, and publicize
such resources and benefits;



      (3)   Assist the elderly in applying for federal and other
grants and benefits available to the elderly;



      (4)   Make recommendations to the Commission on Aging
concerning needs and conditions of the elderly in relation to housing,
nutrition, employment, health, recreation, social services, transportation
and other matters of concern to the elderly;



      (5)   Make recommendations to the Commission on Aging for
plans and implementation of programs to meet the needs and to improve the
conditions of the elderly;



      (6)   Coordinate and supervise the implementation of
Commission-approved plans and programs, including the supervision of the
senior citizen bus drivers, office personnel, other related personnel who are
under the jurisdiction of the Administrator and volunteers contributing time
and resources to such plans and programs;



      (7)   Administer grant and benefit programs;



      (8)   Work with the Commission to prepare the Commission
budget;



      (9)   Submit written reports as required, and cooperate with
the Chairperson of the Commission in writing the Annual Report to be
submitted to the Board of Selectmen, summarizing the year’s plans,
activities and recommendations for the future;



      (10)   Develop and coordinate media releases;



      (11)   Act as liaison between the town and the Senior
Citizen’s Club;



      (12)   Develop and implement programs with other agencies
related to senior citizens;



      (13)   Remain accessible to the town’s senior citizens; and



      (14)   Attend meeting and training sessions related to the
duties herein described.



(Ord. passed 5-15-1985)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 167



§ 31.08  SMITH-HARRIS HOUSE COMMISSION.



   (A)   The responsibility for the management, control, restoration
and repair of the Smith-Harris House and the land and improvements
appurtenant thereto, is hereby vested in the Smith-Harris House Commission.



   (B)   The Smith-Harris House Commission is authorized to enter into
agreements for the use of the property, and to set reasonable fees therefor.



   (C)   There shall be seven members of the Commission who shall be
appointed by the Board of Selectmen in the following manner.



      (1)   All seven terms shall be filled by appointment within 30
days from the effective date of this section, four terms to expire on the
first Monday of January, 1980 and three terms to expire on the first Monday
of January, 1982.



      (2)   Each of said terms shall be filled upon its expiration
for four years.



(Ord. passed 3-28-1978)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 101



§ 31.09  BOARD OF FINANCE.



   The town, pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. Chapter 28,
Revised of 1930, as amended, establish a Board of Finance in said town with
all the rights and powers conferred, and duties and obligations imposed by
the General Statutes upon Boards of Finance.



(Res. passed 3-3-1947)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 6, page 94



§ 31.10  YOUTH SERVICES COMMISSION.



   (A)   There shall be a seven-member Commission on Youth Services.
The Commission shall act as an advisory board to the Board of Selectmen with
regard to those matters which relate to the youth of the town, and shall
plan, coordinate and oversee the implementation of programs of the Commission
to meet the needs of such young people.



   (B)   The Commission on Youth Services shall adhere to the
Connecticut Youth Services Association Mission Statement as established by
Connecticut General Statutes in promoting the healthy development of East
Lyme/Salem children, youth and families through advocacy, education and
training.



   (C)   (1)   The Commission shall be comprised of seven public
members who shall be East Lyme residents and who have a primary interest in
promoting the well being of the youth population of the town and may include
representatives from public agencies with statutory responsibilities for
youth and private sector organizations representing community social
institutions.



      (2)   In addition, the following shall serve as ex officio
members of the Commission:



         (a)   One member designated by the Board of Education;



         (b)   One member representing the Police Department;



         (c)   One member who is a representative of East Lyme
youths;



         (d)   The Youth Services Administrator; and



         (e)   A non-voting ex officio member from Salem.



   (D)   The terms of the public members of the Commission shall be
four years. In 2006, three members shall be appointed for terms that expire
on the first Monday of January, 2008 and four members shall be appointed for
terms that expire on the first Monday of January, 2010.



   (E)   The Youth Services Administrator shall:



      (1)   Serve as an ex officio member of the Commission on Youth
Services;



      (2)   Make recommendations to the Commission on Youth Services
concerning needs of East Lyme youth and other matters concerning young people
of the town;



      (3)   Make recommendations to the Commission on Youth Services
for plans and implementation of programs to meet the needs of East Lyme youth;



      (4)   Coordinate and supervise the implementation of
Commission-approved plans and programs;



      (5)   Apply for and administer grant and benefit programs;



      (6)   Work with the Commission to prepare the Commission
budget;



      (7)   Submit written reports as required, and cooperate with
the Chairperson of the Commission in writing the annual report to be
submitted to the Board of Selectmen, summarizing the year’s activities,
plans and recommendations for the future;



      (8)   Develop and implement programs with other agencies
related to youth; and



      (9)   Remain accessible to East Lyme/Salem youths.



(Ord. effective 7-10-2006)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 598



SCHOOL BUILDING COMMITTEES



§ 31.25  SCHOOL BUILDING COMMITTEE (EAST LYME ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS).



   (A)   There is constituted a nine-member School Building Committee
for alterations and upgrades to the Niantic Center School, Lillie B. Haynes
School and Flanders Elementary School. Said School Building Committee shall
consist of the seven-member Town Building Committee and two members of the
Board of Education appointed to the School Building Committee by the Board of
Selectmen.



   (B)   The Superintendent of Schools and the Elementary School
Principals for each of the schools shall be ex officio members of the
Committee without vote, and shall not be counted in determining a quorum.



(Ord. passed 6-21-2017)



§ 31.26  SCHOOL BUILDING COMMITTEE (EAST LYME MIDDLE SCHOOL).



   (A)   The Town Board of Education shall act as the town’s School
Building Committee, during the design phase of the project to construct a new
middle school and convert the existing middle school to an elementary school,
and the Town Building Committee shall act as the town’s School Building
Committee during the construction phase of the project.



   (B)   The Superintendent of schools shall be an ex officio member
without vote of the committee during the design phase and the construction
phase of the project.



(Ord. passed 2-10-2000)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 752; TM Volume 21, page 752



ZONING AND PLANNING COMMISSIONS



§ 31.40  DESIGNATING ZONING COMMISSION AS AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY.



   The Town Zoning Commission is hereby designated as the Town Aquifer
Protection Agency, with all the authority, powers and responsibilities of
local aquifer protection agencies set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 22a-354a
et seq., as they may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. effective 11-20-2005)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 556



§ 31.41  PROVIDING FOR ELECTION OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS OF ZONING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Pursuant to Public Act 84-154, there are constituted three
alternate members of the Zoning Commission, with the powers and duties set
forth in said Act. Such alternate members shall be electors and shall not be
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Commission.



   (B)   At the town election in November of 1985, one alternate member
of the Zoning Commission shall be elected for a term of two years, and two
shall be elected for a term of four years. At the town election in November
of 1987, the term of the alternate member which expires in December of 1987
shall be filled by election for a term of four years. Alternate members of
the Zoning Commission shall be elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of the
Charter. A vacancy occurring among alternate members shall be filled until
the next special election or regular town election by vote of the members of
the Zoning Commission including any alternate members then serving for absent
or disqualified Commissioners; but if the vacancy is not filled within 30
days from the time that the office becomes vacant, the Board of Selectmen
shall fill the vacancy within 30 days thereafter.



   (C)   Within 30 days from the effective date of this section, the
Board of Selectmen shall appoint alternate members of the Zoning Commission
to serve until the persons elected in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall have qualified.



(Ord. passed 4-30-1985; Ord. passed 5-25-1986; Ord. passed 12-2-2004)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 170; TM Volume 15, page 341, amended; TM Volume 22,
page 461,  amended



§ 31.42  PROVIDING FOR ELECTION OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS OF PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   At the town election in November of 1975, one alternate member
of the Planning Commission shall be elected for a term of two years, two
alternate members of the Planning Commission shall be elected for terms of
four years.



   (B)   At the town election in November of 1977, the term of the
alternate members of the Planning Commission that expires in December, 1977
shall be filled by election for a term of four years.



   (C)   Alternate members of the Planning Commission shall be elected
in accordance with Chapter 2 of the Charter. A vacancy occurring among
alternate members shall be filled until the next special election or regular
town election by vote of the members of the Planning Commission including any
alternate members then serving for absent or disqualified Commissioners; but
if the vacancy is not filled within 30 days from the time that the office
becomes vacant, the Board of Selectmen shall fill the vacancy by appointment
within 30 days thereafter.



   (D)   Within 30 days from the effective date of this section, the
Board of Selectmen shall appoint alternate members of the Planning Commission
to serve until the persons elected in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall have qualified.



(Ord. passed 2-6-1975; Ord. passed 5-25-1986; Ord. passed 12-4-2004)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 75; TM Volume 15, Page 341; TM Volume 22, page 461,
Amended



CHAPTER 32:  LAW ENFORCEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   32.01   Setting the number of Justices of the Peace




Board of Police Commissioners




   32.15   Established



   32.16   Composition



   32.17   Powers



   32.18   Police Department



   32.19   Chief of Police



   32.20   Establishment of policies and procedures



   32.21   Establishment of Police Department



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  SETTING THE NUMBER OF JUSTICES OF THE PEACE.



   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 9-183a, Revision of 1958, as amended,
the number of Justices of the Peace to be elected at the regular election in
November, 1988 and each four years thereafter shall be 101.



(Ord. passed 7-25-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 226D



BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.15  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is established a seven member Board of Police
Commissioners for the purpose of organizing and maintaining a Police
Department in the town.



   (B)   The Board shall have all the authority, powers and
responsibilities set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-276, as it may be amended
from time to time.



(Ord. effective 11-15-2016)



§ 32.16  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The Board of Police Commissioners shall consist of the First
Selectman and six resident electors of the town appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. The terms of the appointed members shall be as follows: three
terms shall be filled by appointment until the first Monday of January, 2018,
at which time they shall be filled by appointment for four years; three terms
shall be filled by appointment until the first Monday of January, 2020, at
which time they will be filled by appointment for four years.



   (B)   Appointed members of the Board of Police Commissioners may
serve no more than two consecutive terms. A member who has served two
consecutive terms may not be reappointed to the Board until four years have
elapsed from the conclusion of his or her most recent term. A First Selectman
who has ceased to occupy said office may not be appointed to the Board until
four years have elapsed from the conclusion of his or her most recent term as
First Selectman.



   (C)   No appointed member of the Board of Police Commissioners shall
hold any other elective or appointed office within the town.



   (D)   The First Selectman shall have the right to vote at meetings
of the Board of Police Commissioners.



(Ord. effective 11-15-2016)



§ 32.17  POWERS.



   The Board shall have all of the powers given by the General Statutes to
boards of police commissioners, shall have general management and supervision
of the Police Department of the town and of the property and equipment used
in connection therewith, shall make all needful regulations for the
government thereof not contrary to law or applicable collective bargaining
agreements and may prescribe suitable penalties for the violation of any such
regulation. The Board shall have the sole power of appointment, promotion and
removal of the officers and members of such Police Department, under such
regulations as it adopts for the purpose, and such appointees shall hold
office during good behavior and until removed for cause upon written charges
and after hearing. The members of such Police Department shall have all such
authority with respect to the service of criminal process and the enforcement
of the criminal laws as is vested by the General Statutes in police officers
and constables.



(Ord. effective 11-15-2016)



§ 32.18  POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The Police Department, under the direction of the Board of Police
Commissioners, shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace,
prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, regulation of traffic,
protection of rights of persons and property and enforcement of the laws of
the state, and the ordinances of the town and all rules and regulations made
in accordance therewith. All members of the Department, except clerks, shall
have the same powers and duties with respect to the service of criminal
process and enforcement of the criminal laws as are vested in officers by the
General Statutes.



(Ord. effective 11-15-2016)



§ 32.19  CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and
such other officers of rank, patrol officers, supernumeraries and clerks as
may be necessary to discharge the duties of the Police Department. The
establishment of grades within the Department shall be at the discretion of
the Board of Police Commissioners.



   (B)   (1)   The appointment of the Chief of Police shall be made
only after certification of the applicant by the State of Connecticut Police
Officer Standards and Training Council. The chief, or in his or her absence,
the officer of rank designated by the Board of Police Commissioners, shall be
responsible for the administration of the affairs of the Police Department,
under the direction of the Board of Police Commissioners.



      (2)   The duties of the Chief shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:



         (a)   Be responsible for the day to day operation of the
Police Department; report on such operation to the Board of Police
Commissioners at such intervals as said Board shall establish;



         (b)   Initiate and cause to be carried out a continuing
program for instruction and training of personnel for the department;



         (c)   Develop and preserve system records with respect
to law enforcement and other activities of Department personnel and
communications maintained by the Department;



         (d)   Maintain records of all personnel within the
Department, by rank, grade and category, and render periodic reports to the
Board of Police Commissioners with respect to the performance of duty of such
personnel;



         (e)   Establish schedules and rules with respect to the
kind of duties within the Department;



         (f)   Be personally responsible for the review of
records with respect to all arrests, accidents and complaints made by or to
the Department and render a monthly report to the Board of Police
Commissioners with respect thereto; and



         (7)   Report to the Board of Police Commissioners any
neglect of duty or violation of the Department’s rules and regulations
promptly after any such neglect or violation comes to his or her attention.



   (C)   The Chief of Police may be suspended or removed from office by
the Board of Police Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of
Connecticut General Statutes, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. effective 11-15-2016)



§ 32.20  ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board of Police Commissioners may establish policies and
procedures regarding the assignment of any member or members of the Police
Department to special duty on or near private premises or the highways
adjacent thereto within the town whenever in the opinion of said Board the
activities conducted thereon shall or may cause persons to congregate or
create a hazardous condition, such as construction or utility projects,
concerts, sporting events, circuses, carnivals, fairs, motion pictures,
outdoor theaters, bars, restaurants or other places to preserve the public
safety.



   (B)   The owner or operator of any such private premises upon which
any such activity is conducted within the town shall accept and use the
police so assigned to or near such premises and shall pay to the Treasurer of
the town such rate of compensation as shall be determined by the Board of
Police Commissioners for such special duty. Said payment shall be made in
accordance with such procedures as shall be established by the Board of
Police Commissioners.



   (C)   Police so assigned to such special duty shall be subject to
the rules and regulations of the Department.



   (D)   No person shall operate within the town any construction or
utility project, concert, sporting event, circus, carnival, fair, motion
picture, outdoor theater, bar, restaurant or other place to which or adjacent
to which premises the Board of Police Commissioners has assigned any police
without first having accepted and used such number of police as have been
assigned thereto.



(Ord. effective 11-15-2016)



§ 32.21  ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   For purposes of this subchapter and transition from the
constabulary, the Police Department shall be considered as “established”
when the Board of Police Commissioners has adopted such regulations and
procedures as may be necessary or desirable for the proper functioning of a
Police Department, and sufficient funds have been appropriated to the Board
and a Chief of Police has been appointed and sworn. The Board of Police
Commissioners shall certify to the Town Clerk and the Board of Selectmen the
date on which the Police Department is established.



   (B)   On the date the Police Department is established, the
appointment of Constables pursuant to the ordinance entitled “Amended
Ordinance Concerning Terms of Appointment and Qualifications of Constables”
shall terminate, and the full time officers in active service and in good
standing as Constables shall be officers of the Police Department.



   (C)   On the date the Police Department is established, the
ordinance entitled “Resolution Designating First Selectman as Town Agent to
act as Chief of Police” shall be repealed.



   (D)   On the date the Police Department is established, the
ordinance entitled “Resolution Regarding Establishment of a Resident State
Policeman in the Town of East Lyme” shall be repealed.



   (E)   On the date that the Police Department is established,
officers who were appointed by the Board of Selectmen as Constables pursuant
to the ordinance entitled “Amended Ordinance Concerning Terms of
Appointment and Qualifications of Constables” and are in active service and
in good standing on the effective date of this section, shall be officers of
the Police Department, with such rank, years of service and other
classifications and categories as are commensurate with their positions in
the constabulary. Unsworn clerks and administrative personnel who are in
active service and in good standing on the effective date of this ordinance
shall be employees of the Police Department in positions commensurate with
their previous service for the constabulary.



   (F)   On the date the Police Department is established, all business
pending with the constabulary, including, but not limited to, applications,
permits, patrols, arrests, investigations, enforcement actions, warrants and
all other open or pending items of business of any nature whatsoever, and
records of any kind or nature whatsoever pertaining to the law enforcement
and administrative functions of the constabulary, shall be transferred to and
continue to be pending at the Police Department. All items of property and
equipment used in connection with the business of the constabulary shall
continue to be used by the Police Department.



(Ord. effective 11-15-2016)



CHAPTER 33:  ELECTIONS



Section




Board for Admission of Electors




   33.01   Board for Admission of Electors




Voting Districts and Registrar of Voters




   33.15   Voting districts



   33.16   Registrars of Voters



BOARD FOR ADMISSION OF ELECTORS



§ 33.01  BOARD FOR ADMISSION OF ELECTORS.



   The Board for Admission of Electors shall consist of the Town Clerk and
the Registrars of Voters for the First District.



(Ord. passed 2-2-1970)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 10, page 245



VOTING DISTRICTS AND REGISTRAR OF VOTERS



§ 33.15  VOTING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The town is divided into three voting districts.



   (B)   The first voting district comprises all the area lying
northwest of U.S. Route I-95 (the Connecticut Turnpike).



   (C)   The second voting district comprises:



      (1)   All the area lying southeast of U.S. Route I-95 and east
and southeast of the following line: commencing at the intersection of the
centerline of Route 161 with the southeasterly line of U.S. Route I-95,
thence run southerly along the centerline of Route 161 to the centerline of
East Pattagansett Road, thence run southerly along the centerline of East
Pattagansett Road to the centerline of Black Point Road, thence run
southerly, southwesterly and southerly along the centerline of Black Point
Road to its intersection with the railroad; thence run westerly along the
railroad to its intersection with the easterly shore of the Pattagansett
River; thence run generally southerly along the easterly shore of the
Pattagansett River to the most southerly point of Old Black Point.



      (2)   All properties having street numbers assigned by the
town on:



         (a)   The portion of Route 161 lying south of U.S. Route
I-95;



         (b)   East Pattagansett Road;



         (c)   Black Point Road to its intersection with the
railroad;



         (d)   Brook Road;



         (e)   Faulkner Drive; and



         (f)   McElaney Drive.



      (3)   The property on which is located Niantic Center School.



   (D)   The third voting district comprises all the area not included
in the first or second voting districts.



(Ord. passed 1-18-1995)



§ 33.16  REGISTRARS OF VOTERS.



   At each state election, there shall be elected two registrars of voters
for the entire town.



(Ord. passed 1-18-1995)



CHAPTER 34:  TAXATION



Section




General Provisions




   34.001   Authorizing Tax Collector to retain payments in excess of
the amount due provided the excess is less than $5



   34.002   Persons owing past due property taxes



   34.003   Property on which property taxes are past due



   34.004   Abatement and deferral of payment of property tax



   34.005   Date taxes become past due




Tax Exempt Organizations




   34.020   Property tax exemption for property leased to tax-exempt
organizations



   34.021   Property acquired by tax exempt organizations




Solar Energy Systems




   34.035   Tax exemption for solar energy systems




Veterans or Their Surviving Spouses




   34.050   Additional tax exemption




Motor Vehicles Modified for Disabled Persons




   34.065   Property tax exemption for certain motor vehicles modified
for disabled persons




Elderly and Totally Disabled Homeowners




   34.080   Property tax relief for elderly and totally disabled
homeowners




Low and Moderate Income Housing




   34.095   Definitions



   34.096   Contracts for abatement



   34.097   Term



   34.098   Valuation



   34.099   State assistance



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.001  AUTHORIZING TAX COLLECTOR TO RETAIN PAYMENTS IN EXCESS OF THE
AMOUNT DUE PROVIDED THE EXCESS IS LESS THAN $5.



   Pursuant to the provisions of the Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-129, the Tax
Collector is hereby authorized to retain payments of taxes in excess of the
amount due, provided the amount of each such excess payment is less than $5.



(Ord. passed 8-2-2008)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 814



§ 34.002  PERSONS OWING PAST DUE PROPERTY TAXES.



   (A)   The Treasurer, before making payment to any person for
services rendered to or materials purchased for the town shall ascertain from
the Tax Collector whether such person owes past due taxes on real or personal
property. Any such past due taxes and any interest and fees in respect
thereto, shall be deducted from the amount due and owing from the town to any
such person and shall be paid to the Tax Collector and applied to such taxes,
interest and fees.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the payment
of wages.



(Ord. passed 8-4-1983)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 2



§ 34.003  PROPERTY ON WHICH PROPERTY TAXES ARE PAST DUE.



   No building permit, certificate of occupancy or permit for excavation
in a highway for purposes of installing a driveway shall be issued as to any
real property on which there are past due property taxes.



(Ord. passed 8-4-1983)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 2



§ 34.004  ABATEMENT AND DEFERRAL OF PAYMENT OF PROPERTY TAX.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by Public Act 82-1 of the
June, 1982 Special Session of the General Assembly, property taxes on real
and personal property damaged as a result of the flooding and related
occurrences in the period from June 4, 1982 to June 7, 1982, inclusive are
abated as provided in this section.



   (B)   Such abatement shall be equal to one-third of the total
property tax determined as the same proportionate part of such total tax as
the damaged portion of such property bears to the entire property subject to
such tax; provided, however, that no abatement shall take effect unless the
loss in assessed value resulting from such damage is not less than 10% of the
assessed value of such damaged property.



   (C)   Any construction or reconstruction related to property so
damaged with respect to which property taxes have been abated as provided in
this section shall be subject to property tax as provided in Conn. Gen. Stat.
§ 12-53a.



   (D)   With respect to any real or personal property damaged as a
result of such flooding and related occurrences which qualifies for property
tax abatement under division (B) above, payment of the property tax may be
deferred without interest until July 1, 1983.



   (E)   Applications for the abatement provided for in division (A)
above and for the deferral of payment provided for in division (D) above
shall be filed with the Assessor in a form to be determined by the Assessor
not later than September 10. The Assessor shall notify the applicants of his
or her decision not later than September 30.



   (F)   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the actions of the
Assessor under this section may appeal to the Board of Tax Review on or
before October 8, 1982.



(Ord. passed 9-3-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 261



§ 34.005  DATE TAXES BECOME PAST DUE.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   To designate April 1, 1977 as the date on which property
taxes for the tax year beginning September 1, 1976 and ending June 30, 1977,
shall be due and payable.



      (2)   To provide that commencing on July 1, 1977, property
taxes shall be due and payable in two equal semi-annual installments with the
first installment due and payable on July 1 and the second installment due
and payable on January 1; provided, however, that all property taxes on motor
vehicles shall be due and payable in a single installment on July 1, as
required by the 1976 General Assembly; provided further, that all other
property taxes of $100 or less shall be due and payable in full on July 1.



   (B)   Assessment date. To designate October 1, 1976 as the
assessment date for property taxes on motor vehicles for the tax year ending
June 30, 1977, as required by the 1976 General Assembly.



(Res. passed - -)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 246



TAX EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS



§ 34.020  PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR PROPERTY LEASED TO TAX-EXEMPT
ORGANIZATIONS.



   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(58), an exemption from property
tax is authorized for personal property leased to a charitable, religious or
nonprofit organization which is exempt from taxation for federal income tax
purposes; provided such property is used exclusively for the purposes of such
charitable, religious or nonprofit organization.



(Ord. passed 11-7-1986)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 37



§ 34.021  PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY TAX EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   The property tax exemption authorized by Conn. Gen. Stat. §
12-81(7) to (16), inclusive, as amended, shall be effective as of the date of
acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies by a tax-exempt
organization.



   (B)   The Board of Selectmen shall, upon application by such a
tax-exempt organization, authorize reimbursement of such organization for any
tax paid by it for a period subsequent to such date of acquisition, and for
any tax paid by the prior owner subsequent to such date of acquisition for
which such organization reimburses such owner.



(Ord. passed 12-5-1977)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 38



SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS



§ 34.035  TAX EXEMPTION FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. §12-81, as amended, an
exemption from property tax is authorized for the following:



         (a)   Any building, the construction of which is
commenced on or after October 1, 1976 and before October 1, 1991, which is
equipped with an active solar energy heating or cooling system;



         (b)   Any building to which an active solar energy
heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976 and before
October 1, 1991;



         (c)   Any solar energy electricity generating system
which is installed for the generation of electricity for private residential
use, provided such installation occurs on or after October 1, 1977 and before
October 1, 1991.



         (d)   Any building, the construction of which is
commenced on or after April 20, 1997 which is equipped with a passive or
hybrid solar energy heating or cooling system; and



         (e)   Any building to which a passive or hybrid solar
energy heating or cooling system is added on or after April 20, 1997.



      (2)   ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM as used in
divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) above means equipment which:



         (a)   Provides for the collection, transfer, storage and
use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling
which absent such solar energy system would require a conventional energy
resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity;



         (b)   Employs mechanical means such as fans or pumps to
transfer energy; and



         (c)   Which meets standards established by regulation by
the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management.



      (3)   PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM as used
in divisions (A)(1)(c) and (A)(1)(d) above means a system which utilizes the
structural elements of a building for the collection of incident solar energy
and its storage and distribution for use in water heating or space heating or
cooling; which building absent such system would require a conventional
energy resource, such a petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, and
which system meets standards established by regulation by the Secretary of
the Office of Policy and Management.



      (4)   HYBRID SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEM as used in
divisions (A)(1)(c) and (A)(1)(d) above means a solar energy heating or
cooling system which consists of both active and passive elements and which
meets the standards established for both.



      (5)   SOLAR ENERGY ELECTRICITY GENERATING SYSTEM. Equipment
which is designed, operated and installed as a system at any private
residential location, which utilizes solar energy to produce electricity for
consumption at such location and which meets standards established by
regulation by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management.



   (B)   The extent of the exemptions granted by divisions (A)(1)(a)
and (A)(1)(b) above is the amount by which the assessed valuation of such
real property equipped with such a system exceeds the assessed valuation of
such real property equipped with the conventional portion of the heating of
cooling system, exclusive of any portion of such system related to solar
energy, as determined by the Assessor.



   (C)   The extent of the exemptions granted by divisions (A)(1)(c)
and (A)(1)(d) above is the amount by which the assessed valuation of such
real property equipped with such a system exceeds the valuation of which such
real property would be assessed if building using conventional construction
techniques in lieu of construction related to such a system, as determined by
the Assessor.



   (D)   These exemptions shall only apply to the first 15 assessment
years following construction of said building or the addition or installation
of any such system to a building.



   (E)   Application for such exemptions must be filed in accordance
with the relevant subsections of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81 and on or before
November 1 following the annual assessment date. Such application shall not
be required for any assessment year following that for which the initial
application is filed; provided if such system is altered in a manner which
would require a building permit, such alteration shall be deemed a waiver of
the right to such exemption until a new application, applicable with respect
to such altered system, is filed and the right to such exemption is
established as required initially.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981; Ord. passed 2-10-2000; Ord. passed 6-19-2008)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 140;  Amended, See page 232



   TM Volume 21, page 752; TM Volume 22, page 804



VETERANS OR THEIR SURVIVING SPOUSES



§ 34.050  ADDITIONAL TAX EXEMPTION.



   (A)   Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(19) shall be entitled to an
additional exemption, provided such veteran’s qualifying income does not
exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat.§
12-81, as it may be amended from time to time, plus $2,000. The exemption
provided for under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(19) shall be applied to the
assessed value of an eligible veteran’s property and shall be in the amount
of $5,000.



   (B)   Any veteran’s surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from
property tax in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(22) shall be
entitled to an additional exemption, provided such surviving spouse’s
qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided
under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81, as it may be amended from time to time, plus
$2,000. The exemption provided for under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(22) shall
be applied to the assessed value of an eligible surviving spouse’s property
and shall be in the amount of $5,000.



   (C)   Any such veteran or spouse submitting a claim for such
additional exemption shall be required to file an application on a form
prepared for such purpose by the Assessor, not later than the assessment date
with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed; provided when an
applicant has filed for such exemption and received approval for the first
time, such applicant shall be required to file for such exemption biennially
thereafter, subject to the provisions of division (D) below. Each such
application shall include a copy of such veteran’s or spouse’s federal
income tax return, or in the event such a return is not filed such evidence
related to income as may be required by the Assessor, for the tax year of
such veteran or spouse ending immediately prior to the assessment date with
respect to which such additional exemption is claimed.



   (D)   Any person who has submitted an application and been approved
in any year for the additional exemption under divisions (A) or (B) above
shall, in the year immediately following approval, be presumed to be
qualified for such exemption. During the year immediately following such
approval, the Assessor shall notify, in writing, each person presumed to be
qualified pursuant to this division (D) of their duty to reapply for
continuance of the exemption or to inform the Assessor of any change in
circumstances that disqualifies them from such exemption. If any such person
has qualifying income in excess of the maximum allowed under said divisions
(A) or (B) above, such person shall notify the Assessor on or before the next
filing date for such exemption and shall be denied such exemption for the
assessment year immediately following and for any subsequent year until such
person has reapplied and again qualified for such exemption. Any person who
fails to notify the assessor of such disqualification shall make payment to
the municipality in the amount of property tax loss related to the exemption
improperly taken.



(Ord. effective 10-1-2006)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 572



MOTOR VEHICLES MODIFIED FOR DISABLED PERSONS



§ 34.065  PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES MODIFIED FOR
DISABLED PERSONS.



   (A)   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81c(3), an exemption from
personal property tax is authorized for certain modified disabled-accessible
motor vehicles, owned by such disabled person or his or her parent, that are
used primarily for the transportation of disabled persons.



   (B)   A MODIFIED DISABLED-ACCESSIBLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall be defined
as any production motor vehicle that has been altered or reconfigured, or has
undergone mechanical or structural changes, that is not used for commercial
purposes, which permits an individual with a disability to safely drive or
ride as a passenger. Vehicle modifications shall include, but are not limited
to:



      (1)   Wheelchair or scooter loaders which mount on the roof in
the passenger area or in the trunk or other storage areas of a car or other
motor vehicle;



      (2)   Any vehicle which has had automotive adaptive control
devices (“AACDs”) installed. AACDs shall include any mechanical or
electrical devices added to the standard motor vehicle to enable an
individual with mobility restrictions to control the accelerator, foot brake,
turn signals, dimmer switch, steering wheel or parking brake; and



      (3)   Any vehicle equipped with ramps, stretchers or other
special seating and alterations to accommodate medical equipment.



   (C)   The Tax Assessor shall determine whether modifications not
specifically listed in division (B) above qualify the vehicle as a modified
disabled-accessible motor vehicle.



   (D)   Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this
section shall file with the Tax Assessor of the town, before October 1 of any
assessment year for which exemption is claimed, a written request for said
exemption containing information sufficient to enable the Tax Assessor to
make a determination of eligibility, including, but not limited to, a letter
from a physician and documentation of the modification. Failure to file such
a request in said manner shall constitute a waiver of the right to such
exemption for the assessment year.



(Ord. effective 11-20-2005)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 555



ELDERLY AND TOTALLY DISABLED HOMEOWNERS



§ 34.080  PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FOR ELDERLY AND TOTALLY DISABLED HOMEOWNERS.



   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-129n, property tax relief for
qualified elderly and totally disabled homeowners in the town is hereby
provided with respect to real property owned and occupied by such residents
as their principal residence, on the following terms and conditions.



   (A)   Applicants must be residents of the town who are:



      (1)   Sixty-five years of age or over, or whose spouses,
living with them, are 65 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a
taxpayer who has qualified under this section at the time of his or her death
or with respect to real property for which such residents or their spouses
are liable for real property taxes under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-48; or



      (2)   Under age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable
federal regulations to receive permanent total disability benefits under
Social Security, or have not been engaged in employment covered by Social
Security and have not qualified for benefits thereunder, but are qualified
for permanent total disability benefits under any federal, state or local
government retirement or disability plan, including the Railroad Retirement
Act and any government-related teacher’s retirement plan with requirements
regarding qualifications for such permanent total disability benefits that
are comparable to such requirements under Social Security, and are liable for
real property taxes under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-48.



   (B)   Applicants must have been taxpayers of the town for ten years
immediately preceding their receipt of tax relief under this section, and
shall be current in their payment of property taxes to the town as of the
date of application.



   (C)   The property for which tax relief is claimed must be occupied
by an applicant as his or her principal residence for more than 183 days of
each year.



   (D)   Applicants shall have individually, if unmarried, or jointly,
if married, adjusted gross income, as shown on Internal Revenue Service 1040,
Social Security benefits and all other income, hereinafter called
“qualifying income” during the calendar year preceding the filing of his
or her application in accordance with the standards set forth below.



   (E)   (1)   Tax credits shall be provided to qualified applicants
on a graduated basis in accordance with the following income and credit
standards:



 


Qualifying Income

 

Tax Credit




$0—$13,300

 

$1,000




$13,301—$18,100

 

$900




$18,101—$22,600

 

$600




$22,601—$27,100

 

$400




$27,101—$33,000

 

$300




 



      (2)   The “qualifying income” standards in the table set
forth above shall be adjusted annually in accordance with the determination
of the Secretary of the Connecticut Office of Policy and Management as
distributed to the Assessor in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. §
12-170aa(b)(2).



   (F)   Persons who qualify for property tax relief under this section
may also qualify for deferral of the remaining amount of taxes on qualifying
real property; provided that the real property tax which would have been
imposed on a qualifying taxpayer in the absence of state and local tax relief
shall not be reduced by more than 75% by virtue of the tax credit and
deferment provided by this section, together with all other tax relief
obtained by said person pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes. Any
such deferral shall be on the following terms and conditions.



      (1)   All deferred taxes and interest shall be reimbursed to
the town upon the death of the recipient of any tax deferral, or upon
conveyance or transfer of the real property subject to tax deferral.



      (2)   All deferred taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 6%
per year. Such interest shall be simple interest, not compounded, and shall
accrue from the due date of each installment until the date of reimbursement
to the town.



      (3)   Total tax deferments, including accrued interest, for
all years shall not exceed the assessed value of the real property upon which
deferment has been approved.



      (4)   An applicant receiving a tax deferment shall enter into
a written agreement with the town providing for reimbursement of all deferred
taxes and interest. The principal amount of such tax deferral shall be
recorded in the land records of the town and, together with the interest
thereon, shall constitute a lien on the property. All deferred taxes and
interest shall be payable upon death, conveyance or transfer, as set forth in
division (F)(2) above.



   (G)   The property tax relief provided by this section shall be in
addition to and not dependent upon those benefits available to qualified
taxpayers under the Connecticut General Statutes; provided that the town and
state tax relief in any year shall not exceed 100% of the real property tax
which would have been imposed on a qualified taxpayer in the absence of said
statutes and this section.



   (H)   If the state denies the eligibility of an applicant for the
portion of tax relief granted under one of the state tax relief programs, the
Assessor shall deny the applicant the local share of tax relief, and remove
the applicant from the town’s tax relief records.



   (I)   The total of all tax relief granted under the provisions of
this section shall not in any taxable year exceed an amount equal to 10% of
the total town-wide real property tax assessed in the town in the preceding
tax year.



   (J)   When title to real property is recorded in the name of the
taxpayer or his or her spouse who receive tax relief under this section and
any other person or persons, the tax relief under this section shall be
prorated to allow tax relief equivalent to the fractional share in the
property of such taxpayer or spouse. The persons not otherwise eligible for
tax relief shall not receive any tax credit.



   (K)   Upon the sale, conveyance or transfer of the property, the new
owner shall not be entitled tax relief under this section. The Assessor and
Tax Collector shall prorate the increased tax liability from the date of sale
or transfer and bill the new owner within a reasonable time thereafter.



   (L)   The Tax Collector and Assessor shall prescribe, with regard to
their respective duties under this section, such forms and procedures as may
be necessary to implement this section. The Assessor, in addition, shall
satisfy himself or herself as to the qualifying income of an applicant for
benefits under this section by requesting and reviewing such evidence of
qualifying income as he or she may deem pertinent. All applications, federal
income tax returns filed therewith and any additional evidence of qualifying
income which the assessor may require shall be kept confidential and not open
to public inspection.



   (M)   Applications for benefits under this section shall be filed
with the Assessor between February 1 and May 15, annually.



   (N)   This section shall be applicable to the Grand List of October
1, 2006 and all subsequent Grand Lists.



(Ord. effective 11-20-2005)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 556



LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING



§ 34.095  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING. Housing, the construction or
rehabilitation of which is aided or assisted in any way by any federal or
state statute, which housing is subject to regulation or supervision of
rents, charges or sales prices and methods of operation by a governmental
agency under a regulatory agreement or other instrument which restricts
occupancy of such housing to persons or families whose incomes do not exceed
prescribed limits, and shall be deemed to include the land on which such
housing is situated.



   OWNER. A person or persons, partnership, joint venture or corporation
who or which has executed, or will execute, a regulatory agreement or other
instrument with a governmental agency which limits occupancy of the low and
moderate income housing owned or to be owned by such person or persons,
partnership, joint venture or corporation to persons or families whose
incomes do not exceed prescribed limits.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 220



§ 34.096  CONTRACTS FOR ABATEMENT.



   (A)   The Board of Selectmen may enter into contracts for the town
with owners of low and moderate income housing granting abatement, in whole
or in part, of the real property taxes on such housing; provided, that such
abatement need not be conditioned upon receipt of state reimbursement to the
town for such abatement; and provided further that each such contract shall
require that the owner apply the money equivalent of the taxes so abated to
one or more of the following specified purposes:



      (1)   To reduce rents below the levels which would be achieved
in the absence of abatement;



      (2)   To improve housing quality and design;



      (3)   To effect occupancy by persons and families of varying
income levels, within prescribed limits; or



      (4)   To provide necessary related facilities.



   (B)   The amount of such abatement shall be established in each such
contract, giving due consideration to the purpose or purposes to which the
money equivalent of the taxes so abated is to be applied.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 220



§ 34.097  TERM.



   The abatement shall become effective on the date specified in the
contract between the town and the owner of low and moderate income housing.
The term of abatement shall extend for the remainder of the fiscal year in
which such abatement becomes effective and may continue for a period not to
exceed 39 consecutive fiscal years thereafter; provided, that such abatement
shall terminate at any time when the property for which tax abatement had
been granted is not used solely for low and moderate income housing.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 220



§ 34.098  VALUATION.



   For the purpose of determining the amount of taxes to be abated as
aforesaid, the present true and actual value of low and moderate income
housing on which rents and carrying charges are limited by regulatory
agreement with, or otherwise regulated by, the federal or state government or
department or agency thereof, shall be based upon and shall not exceed the
capitalized value of the net rental income of such housing; provided, that
for the purposes of this section, NET RENTAL INCOME shall mean gross income
as limited by the schedule of rents or carrying charges, less reasonable
operating expenses and property taxes.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 220



§ 34.099  STATE ASSISTANCE.



   The Board of Selectmen may enter into contracts with the state for
financial assistance by the state in the form of reimbursement for all or any
part of the tax abatement granted to an owner of low and moderate income
housing in accordance with this subchapter but the entering into of such a
contract for financial assistance need not be a condition of any tax
abatement.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 220



CHAPTER 35:  TOWN POLICIES



Section




General Provisions




   35.01   Lost goods




Ethics Code




   35.15   Declaration of policy and purpose



   35.16   Applicability



   35.17   Definitions



   35.18   Standards of conduct



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  LOST GOODS.



   (A)   The provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 50-9 to 50-13,
Revision of 1958, as amended, are adopted and made applicable to lost goods
within the town.



   (B)   Any person who finds and takes possession of any article of
the value of $1 or more shall report the finding of such article to the
Police Department of the town within 48 hours from the time of such finding.
The finder of such article shall, at the time of reporting, furnish to the
Police Department the date, time and place of finding, his or her name and
address and a description of the article found and, within a period of one
week from such finding, shall deliver such article to the Police Department.



   (C)   The Police Department shall, commencing within one week from
the date of receipt of any lost article, advertise a general description of
such article once a week for at least two successive weeks in a newspaper
having a circulation in the town and shall retain custody of such article for
six months from the date of receipt thereof, unless it is claimed by the
rightful owner within such six-month period. The requirement of advertising
may be omitted when the value or estimated value of the article is less than
$2. Perishable or obnoxious property or articles of a dangerous or harmful
nature may be sold or otherwise disposed of as soon as practicable on the
best terms available.



   (D)   If the owner of any such article claims it within six months
from the date of receipt by the Police Department, the article or the
proceeds thereof shall be restored to him or her upon payment or deduction of
all proper charges.



   (E)   If no owner claims such article within six months from the
receipt thereof by the Police Department, the Police Department shall, within
two weeks thereafter, notify the finder of such fact by registered or
certified mail at his or her last-known address, and the article or the
proceeds thereof shall be turned over to the finder, upon demand by him or
her within 30 days from the expiration of the six-month period and upon
payment or deduction of all proper charges; but, if such finder fails to
demand such article or the proceeds thereof or refuses to pay such charges
within 30 days from the expiration of the six-month period, such article or
proceeds shall belong to the town. The requirement of notification may be
omitted when the value or estimated value of the article is less than $5.



   (F)   The Police Department shall sell at public auction any
articles which it acquires as provided herein after the expiration of time
for the owner or finder to demand the same and after the time and place of
such sale and a description of the articles to be sold have been advertised
once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper having a circulation in
the town. The net proceeds from such sales and the unclaimed net proceeds
from the sales of perishable or obnoxious property or articles of a dangerous
or harmful nature shall be paid to the Treasurer of the town, who shall
deposit them in the Police Benefit Fund, if any, of the town.



(Ord. passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 255



ETHICS CODE



§ 35.15  DECLARATION OF POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Public office is a public trust. In order for the town government to
function most efficiently, the trust of the public is critical. Public policy
developed by government officials and employees impacts every citizen and
property owner of the town, and as such, must be consistently based on honest
and fair deliberation and decisions. The process of policy formulation and
decision making must be free from threats, favoritism, undue influence and
even the appearance of impropriety so that the confidence of the public in
the town government is maintained.



(Ord. passed 8-2-2007)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 704



§ 35.16  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The Code shall apply to all public town officials and town
employees whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid.



   (B)   All of the above shall be referred to hereinafter as
“persons governed by this Code”.



   (C)   A provision of this Code shall not be applicable if it
conflicts in whole or in part with any provisions of any labor agreement,
employment contract or state statute.



(Ord. passed 8-2-2007)



§ 35.17  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENCY. Any board, commission, department, authority and advisory
committee of the town.



   BUSINESS. Any entity through which business for profit or not for
profit is conducted including a corporation, company, partnership,
proprietorship, firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization or
self-employed person.



   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information, whether transmitted orally or in
writing, which is obtained by reason of the public position or office held
and is of such a nature that it is not at the time of transmission a matter
of public record or public knowledge.



   FINANCIAL INTEREST. Pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a town
official or employee as a result of a contract, transaction, decision or
other matter which is, or may be, the subject of any official act or action
by or with the town except for such contracts or transactions which by their
terms and by the substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and
right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all persons and/or
property owners similarly situated.



   GIFT.



      (1)   Anything of value in excess of $25.



      (2)   The term GIFT does not include:



         (a)   A political contribution otherwise reported as
required by law or a donation or payment as described in Conn. Gen. Stat.
§§ 9-333b(b)(9) or (11):



         (b)   Services provided by persons volunteering their
time;



         (c)   A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not
more favorable than loans made in the ordinary course of business;



         (d)   A gift received from:



            1.   An individual’s spouse, fiancé or fiancée;



            2.   The parent, brother or sister of such spouse
or such individual; or



            3.   The child of such individual or the spouse of
such child.



         (e)   Goods or services which are provided to the town
and facilitate governmental action or functions;



         (f)   A certificate, plaque or other ceremonial award;



         (g)   Printed or recorded informational material germane
to governmental action or functions;



         (h)   An honorary degree bestowed upon a public official
or public employee by a public or private university or college;



         (i)   A meal provided at an event and/or the
registration or entrance fee to attend such an event, in which the public
employee or public official participates in his or her official capacity;



         (j)   A meal provided in the home of an individual; and



         (k)   Gift-giving occasions, generally recognized by the
public, including Christmas, Hanukkah, birthdays, the birth or adoption of a
child, weddings, First Communions, confirmations or bar/bat mitzvahs,
provided the total value of such gifts for each person for each event shall
not exceed $25 per calendar year.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild,
stepchild, sibling, stepsibling, all in-laws and/or any individual who has a
family-like relationship and/or who resides in the household.



   ON THE RECORD. A writing, signed and dated, or a directive to the
recording secretary of a meeting to note in the minutes a particular
statement.



   PERSONAL BENEFICIAL INTEREST. Any interest, other than financial, which
would affect the action of the official or employee. Membership in or
affiliation with a social, fraternal, charitable, service, education,
religious, governmental or similar non-profit organization is not deemed to
automatically create a personal interest.



   TOWN OFFICIAL, OFFICER or EMPLOYEE. An individual whether elected or
appointed, whether paid or unpaid, full or part time, including members and
employees of any agency of the town.



(Ord. passed 8-2-2007)



§ 35.18  STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.



   (A)   Conflict of interest.



      (1)   A person governed by this Code shall not engage in or
participate in any business or transaction, nor have an interest, direct or
indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her
official duties in the public interest, or would tend to impair his or her
independent judgment or action in the performance of his or her official
duties.



      (2)   A person governed by this Code shall not be financially
interested or have any personal beneficial interest, in any contract or
purchase order for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services
furnished to or used by the board, agency or commission of which he or she is
a member, or of which he or she is an employee. Notwithstanding the above, no
member of the Board of Selectmen and no member of the Board of Finance shall
be financially interested, or have any personal beneficial interest, either
directly or indirectly, in any contract or purchase order for any supplies,
materials, equipment or contractual services furnished to or used by any
board, agency or commission of the town.



         (a)   A town official, officer or employee shall refrain
from voting upon or otherwise participating in any matter if he or she, or a
member of his or her immediate family, has a financial or personal interest
in the transaction or contract, including, but not limited to, the sale of
real estate, material, supplies or services to the municipality.



         (b)   Notwithstanding the prohibition in division
(A)(2)(a) above, a town official, officer or employee may vote or otherwise
participate in a matter if it involves a determination of general policy and
the interest is shared with a substantial segment of the population of the
town.



      (3)   Any public official or public employee who has a
conflict of interest, direct or indirect, in any contract, transaction or
decision within the purview of his or her official responsibilities shall
disclose that conflict of interest. Such disclosure shall disqualify the
public official or public employee from participation or deliberation in the
matter, transaction or decision. Such disclosure shall be made in executive
session of an agency at the request of the public official or the public
employee.



   (B)   Financial interest. A person governed by this Code who has a
financial or personal interest in any transaction or contract with the town,
including, but not limited to, the sale of real estate, materials, supplies
or services to the town, in which he or she may be called upon to act in his
or her official capacity shall not vote or otherwise participate in the
transaction on behalf of the town. That person shall declare on the record
that he or she has a conflict of interest that disqualifies him or her from
participating and voting.



   (C)   Town-owned property. A person governed by this Code shall not
request or permit the use of town-owned vehicles, equipment, facilities,
material or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such
town property is available to the general public as a result of a policy
adopted in the interest of the town.



   (D)   Appearance of impropriety.



      (1)   No public official or public employee shall accept a
gift or engage in private employment or render services when the gift,
employment or services:



         (a)   Are incompatible with the proper discharge of the
official duties of the public official or public employee; or



         (b)   Could tend to impair independence of judgment or
action by the public official or public employee, in the performance of his
or her official duties.



      (2)   To avoid even the appearance of impropriety or creation
of a situation that would be contrary to the declared policy and purpose of
the Code, a public official or public employee, not otherwise restrained by
the code, shall exercise care when appearing before other agencies and shall
disclose whether he or she is appearing in his or her official capacity or as
a private citizen.



(Ord. passed 8-2-2007)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      51.   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING



      52.   WATER



      53.   SEWERS



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Automatic sprinkler systems



   50.02   Well and sanitation permits




Water and Sewer Commission




   50.15   Ordinance designating Board of Water Commissioners as sewer
authority



   50.16   Established



   50.17   Duties and responsibilities



   50.18   Income



   50.19   Effect



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Any automatic lawn sprinkler system making use of water
provided by or through the town municipal water system shall be equipped with
a rain sensor device or switch that will automatically override the
irrigation cycle of such sprinkler system when adequate rainfall has occurred.



   (B)   The Town Director of Public Works shall determine the method
by which an appropriate level of “adequate rainfall” will be measured and
the method by which the automatic lawn sprinkler system will be deactivated
by the rain sensor device or switch. In making such determinations, the
Director of Public Works may be guided but not controlled by the
specifications of manufacturers of said automatic lawn sprinkler systems.



   (C)   Any person who uses water from a faucet or spigot which is not
connected to the municipal water system may apply to the Water and Sewer
Commission for a certificate evidencing such fact and, upon inquiry from any
person charged with the enforcement of such section, shall make such
certificate available to the enforcement officer.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall apply to any automatic
lawn sprinkler system installed on or after the effective date of this
section.



(Ord. passed 6-29-2004)  Penalty, see § 50.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 388



§ 50.02  WELL AND SANITATION PERMITS.



   (A)   No well or sewage disposal system shall be constructed within
the town until a written permit has been obtained from the Director of Health
or his or her duly authorized agent.



   (B)   (1)   No building permit for the construction of any
building or any addition thereto shall be issued by the Building Official, or
such other officer as may be authorized to issue building permits, until
there has been presented to such officer a written certificate, signed by the
Director of Health or his or her duly authorized agent, indicating that the
well or other water supply facilities and the sewage disposal facilities,
located on the land on which said building or addition are to be constructed,
are satisfactory.



      (2)   Reasonable fees for such permits and certificates, and
for dumping of septic tank wastes at the site authorized by the Board of
Selectmen, shall be prescribed from time to time by the Board of Selectmen.



(Ord. passed 2-7-1968)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 10, page 8



WATER AND SEWER COMMISSION



§ 50.15 ORDINANCE DESIGNATING BOARD OF WATER COMMISSIONERS AS SEWER
AUTHORITY.



   (A)   There is constituted a nine member Water and Sewer Commission.
The First Selectman shall be Chairperson, and upon his or her absence or
disability the Deputy First Selectman shall have the powers and perform the
duties of the absent or disabled Chairperson, which shall include presiding
at meetings of the Commission and having the right to vote at such meetings.



   (B)   The remaining eight members shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen in the manner set forth in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(5) below.



      (1)   The remaining six members of the Board of Water
Commissioners on the effective date of this subchapter shall continue to be
members of the Commission and shall serve the terms for which they were
appointed.



      (2)   One member shall be appointed for a term to expire on
the first Monday of January, 1978.



      (3)   One member shall be appointed for a term to expire on
the first Monday of January, 1980.



      (4)   Upon expiration of the terms established by divisions
(B)(2) and (B)(3) above, the terms of appointment shall be for four years.



      (5)   The members shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for necessary expenses.



(Ord. passed 7-23-1977; Ord. passed 1-21-1979; Ord. passed 1-24-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 1; TM Volume 13, page 170, Amended; TM Volume 14,
page 77, Amended



§ 50.16  ESTABLISHED.



   Said Commission shall maintain and operate the water system of the
town, obtain plans and cost estimates for extensions and improvements to the
system, expend such funds as may be appropriated for such purposes, provide
all necessary rules and regulations in connection with the operation of the
system, prescribe the rates at which water may be sold, perform all the
duties incidental thereto, and present an annual report and budget before
each annual budget meeting of the town.



(Ord. passed 7-23-1977; Ord. passed 1-21-1979; Ord. passed 1-24-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 1; TM Volume 13, page 170, Amended; TM Volume 14,
page 77, Amended



§ 50.17  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Commission as the sewer authority of the town shall have all the
powers, authority and duties set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. Chapter 103,
Revision of 1958, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. passed 7-23-1977; Ord. passed 1-21-1979; Ord. passed 1-24-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 1; TM Volume 13, page 170, Amended; TM Volume 14,
page 77, Amended



§ 50.18  INCOME.



   All income derived from service provided by the water system shall be
paid to the Treasurer of the town to be credited to the account of the
Commission and to be first applied to defray the current expenses of said
water system.



(Ord. passed 7-23-1977; Ord. passed 1-21-1979; Ord. passed 1-24-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 1; TM Volume 13, page 170, Amended; TM Volume 14,
page 77, Amended



§ 50.19  EFFECT.



   The adoption of this subchapter shall not be construed to affect the
powers, authority and duties of the Town Board of Water Commissioners which
shall hereafter, pursuant to this amendment, be known as the Water and Sewer
Commission.



(Ord. passed 7-23-1977; Ord. passed 1-21-1979; Ord. passed 1-24-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 1; TM Volume 13, page 170, Amended; TM Volume 14,
page 77, Amended



CHAPTER 51:  SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING



Section




Regulating the Storage, Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste




   51.01   Declaration of policy



   51.02   Definitions



   51.03   License required for refuse collections



   51.04   Refuse containers



   51.05   Location of containers



   51.06   Storing of refuse



   51.07   Bulky waste



   51.08   Disposal of refuse



   51.09   Source separation and recycling



   51.10   Licensing of refuse collectors; registration of vehicles



   51.11   Refusal, revocation or suspension of license



   51.12   Licensing private individuals to dispose of their own refuse



   51.13   Administration; promulgation of rules and regulations



   51.14   Refuse collector’s responsibilities and obligations




Sanitary Landfill Tract




   51.25   Definitions



   51.26   Entry restricted



   51.27   Restrictions on motor vehicles



   51.28   Regulations of motor vehicles



   51.29   Towing of motor vehicles




Recycling




   51.40   Regulations concerning designation of recyclable materials




Fees




   51.55   Fees for disposal of waste at landfill



   51.56   Fee for refuse collectors



 



   51.99   Penalty



REGULATING THE STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE



§ 51.01  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of refuse
must be controlled by the town for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.



   (B)   It is consequently found and declared that:



      (1)   The town is authorized by law to provide for or regulate
the collection and disposal of refuse;



      (2)   The town has a substantial interest in and
responsibility for protecting the health and safety of its inhabitants by
regulating the collection and disposal of such refuse;



      (3)   The expense of such regulation is substantial and can
best be borne, in the case of commercial, industrial and condominium owners,
by those owners and by the refuse collectors who service them; and



      (4)   The enactment of this subchapter is in furtherance of
the town’s approved solid waste management plan.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BULKY WASTES. Noncombustible construction debris, street sweepings and
oversized bulky items including, but not limited to, discarded appliances and
tree stumps, logs and branches.



   COMMERCIAL FOOD REFUSE. Includes waste from the preparation, cooking
and consumption of food, condemned food products and all refuse from the
handling, storage, preparation and sale of produce originating primarily in
commercial kitchens, stores, restaurants, food markets and factories.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works of the town.



   HAZARDOUS WASTES. Solid and liquid wastes in the following
classifications:



      (1)   Explosives;



      (2)   Pathogenic or pathological wastes;



      (3)   Radioactive wastes; and



      (4)   Medical wastes.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials which have been so designated by the
Director of by a regulation of the Board of Selectmen.



   REFUSE. Unwanted and discarded solid materials, but does not include:



      (1)   Liquid wastes including, but not limited to, semisolid,
liquid materials collected in a municipal sewage system or a septic system;



      (2)   Bulky wastes;



      (3)   Hazardous wastes;



      (4)   Any other material which may not be lawfully disposed of
(in a sanitary landfill or a resources recovery facility; or



      (5)   Recyclable materials.



   REFUSE COLLECTORS. Includes any person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of collecting and transporting refuse, including recyclable
materials, for hire within the town.



   TOWN. The Town of East Lyme.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.03  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR REFUSE COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   All refuse accumulated in the town shall be collected,
conveyed and disposed of by the town or by persons licensed by the town in
accordance with § 51.10 to perform such work.



   (B)   No other person shall collect, convey over any street or
dispose of any refuse in the town, except that occupants of premises in the
town upon which refuse has accumulated may personally collect, convey and
dispose of such refuse at such place or places as the Board of Selectmen or
the Director may from time to time designate, subject to the obtaining of a
private permit in accordance with § 51.12. No refuse which was not generated
within the town shall be disposed of in any such place.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.04  REFUSE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Provision for containers. The owner of each premises where
refuse is generated shall provide, at a suitable place upon such premises,
sufficient receptacles for receiving and holding such refuse during the
intervals between collections. Refuse containers shall be maintained in good
condition, free of holes and fissures, and shall be equipped with
securely-fitting covers.



   (B)   Containers for commercial food refuse. Commercial food refuse
shall be drained, free of liquids and placed in a watertight, vermin-proof
galvanized or plastic receptacle, with a tight lid, of not over 30-gallon
capacity. Refuse containers shall weigh not more than 50 pounds when full.
The persons having custody or control of premises used for business purposes
from which refuse is offered for collection by the town shall see that the
same is placed at the side of the nearest public road not more than two hours
before the scheduled time of collection for said road in such containers and
bundles as are herein described, and in such manner that said containers and
bundles do not constitute a travel or health hazard or nuisance of any sort,
and after said containers have been emptied, shall be removed from the side
of the road within one hour after the materials therein have been collected.
Alternatively, commercial food refuse containers may be large covered
containers designed to be mechanically emptied into a refuse truck where
collection is to be by a refuse collector.



   (C)   Containers for household refuse. All refuse set out for
collection by the town shall be placed in 20- or 30-gallon containers. Refuse
containers shall weigh not more than 50 pounds when full and shall be free of
handling hazards and of such quality as to prevent collapsing during handling
and breakage due to cold weather. Solid waste from multi-family dwelling
units may alternatively be placed in a large covered container designed to be
mechanically emptied into a refuse truck where collection is to be by a
refuse collector.



   (D)   Loose materials. The town shall not be obligated to collect
any loose materials.



   (E)   Containers not conforming to the above requirements.
Containers not conforming to the above requirements or which may be a travel
or health hazard or nuisance may be left not emptied and the occupant of the
premises notified.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.05  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.



   (A)   The persons having custody or control of residential premises
from which refuse is offered for collection shall see that the same is placed
at the side of the nearest public road, or in the case of privately-owned
property where the town by agreement makes collections, at the side of a
private road or driveway designated by the Director, not earlier than 12
hours before the scheduled time of collection for said road or driveway nor
later than 7:00 a.m. on scheduled collection days, in such a manner that said
containers and bundles do not constitute a travel or health hazard or
nuisance, and after said containers have been emptied, shall be removed from
the side of said road or driveway within 12 hours after the material therein
has been collected.



   (B)   All refuse collected or transported within the town shall be
carried in tightly-covered vehicles, or in tightly-covered containers in or
on such vehicles. Any refuse which is collected or transported in open top
vehicles shall be suitably covered so as to prevent scattering litter upon
the streets. All vehicles used for the collection or transportation of refuse
within the town shall be subject to the approval of the Director or the Board
of Selectmen.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.06  STORING OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Public places. No person shall place any refuse in any street,
alley or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by
such person or not, within the town, except in proper containers or otherwise
properly prepared for collection or under express approval granted by the
Director. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other
body of water.



   (B)   Accumulation of refuse. Any uncontained accumulation of refuse
on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
Failure to remove any uncontained accumulation of refuse within two days
after written notice to remove same shall be deemed a violation of this
subchapter.



   (C)   Scattering of refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep or
deposit anywhere within the town any refuse in such a manner that it may be
carried or deposited by the elements upon or in any street, sidewalk, alley,
sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises.



   (D)   Hazardous wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to place hazardous wastes or similarly dangerous substances into
any refuse container, or to transport any such substance to any place
designated for the disposal or delivery of refuse or bulky waste.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.07  BULKY WASTE.



   Bulky waste may not be collected or mixed with refuse and shall be
collected and transported as the Board of Selectmen or the Director may from
time to time designate, and any applicable charge for disposal at an approved
location with the town shall be paid by the person delivering the waste.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.08  DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Each refuse collector who disposes of refuse collected within
the town at the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Resource Recovery Authority
Facility (the SCRRRA Facility) in Preston, Connecticut shall, except as
provided in division (B) below, pay the town promptly when billed a per-ton
fee to be set by the Board of Selectmen from time to time.



   (B)   The town may, from time to time, in accordance with procedures
set by the Board of Selectmen or the Director, offer for sale to licensed
refuse collectors the right to dispose of refuse collected within the town at
the SCRRRA Facility at a price and on terms set by the Board of Selectmen.
Any refuse collector who purchases the right to dispose of refuse pursuant to
this division (B) shall not be liable for payment of any fee pursuant to
division (A) above for any refuse disposed of at the SCRRRA Facility of which
the right to dispose was purchased pursuant to this division (B).



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.09  SOURCE SEPARATION AND RECYCLING.



   (A)   Separation of materials; collection. Recyclable materials for
which collection service is provided by the town shall be separated from
solid waste and placed at the curb or other designated collection place for
collection on the days designated by the Director. Recyclable materials for
which collection service is not provided by the town shall be separated from
solid waste and disposed of at an appropriate facility.



   (B)   Separation at dumpsters. Multi-family dwelling units and each
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential entity not utilizing curbside
collection shall provide, or shall require its refuse collector to provide
separate dumpsters or other collection containers for refuse and for all
recyclable material accumulated on the premises. Containers shall be placed
immediately adjacent to each other and labeled as to the material intended
for each with stenciling in a prominent location.



   (C)   Methods of separating and packing. All recyclable materials
for which collection service is provided by the town shall be separated from
solid waste and placed out for collection in the following manner.



      (1)   Corrugated boxes and cardboard cartons shall be
separated from other refuse and shall be collapsed and tied in bundles
weighing not more than 30 pounds.



      (2)   Newspapers and magazines shall be separated from other
refuse and placed out for collection separately. Newspapers and magazines
shall be either tied securely in flat bundles weighing not over 30 pounds or
placed flat in paper bags. Newspapers and magazines not so bundled will not
be collected.



      (3)   Unbroken glass bottles and jars, and all types of metal
food containers, including cans, trays and aluminum foil, shall be separated
from other refuse and combined in one or more upright containers (preferably
plastic) used only for this category of recyclable material and containing no
paper or other refuse. Containers for recyclable materials shall be supplied
by the occupant and shall be marked with two decals, obtained from the
Director, placed on opposite sides approximately halfway up the side of each
container; provided that the town may supply containers, in which event they
shall be used unless other containers shall be approved by the Director.



      (4)   Leaves shall be separated from other refuse and may be
placed out for collection during designated collection periods in degradable
paper bags or in upright, rigid containers weighing not more than 30 pounds
when full. Leaves in plastic bags will not be collected. The Director shall
determine and provide public notice of the schedule for collecting leaves.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.10  LICENSING OF REFUSE COLLECTORS; REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   Licensing authority designated. The Director shall be the
licensing authority for refuse collectors, and the registering authority for
vehicles and containers. The Director shall grant a license within a
reasonable time following the filing of proper application and payment of the
prescribed fee unless the Director finds one or more of the following
conditions to prevail:



      (1)   The applicant has been irresponsible in the conduct of
refuse collection and hauling operations within the town;



      (2)   The applicant lacks suitable equipment with which to
collect refuse in a safe and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with this
subchapter; and/or



      (3)   The applicant or the refuse collector to which it is the
successor was previously licensed and its license was revoked in accordance
with this subchapter.



   (B)   License required. Each refuse collector shall annually, on or
before July 1, apply for a license from the Director on such form as the
Director shall prescribe to engage in the business of refuse collection in
the town.



   (C)   Registration of vehicles, containers. Each licensed refuse
collector shall obtain a separate registration for each vehicle it operates
within the town. When a vehicle is employed to transport more than one
container, each container to be transported shall require a registration.
Registrations shall not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle nor container
to container; however, the Director may allow such temporary transfer of
registrations in hardship situations, such as a temporary breakdown of an
individually registered vehicle.



   (D)   License term; fee; renewal. All licenses shall be issued for a
term not to exceed one year and shall be renewable on or before July 1 of
each year. The license fee shall be established by the Board of Selectmen by
regulation from time to time.



   (E)   Display of license. The license issued shall be conspicuously
displayed on the left front of the body of each vehicle or container so
licensed, or as may be directed.



   (F)   Identification of vehicles and containers. Each licensee shall
prominently display at all times on each registered vehicle or container in
letters at least four inches in height its name, license number and telephone
number.



   (G)   Licenses nontransferable. Licenses are not transferable. When
any licensee shall sell, transfer, all or part of its route to any refuse
collector not licensed in the town, it shall, at least seven days before the
date of sale or transfer, notify the Director, in writing, of its intent to
sell and the transferee shall, at the same time, make application for a
license to operate in the town.



   (H)   Routes serviced. As a prerequisite to the issuance or renewal
of any license, the refuse collector must, during the month of June, furnish
to the Director the geographical routes within the town that such refuse
collector services or intends to service.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.11  REFUSAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   General. Failure to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter or any regulation or directive issued by the Board of Selectmen or
the Director pursuant to this subchapter or any such regulation shall be a
grounds for refusal, revocation or suspension of a license in addition to any
other penalty imposed by this subchapter or any other law.



   (B)   Notice required. Refusal, revocation or suspension shall only
become effective five calendar days after receipt of written notice from the
Director.



   (C)   Request for review; filing; effect of failure to file. If a
refuse collector objects to the Director’s action described in division (B)
above to refuse, revoke or suspend its license, it may within five calendar
days of receipt of said notice, file a written request for review with the
First Selectman. Failure to timely file such request for review shall make
the Director’s action final and binding upon the collector.



   (D)   Request for review; effect of timely filing. Timely filing of
such request for review shall operate as an automatic stay of the
Director’s action.



   (E)   Special Appeals Board; hearing. The First Selectman shall
appoint forthwith a Special Appeals Board consisting of two electors of the
town and two licensed refuse collectors and a member of the Board of
Selectmen, and said Board shall then within 15 days hear and decide the
matter. Such hearing shall be private except, however, that such hearing may
be public if so requested, in writing, by the refuse collector. The decision
of said Board shall be final and binding upon the collector.



   (F)   Names, addresses of customers to be furnished upon revocation
or suspension. Whenever a collector’s license is refused, revoked or
suspended, it shall furnish the Director within 24 hours the names and
addresses of its customers.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.12  LICENSING PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS TO DISPOSE OF THEIR OWN REFUSE.



   Occupants of premises in the town must apply to the Director for a
permit, to be able to dispose of refuse accumulated on such premises. A
permit may be obtained from the Director by applying on such form as the
Director shall prescribe. The permit shall be displayed in such manner as the
Director shall prescribe. Such permit may be revoked or suspended for the
reasons and in the manner prescribed for commercial licenses, and appeals
therefrom may be taken in the same manner.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.13  ADMINISTRATION; PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Director responsible. The Director shall administer the
licensing of any refuse collector engaged in the collecting and transporting
of refuse in the town.



   (B)   Insurance. The Director shall, when considering an application
for a refuse collector license, including renewal, ascertain that the
applicant has adequate liability insurance.



   (C)   Additional rules. The Board of Selectmen may promulgate
regulations and the Director may promulgate additional rules on all
collection and disposal procedures from time to time as are deemed proper,
but such rules shall not be inconsistent with this subchapter.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



§ 51.14  REFUSE COLLECTOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES AND OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Charges. Each refuse collector shall pay all charges imposed
by § 51.08, all charges for disposal rights awarded to the refuse collector
or assigned to the refuse collector pursuant to this subchapter or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and the license fee imposed by §
51.10, and shall comply with all other requirements of this subchapter and
such regulations.



   (B)   Recyclable materials. Each refuse collector shall collect
recyclable materials from each of its customers in the manner specified in
this subchapter. Any refuse collector who has reason to believe that a person
from whom it collects solid waste has discarded recyclable material with such
solid waste in violation of this subchapter shall promptly notify the
Director of the alleged violation. Upon the request of the Director, a
collector shall provide a warning notice, by tag or other means, to any
person suspected by the collector or the Director of violating separation
requirements. A collector shall also assist the town to identify any person
responsible for creating loads containing significant quantities of
recyclable materials mixed with solid waste.



   (C)   Construction and maintenance of vehicles and containers. All
vehicles registered to collect and transport refuse shall be maintained free
of obnoxious odors and accumulated refuse. Any such vehicle shall be of a
closed construction. A container utilized primarily for non-liquid refuse
need not be of watertight construction, but shall be completely enclosed.



   (D)   Delinquent customers. A refuse collector may refuse to provide
collection service to any customer who is more than 30 days delinquent in the
payment of the refuse collector’s fee. If the delinquent customer shall
discharge its delinquency, the refuse collector shall immediately restore
collection services to the customer.



   (E)   Responsibility to provide service; refusal to provide. Refuse
collectors are hereby made jointly responsible for providing collection
service to any resident of the town. If any commercial, industrial or
condominium customer of the town shall be refused collection services without
reasonable grounds or is dissatisfied with collection service, the customer
may make application to the Director, who shall have the right to direct said
collector to provide service or who shall have the right to designate another
licensed refuse collector to provide refuse collection service and the
collector so selected shall comply with the Director’s designation. In
making such designation, the Director shall give primary consideration to
those collectors who service customers in the same or a contiguous locality.



   (F)   Designation of collector to provide service. In the event
refuse collection service is not provided, the Director shall designate a
licensed refuse collector or collectors to provide refuse collection service
in the geographical area affected, and such collector or collectors shall
comply with the Director’s designation.



   (G)   Customers’ containers. Refuse collectors shall leave their
customers’ containers in a neat, upright position and off the road.



   (H)   Spilled refuse. Refuse collectors shall clean up refuse that
may have spilled when carrying or transferring refuse.



   (I)   List of rates. Each refuse collector shall furnish to its
customers, upon request, a list of rates for the various services provided.



(Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord. passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997;
Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



SANITARY LANDFILL TRACT



§ 51.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   QUARRY AREA. The portion of the sanitary landfill tract lying west of a
line running north and south and passing through the gate on the old quarry
road. The QUARRY AREA contains the quarry and the standpipe water reservoir.



   SANITARY LANDFILL TRACT. The entire tract of land owned by the town and
lying north of Roxbury Road and west of Riverview Road, and includes all
portions of that tract whether or not actually used as part of the sanitary
landfill operation, and the area around the standpipe water reservoir.



(Ord. passed 11-7-1974; Ord. passed 9-21-1975)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 44; TM Volume 12, page 142



§ 51.26  ENTRY RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person except one of the following may go into the sanitary
landfill tract for any purpose:



      (1)   A resident or taxpayer of the town;



      (2)   A guest or member of the immediate family of a resident
or taxpayer of the town;



      (3)   A town, state or federal official engaged in government
business;



      (4)   A person engaged in business with or for the town; or



      (5)   A person engaged in a business which involves disposing
of solid waste originating in the town.



   (B)   No person except one of the following may go into the quarry
area for any purpose:



      (1)   A town, state or federal official engaged in government
business;



      (2)   A person engaged in business with or for the town; or



      (3)   A person engaged in a business which involves disposing
of septic tank waste originating within the town.



(Ord. passed 11-7-1974; Ord. passed 9-21-1975)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 44; TM Volume 12, page 142



§ 51.27  RESTRICTIONS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Except for town, state or federal motor vehicles or motor vehicles of
persons engaged in business with or for the town, or motor vehicles of
persons engaged in a business which involves disposing of solid waste
originating within the town, no motor vehicle may be brought into, operated
in or parked in the sanitary landfill tract unless such vehicle is registered
in the name of a natural person who is a resident or taxpayer of the town,
and unless such motor vehicle carries a clearly displayed marker or
identification issued in accordance with regulations to be adopted by the
Board of Selectmen.



(Ord. passed 11-7-1974; Ord. passed 9-21-1975)  Penalty, see § 51.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 44; TM Volume 12, page 142



§ 51.28  REGULATIONS OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Any vehicle which is authorized under § 51.27 to be brought into and
parked in the sanitary landfill tract shall be operated and parked only in
accordance with regulations to be adopted by the Board of Selectmen, and
shall be removed prior to the daily closing of the tract.



(Ord. passed 11-7-1974; Ord. passed 9-21-1975)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 44; TM Volume 12, page 142



§ 51.29  TOWING OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   In order to eliminate congestion, permit orderly conduct of the
sanitary landfill operation and furnish security to the equipment and
fixtures of the town located in the sanitary landfill tract, the town
constables and the state police are authorized to remove and tow away, or
have removed or towed away by any commercial towing service, any motor
vehicle which is brought into, operated in or parked in the sanitary landfill
tract in violation of this subchapter and regulations to be adopted by the
Board of Selectmen. Motor vehicles so towed away shall be stored at the
expense of the owner and may be claimed by the owner upon payment of storage
and towing fees as determined by the Board of Selectmen by regulations.



(Ord. passed 11-7-1974; Ord. passed 9-21-1975)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 44; TM Volume 12, page 142



RECYCLING



§ 51.40  REGULATIONS CONCERNING DESIGNATION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the §§ 51.01 through 51.14, the following
regulations are enacted by the Board of Selectmen, to become effective on
publication.



   (B)   The following materials are designated as recyclable
materials, which shall be separated from solid waste and shall be set out for
collection or delivered to a collection point as provided by the these
regulations:



      (1)   Cardboard;



      (2)   Glass food and beverage containers;



      (3)   Leaves and other yard waste;



      (4)   Metal food and beverage containers;



      (5)   Newspaper and magazines;



      (6)   Office paper;



      (7)   Scrap metal;



      (8)   Storage batteries; and



      (9)   Waste oil.



   (B)   The above terms shall have the meanings given them in the
Connecticut Regulations of State Agencies, § 22a-241b-1.



(Ord. passed 12-8-1990)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 17, page 396



FEES



§ 51.55  FEES FOR DISPOSAL OF WASTE AT LANDFILL.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the Board of Selectmen, the
following schedule of fees for the disposal of waste at the town landfill is
established, to become effective upon publication.



 



Asphalt and non-reinforced concrete, per 100 lbs.
 

$1



Automobile and light truck tires (each)
 

$1.50



Brush
 

$40.00 portion, applied as follows:




   For each 20 pound multiple or portion thereof as defined by the
town’s weighing system

 

$0.40



Demolition material including waste from remodeling and construction projects
and sites, and all oversize household items and tree stumps
 

$110 per ton applied as follows:




   Minimum charge

 

$5




   Per each 20 pound multiple or portion thereof as determined by the
town’s weighing system

 

$1.10



Heavy truck tires (each)
 

$5



Refrigeration appliances containing CFCs (non-commercial only)
 

$10 each



Tires from earth-moving equipment (each)
 

$100





 



(Ord. passed 11-21-1988; Ord. passed 10-5-1994; Ord. passed 11-16-1994; Ord.
passed 10-6-1995; Ord. passed 1-17-1996; Ord. passed 4-9-2001; Ord. passed
2-23-2003; Ord. passed 3-23-2003)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 265; TM Volume 20, page 237 (#3); TM Volume 20, page
239 (#7); TM Volume 20, page 240 (#8); TM Volume 21, page 101 (#9); TM Volume
21, page 157; TM Volume 22, page 79; TM Volume 22, page 248; TM Volume 22,
page 261



§ 51.56  FEE FOR REFUSE COLLECTORS.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the Board of Selectmen, the
following registration fee for refuse collectors is established: $75 per year.



(Ord. passed 11-21-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 266



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any generator of refuse who violates the terms of
§§ 51.01 through 51.14 shall be fined not more than $99 for each offense,
in addition to any other penalty imposable hereunder. Refuse placed out for
collection not in accordance with §§ 51.01 through 51.14 and regulations
adopted pursuant to it may not be collected in the discretion of the Director
or the Board of Selectmen.



      (2)   Any refuse collector who collects refuse in the town
without the license required by § 51.10, or who knowingly mixes refuse with
recyclable materials, or who otherwise violates §§ 51.01 through 51.14 or
any regulation or directive issued by the Board of Selectmen or the Director
pursuant to §§ 51.01 through 51.14 or any such regulation, shall be fined
not more than $99 for each such offense.



      (3)   Each violation shall be a separate and distinct offense
and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day’s continuance thereof
shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. In addition, the
Director is authorized to apply to a Judge of the Superior Court for a
temporary and permanent injunction against a continuing or repeated violation
of §§ 51.01 through 51.14.



      (4)   In addition to any other penalty, the town shall have
the right to bring a civil action to recover any amounts due to the town from
any refuse collector for violation of §§ 51.01 through 51.14 or any
regulation or directive issued by the Board of Selectmen or the Director
pursuant to §§ 51.01 through 51.14 or any such regulation, or for amounts
due from any refuse collector who purchased from the town the right to
dispose of refuse or who took an assignment of any such right, together with
interest and attorney’s fees as permitted by law.



   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 51.25 through 51.29
or the regulations to be adopted by the Board of Selectmen shall be fined not
more than $100 for each offense.



(Ord. passed 11-7-1974; Ord. passed 9-21-1975; Ord. effective 8-15-1995; Ord.
passed 2-22-1996; Ord. effective 10-15-1997; Ord. passed 3-1-1998)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 44; TM Volume 12, page 142



   TM Volume 21, page 44; TM Volume 21, page 197; TM Volume 21, page 425;
TM Volume 21, page 485



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   Authorization of the town to construct a water system



   52.02   Agreements with the town for water service



   52.03   Water emergency conservation



   52.04   Water connection charges



   52.05   Water assessments



   52.06   Water benefit charges




Water Rates and Charges Generally




   52.20   Water rates generally



   52.21   Various water charges



 



   52.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  AUTHORIZATION OF THE TOWN TO CONSTRUCT A WATER SYSTEM.



   The provision of House Bill No. 863 as passed by the General Assembly
of 1941, authorizing the town to construct a water system, is adopted.



(Res. passed 10-6-1941)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 5, page 327



§ 52.02  AGREEMENTS WITH THE TOWN FOR WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   To permit owners of real property, which property abuts on
existing water lines belonging to said town, to connect with and draw water
from said lines; provided, however, that each such property owner, applying
for such permission, shall enter into an agreement with said town, which
agreement shall provide, in addition to such other provisions as the
Selectmen may deem necessary, the following:



      (1)   Said property owner shall pay all charges incurred in
connecting with said water line and a reasonable amount for the water used by
said property owner;



      (2)   Said town shall be relieved of all and any liability or
obligation in the event of the failure by said town to furnish water;



      (3)   Said town may terminate said agreement to furnish water
upon 30 days’ written notice; and



      (4)   Any authority granted by said Selectmen and all
agreements entered into by said Board of Selectmen shall terminate at such
time as the said town by ordinance, or otherwise, shall establish a Board of
Water Commissioners.



   (B)   The Crescent Beach Association be considered an individual and
allowed to connect with the water system for fire hydrants for fire
protection only.



   (C)   The Auditor shall make an annual report of the income and
expenditures in connection with said water system and that said report shall
include the name of each property owner attached to said water line and the
amount paid by each property owner attached thereto.



(Res. passed 3-5-1945)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 6, page 8



§ 52.03  WATER EMERGENCY CONSERVATION.



   (A)   The Water and Sewer Commission shall monitor the town’s
available water supplies to ensure that a flow of water is provided which
will be adequate to:



      (1)   Meet the health and sanitation requirements of those
residents of the town who are supplied by water from the town’s water
system;



      (2)   Provide sufficient firefighting capacity; and



      (3)   Provide a reserve sufficient to meet the foregoing
requirements and meet such emergencies and contingencies as may exist from
time to time.



   (B)   If the Water and Sewer Commission determines that the amount
of available water supplies is below an amount sufficient to meet the
requirements of division (A) above, or that weather and hydrological
conditions are such that their continued existence threatens to reduce the
amount of available water supplies below an amount sufficient to meet the
requirements of division (A) above, it may request the Board of Selectmen to
declare a water supply emergency.



   (C)   The Board of Selectmen may, after notice and a public hearing,
declare that a water supply emergency exists and may impose any of the water
conservation measures and restrictions set out in division (D) below. Such
restrictions and measures shall be subject to the exceptions set out in
division (G) below. Notice of the public hearing shall be by publication of
the request for a water supply emergency and the possible conservation
measures and restrictions and the time and place of the hearing in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the town at least three days before
the date of such hearing.



   (D)   Upon a declaration by the Board of Selectmen that a water
supply emergency exists, it may impose the following water conservation
restrictions, in such combinations and at such times of the day or year as it
deems necessary or desirable, regarding the use of water from the town’s
water system:



      (1)   Prohibiting the sprinkling, watering or irrigation of
lawns, gardens, plants, vines, vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation;



      (2)   Prohibiting the washing of motor vehicles, boats or
trailers;



      (3)   Prohibiting the filling or cleaning of swimming and
wading pools;



      (4)   Prohibiting the cleaning of outdoor surfaces of all
buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways and other outdoor surfaces;



      (5)   Prohibiting the service of water to customers of public
restaurants except at the specific request of such customers;



      (6)   Prohibiting the use of outdoor spigots or faucets or
connections for any purpose whatsoever;



      (7)   Imposing a “drought surcharge” at a flat rate for
any water used in excess of amounts specified by the Board of Selectmen;



      (8)   Requiring a reduction in the amount of water used by all
residents and businesses connected to the town’s water system, and imposing
a “drought surcharge” at a flat rate for any water used in excess of the
reduced amount specified by the Board of Selectmen;



      (9)   Prohibiting the use of water for business and industrial
purposes in excess of an amount specified by the Board of Selectmen, except
that businesses concerned with public health and welfare and food service or
manufacture may, upon approval of the town’s Director of Health, continue
to use an amount of water necessary to meet the ordinary requirements of such
businesses; and



      (10)   Rationing of water by reducing its supply to individual
residential or business structures.



   (E)   (1)   Notice of the restrictions imposed by the Board of
Selectmen shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in
the town at least three days before the effective date of such restrictions,
and may be promulgated by such other means as the Board of Selectmen deems
desirable.



      (2)   Weekends in July and August, no residential outside
water use from Friday midnight to Sunday midnight, no washing cars, boats,
house, watering lawns and the like.



   (F)   If at any time after the imposing of restrictions the Board of
Selectmen deems it necessary to impose restrictions in addition to those
previously imposed, it may do so after a public hearing noticed in accordance
with the provisions of division (C) above. Any additional restrictions
adopted by the Board of Selectmen shall be published in accordance with the
provisions of division (E) above and may be promulgated by such other means
as the Board of Selectmen deems desirable.



   (G)   (1)   (a)   The restrictions set forth in division (D)
above shall not apply to any use of water necessary to maintain an adequate
level of health or sanitation standards, as determined by the town’s
Director of Health, for any persons using water from the town’s system. Any
of such persons who consider that the restrictions imposed upon them
adversely affect their health or sanitation may make application for a
certificate of exemption from the town’s Director of Health.



         (b)   The Director of Health, after considering the
circumstances of such persons and applying the standards necessary for the
preservation of public health, may issue a certificate of exemption from the
restrictions set forth in this section and shall notify the Water and Sewer
Commission of any such exemptions.



      (2)   The restrictions set forth in division (D) above shall
not apply to any firefighting or civil defense emergency.



   (H)   Any person who uses water during a water supply emergency from
an outdoor faucet or spigot which is not connected to the town’s water
system may apply to the Water and Sewer Commission for a certificate
evidencing such fact and, upon inquiry from any person charged with the
enforcement of such regulations, shall make such certificate available to the
enforcement officer.



   (I)   Upon a determination by the Water and Sewer Commission that
the water supplies available to the town’s water system are such that a
water supply emergency is no longer necessary or may be modified, it shall
notify the Board of Selectmen, which shall publish a notice of termination of
the water supply emergency or modifications of restrictions imposed, in a
newspaper having a substantial circulation within the town, and may
promulgate such notice by other means that it deems desirable.



   (J)   (1)   This section shall not be construed as prohibiting
the taking of any action which may be necessary to ensure the safe and secure
operation of the town’s water system in the interval between the occurrence
of an event giving rise to a water supply emergency and the imposition of any
water conservation measures or restrictions by the Board of Selectmen.



      (2)   The Water and Sewer Commission, or its Chairperson or
the Director of Utilities, shall take such action as may be necessary to
ensure the safe and secure operation of the town’s water system during such
intervals.



(Ord. passed 11-8-1986; Ord. passed 6-18-2003)  Penalty, see § 52.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 31



§ 52.04  WATER CONNECTION CHARGES.



   (A)   There are imposed connection charges upon the owners of
property in any extension area, as from time to time, has been or shall be
created, when such property owner requests that a connection of the water
system be made to his or her property line at the expense of the town.



   (B)   The connection charge shall be due and payable within 30 days
from the time that the property owner is billed by the Town Water Department.



   (C)   The rate of connection charges shall be as follows:



      (1)   For each such property containing not more than one
single-family dwelling requiring for adequate service a three fourths-inch
pipe from the main: the average cost, as determined from time to time by the
Board of Water Commissioners, of all direct and indirect expenses incurred by
the town, or any agency thereof, in making connections for properties of this
class;



      (2)   For each such property not described in division (C)(1)
above, the actual costs incurred by the town, or any agency thereof, in
making the connection; and



      (3)   In addition to the foregoing, there shall be imposed
upon each such property, an additional connection charge in an amount
determined by the foregoing schedule for each connection after the first
connection to said property.



   (D)   The Board of Water Commissioners shall determine the size pipe
required for adequate service based upon the volume of water likely to be
used, the pressure requirements and the nature of the use.



   (E)   From the time that any connection charge becomes due and
payable, it shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum until paid. The
connection charge shall, at the time it becomes due and payable, become a
lien upon the property. Any such lien shall be liable to be foreclosed in the
same manner as if it were a mortgage on such land in favor of the town. The
Water and Sewer Commission shall have authority and responsibility to
foreclose any such lien in the name of the town.



   (F)   Such liens shall not continue to exist for a period longer
than one year after the connection charge becomes due and payable, unless
within that period a certificate signed by the First Selectman or his or her
designee describing the premises upon which the lien exists, the reason on
account of which it is claimed, and the amount claimed by the town as a lien
shall be filed in the town land records. Any such lien shall cease to exist
whenever a certificate discharging the same signed by the First Selectman or
his or her designee shall be filed in the town land records. Such liens shall
be discharged by the First Selectman or his or her designee upon payment of
such unpaid connection charges, interest (as set forth in division (E) above)
and a lien fee which shall be an amount which is equal to the sum of a $5
administrative fee and the amount charged by the Town Clerk for recording and
releasing such lien.



(Ord. passed 3-22-1979; Ord. passed 11-23-1980)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, page 112, 133; TM Volume 13, page 197, Amended; TM Volume
14, page 50, Amended



§ 52.05  WATER ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever the Board of Selectmen shall determine that it may be
advisable to make an extension or improvement to the town water system, it
may direct the Board of Water Commissioners to obtain plans and cost
estimates therefore.



   (B)   Upon the receipt of such plans and cost estimates and if in
view thereof it appears that such extension or improvement is necessary or
desirable, the Board of Selectmen shall vote to proceed with such extension
or improvement, shall take all steps necessary in accordance with the Charter
to obtain funds for such extension or improvement and shall direct the Board
of Water Commissioners to prepare estimates of and procedures for assessing
benefits to the properties which are to be benefitted.



   (C)   The Board of Water Commissioners shall thereupon prepare a
report setting forth the method of assessing benefits and the amount of each
such assessment.



   (D)   Within 30 days after receipt of said report, the Board of
Selectmen shall either return said report to the Board of Water Commissioners
for amendment or shall proceed with an ordinance assessing benefits.



   (E)   (1)   There is created a Water Assessment Board of Appeals,
consisting of five electors of the town who shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen, two members shall be appointed for terms to expire on the first
Monday of January 1972 and three members shall be appointed for terms to
expire on the first Monday of January 1974. Upon expiration of said terms,
all terms of appointment shall be four years.



      (2)   Within 30 days after notice has been sent by U.S. mail,
postage prepaid, to each owner of property benefitted, which notice will
include the amount of the assessment against such property, any such property
owner may appeal from said assessment to the Water Assessment Board of
Appeals by filing written notice of such appeal with said Board of Appeals.
Said notice may be filed at the office of the Board of Selectmen. Forms for
said notice may be prescribed by said Board of Appeals.



      (3)   Said Board of Appeals shall assign a place and time for
a hearing on said appeal. Said hearing shall be held not later than 60 days
after the filing of said notice, and notice of said hearing shall be given by
mailing written notice thereof to said property owners by U.S. mail, postage
prepaid, not less than 15 days before the date of said hearing.



      (4)   Said Board of Appeals may increase or decrease the
assessment against the subject property if it shall appear to the Board that
the assessment was erroneous, or that the nature of the subject property is
such that a redetermination of the assessment would be equitable.



      (5)   Said Board of Appeals shall send notice of its action to
said property owners by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, within 60 days after said
hearing.



   (F)   Any property owner who has prosecuted an appeal to the Water
Assessment Board of Appeals may take an appeal from the action of said Board
of Appeals to the Court of Common Pleas for New London County within 30 days
after the mailing of the notice of its action by said Board of Appeals.



   (G)   (1)   The assessments of benefits shall become final upon
completion of its duties by the Water Assessment Board of Appeals and shall
be recorded in a water assessment book in the office of the Town Clerk. When
any owner of property shall make use of the water main unless otherwise
provided in the ordinance assessing benefits, the assessment of benefits
applicable to said property shall become due and payable, together with
interest at the rate of 12% per annum for the period from the date said
assessment became final until the date of payment, together with any
connection charge or similar charge then in effect. The assessments of
benefits shall thereupon become liens upon the property against which they
are made. Any such lien shall be liable to be foreclosed in the same manner
as if it were a mortgage on such land in favor of the town. Such liens shall
not continue to exist for a period longer than one year after the assessment
becomes due and payable unless within that period a certificate signed by the
First Selectman or his or her designee describing the premises on which such
lien exists, the work on account of which it is claimed and the amount
claimed by the town as the lien shall be filed in the town land records. Any
such lien shall cease to exist whenever a certificate discharging the same
signed by the First Selectman or his or her designee shall be filed in the
town land records. Such lien shall be discharged by the First Selectman or
his or her designee upon payment of such unpaid assessment, interest as set
forth herein and a lien fee which shall be an amount which is equal to the
sum of a $5 administrative fee and the amount charged by the Town Clerk for
recording and releasing such lien.



      (2)   The Water and Sewer Commission shall have authority and
responsibility to foreclose any such lien in the name of the town.



   (H)   For purposes of this section, the term PROPERTY OWNER shall be
deemed to mean each person having a property interest in the premises as
disclosed by the town land records.



(Ord. passed 3-22-1979; Ord. passed 11-23-1980)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11 page 110, 133; TM Volume 12, page 295, Amended



   TM Volume 10, page 253 and 277; TM Volume 11, page 29 and 48, Amended;
TM Volume 13, page 195, Amended; TM Volume 14, page 51, Amended



§ 52.06  WATER BENEFIT CHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   There is imposed a benefit charge upon the owner or
owners of property, in any extension area, as from time to time has been or
shall be created, when such property abuts a street within which a water main
has been laid at the expense of anyone other than the town.



      (2)   The benefit charge shall be due and payable at the time
of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or at the time that the Town
Water and Sewer Commission supplies water to the distribution main, whichever
occurs later.



      (3)   Notice of such benefit charges shall be filed on the
land records in the office of the Town Clerk.



   (B)   The rates of benefit charges shall be as follows:



 

For each such property containing not more than one single-family dwelling,
requiring for adequate service a 3/4-inch pipe from the main
 

$700



For each such property requiring for adequate service a 1-inch pipe from the
main
 

$850



For each such property requiring for adequate service a 1-1/2-inch pipe from
the main
 

$1,700



For each such property requiring for adequate service a 2-inch pipe from the
main
 

$2,100



For each such property requiring for adequate service a 4-inch pipe from the
main
 

$4,200



For each such property requiring for adequate service a 6-inch pipe from the
main
 

$7,000



For each such property requiring for adequate service an 8-inch pipe from the
main
 

$10,000




 



   (C)   In addition to the foregoing benefit charges, there shall be
imposed upon owners of property in any such extension area:



      (1)   Where an additional connection to the water main is
made, a charge in accordance with the schedule of rates set out in division
(B) above; and



      (2)   Where property previously charged makes such use of the
water main that it requires for adequate service a pipe larger than that for
which the property was charged, a charge equal to the difference between the
previous charge and the rate set out in division (B) above for the larger
pipe actually required.



   (D)   An unmetered fire connection shall not be a connection within
the meaning of this section.



   (E)   From the time that any connection charge becomes due and
payable, it shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum until paid. The
connection charge shall, at the time it becomes due and payable, become a
lien upon the property. Any such lien shall be liable to be foreclosed in the
same manner as if it were a mortgage on such land in favor of the town. The
Water and Sewer Commission shall have authority and responsibility to
foreclose any such lien in the name of the town.



   (F)   Such liens shall not continue to exist for a period longer
than one year after the charge becomes due and payable unless within that
period a certificate signed by the First Selectman or his or her designee
describing the premises on which such lien exists, the reason on account of
which it is claimed, and the amount claimed by the town as a lien shall be
filed in the town lands records. Any such lien shall cease to exist whenever
a certificate discharging the same signed by the First Selectman or his or
her designee shall be filed in the town land records. Such liens shall be
discharged by the First Selectman or his or her designee upon payment of such
unpaid benefit charges, interest (as set forth in division (E) above) and a
lien fee which shall be an amount which is equal to the sum of a $5
administrative fee and the amount charged by the Town Clerk for recording and
releasing such lien.



(Ord. passed 3-22-1979; Ord. passed 11-23-1980; Ord. passed 6-1-2004)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 198, Amended; TM Volume 14, page 50; TM Volume 22,
page 383, Amended



WATER RATES AND CHARGES GENERALLY



§ 52.20  WATER RATES GENERALLY.



   (A)   All rates charged for water supplied by the town shall be and
remain a lien upon the buildings and land in connection with which said water
shall have been used by the owner or occupant thereof until such rates,
interest, shut-off charges and lien fees have been paid; and the Water
Commission shall have authority and responsibility to foreclose such liens in
the name of the town.



   (B)   Such lien shall not continue to exist for a period longer than
one year after said rates become due and payable unless within that period a
certificate signed by the First Selectman or his or her designee describing
the premises on which such lien exists, the reason on account of which it is
claimed, and the amount claimed by the town as a lien shall be filed in the
town land records. Any such lien shall cease to exist whenever a certificate
discharging the same signed by the First Selectman or his or her designee
shall be filed in the town land records.



   (C)   Any such lien shall be discharged by the First Selectman or
his or her designee upon payment of such unpaid water rates, interest at 12%
per annum upon the unpaid water rates from the date of filing, a shut-off fee
(as set forth in division (D) below) and a lien fee, which shall be an amount
which is equal to the sum of a $5 administrative fee and the amount charged
by the Town Clerk for the recording and release of such lien.



   (D)   The Water Commission shall have the right to shut off water
from the premises where the water rates remain unpaid 30 days after date of
mailing of bill to the owner or occupant. If so turned off, the water shall
not be turned on again without payment of all unpaid rates, interest, lien
fees and a shut-off fee in such amount as shall from time to time be
established by the Commission, said amount to reasonably reflect the costs
incurred in making said shut-off and resumption of service.



(Ord. passed 11-14-1962; Ord. passed 2-6-1975; Ord. passed 3-22-1979)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 8, page 304; TM Volume 12, page 73, Amended; TM Volume 13,
page 196, Amended



§ 52.21  VARIOUS WATER CHARGES.



   (A)   The Town Water and Sewer Commission may impose the following
charges upon the owner or owners of property which is served with water by
the Commission; annual private hydrant charge; annual private sprinkler
charge; meter deposit; frozen meter repair or replacement fee; fee for
installation and disconnection of meters for seasonal residences; meter test
fees; fee for inspection of inground water service pipelines being installed
in subdivisions; charge for labor provided to owner at owners request for
corrections or repairs that are owner’s responsibility; charge for sale of
materials held in stock by Water Department.



   (B)   The meter deposit described in division (A) above shall be due
and payable on or before the date that the Commission provides water service
to the owner or owners of property requesting such service. All other charges
described in division (A) above shall be due and payable when the property
owner is billed by the Commission.



   (C)   The amount of such charges shall be established and from time
to time revised by the Town Water and Sewer Commission, and shall reasonably
reflect the costs incurred by the Commission in providing such services and
materials. The Commission shall establish and revise such charges in
accordance with the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-239, as amended from
time to time.



   (D)   From the time that any fee or charge described in this section
becomes due and payable, it shall bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum
until paid, unless paid within 30 days from the date it becomes due and
payable. Any such fee or charge shall, at the time it becomes due and
payable, become a lien upon the property. Any such lien shall be liable to be
foreclosed in the same manner provided by law, for the foreclosure of tax
liens.



   (E)   Any such lien shall not continue to exist for a period longer
than one year after any such fee or charge becomes due and payable, unless
within that period a certificate signed by the First Selectman or his or her
designee describing the premises upon which the lien exists, the reason on
account of which it is claimed, and the amount claimed by the town as a lien
shall be filed in the town land records. Any such lien shall cease to exist
whenever a certificate discharging the same signed by the First Selectman or
his or her designee shall be filed in the town land records. Such liens shall
be discharged by the First Selectman or his or her designee upon payment of
such unpaid charges, interest (as set forth in division (D) above), and a
lien fee which shall be an amount which is equal to the sum of a $5
administrative fee and the amount charged by the Town Clerk for recording and
releasing such lien.



(Ord. passed 6-23-1979)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 13, page 213



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of the
restrictions imposed by the Board of Selectmen in § 52.03 shall be fined not
more than $99. In the case of a continuing violation, each day’s
continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.



      (2)   If there has been a violation of any provision of the
restrictions imposed by the Board of Selectmen by the same person on three
separate occasions, the Superintendent of Utilities may, after such notice
and hearing as may be required by the State Department of Public Utilities
for termination of service to such person, enforce such restrictions by
reducing or discontinuing the supply of water to the residence or business
owned or occupied by such person.



(Ord. passed 11-8-1986; Ord. passed 6-18-2003)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   53.001   Definitions



   53.002   Establishment of charges



   53.003   Tampering with sewage works



   53.004   Right of entry for purposes of inspection, testing and the
like



   53.005   Appeals; review by Water and Sewer Commission



   53.006   Variances




Use of Public Sewers Required




   53.020   Disposition of objectionable items in unsanitary manner
prohibited



   53.021   Treatment required prior to discharge to natural outlet



   53.022   Connection to public sewer; private disposal systems



   53.023   New construction requiring sewer building construction
permit




Building Sewers and Connections




   53.035   Separate building sewer required; exceptions



   53.036   Use of old building sewers



   53.037   Size, slope, alignment and materials of building sewer
construction



   53.038   Laying of building sewer in relation to water line



   53.039   Laying of building sewer in relation to wells



   53.040   Elevation requirements for building sewer



   53.041   Excavations for building sewer installation



   53.042   Classes of permits; applications



   53.043   Permit required for connection



   53.044   Licensed plumber to perform work; exception



   53.045   Prohibited connections



   53.046   Inspection by Director



   53.047   Responsibility of owner for cost of installation or
connection



   53.048   Disused building sewer lines to be sealed



   53.049   Revocation of permit




Regulation of Discharges to Public Sewers




   53.060   Prohibited discharges



   53.061   Limitations on discharges of unusual strength of character;
criteria for consideration



   53.062   Alternative methods for handling restricted discharges



   53.063   Restricted discharges subject to review by Commission;
preliminary treatment



   53.064   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   53.065   Maintenance of preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing
facilities



   53.066   Control manholes



   53.067   Authority of Commission to require certain information from
user



   53.068   Standard for measurement; tests and analyses



   53.069   Special agreements



   53.070   State requirements of public sewer connection




Sewer Extensions




   53.085   Compliance with state and town requirements; Commission
approval of plans required



   53.086   Construction of sewer extensions and building sewers by
town; assessment of costs



   53.087   Construction by property owner, builder or developer;
responsibility for costs; compliance with section



   53.088   To be designed by registered engineer



   53.089   Extensions to be tested prior to acceptance by Commission




Resolution Regarding Adoption of Sewer Use Charges;
Sewer Rates and Charges Generally




   53.100   Definitions



   53.101   Sewer Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund



   53.102   Rates and charges



   53.103   Billing and late charges



   53.104   Reporting requirements



   53.105   Review of charges by Commission



   53.106   Annual charges by Commission



   53.107   Methodology to be used in calculating user charge rates and
surcharges




Sewer Rates and Charges




   53.120   Sewer rates and charges



 



   53.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023,
53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   ABBREVIATIONS.



 

ANSI
 
American National Standards Institute


ASTM
 
American Society for Testing and Materials


AWWA
 
American Water Works Association


CS
 
Commercial standard


ppm
 
parts per million


mg/l
 
milligrams per liter


Reference to standards of the above organization shall refer to the latest
edition of same.



 



   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   APPROVAL BY DIRECTOR OR COMMISSION. Will be in writing unless otherwise
stated in §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through
53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089.



   BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from the soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   COMMISSION. The Water and Sewer Commission of the Town of East Lyme,
Connecticut.



   DEP COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of Environmental Protection for the
State of Connecticut.



   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. The State of Connecticut
Environmental Protection Agency; abbreviated DEP.



   DIRECTOR OF HEALTH. The Director duly appointed by the town, in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 19a-200 et seq. or his or her
authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   DIRECTOR or SEWER DIRECTOR. The person appointed by the Commission as
an administrative officer who shall at all times be responsible to and
subject to the Commission and subject to removal for cause. The Commission
may also appoint a Deputy Director who in the Director’s absence shall have
the same powers and duties as the DIRECTOR.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary wastewater.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.



   OWNER. Titleholder or titleholders of real property.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group or other entity.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries wastewater and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. A combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SHALL. Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.



   SLUG. Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for
any period or duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the
average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STORM DRAIN (SOMETIMES TERMED “STORM SEWER”). A sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   TOWN. The word TOWN or any other word in common usage designating a
legally constituted unit of local government, shall mean the Town of East
Lyme Connecticut.



   TOWN MEETING. The town meeting of the Town of East Lyme, Connecticut.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devises and structures
used for treating wastewater.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.002  ESTABLISHMENT OF CHARGES.



   (A)   All sewer permit, inspection and connection charges, as well
as sewage disposal charges, shall be established by the Commission.



   (B)   The Chairperson of the Water and Sewer Commission is hereby
designated a collector of any and all charges lawfully established, now or in
the future, with respect to the rent, use of or connection to the town system.



   (C)   Any charge not timely paid within 30 days of its due date,
shall be delinquent and subject to interest, penalties and liens provided for
in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-258, as amended.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.003  TAMPERING WITH SEWAGE WORKS.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenances or equipment which is a part of the sewerage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to law.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.004  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSES OF INSPECTION, TESTING AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The Director, his or her Deputy and any other duly authorized
employee of the Water and Sewer Commission, hereinafter severally or
collectively referred to as Director as used in §§ 53.001 through 53.006,
53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and
53.085 through 53.089, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035
through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089. The Director
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries,
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.



   (B)   The Director, his or her Deputy and other duly authorized
employees of the Commission, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town
holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewerage works lying within said easement. All entries and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.



   (C)   While performing the necessary work in private properties
above, the Director or duly authorized employees of the municipality shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user.
The user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the municipal
employees and the municipality shall indemnify the user against loss or
damage to its property by municipal employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the user
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions as
required in this section.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.005  APPEALS; REVIEW BY WATER AND SEWER COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission shall hear and determine appeals from any
person presented with a notice of violation in accordance with the provisions
of §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049,
53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089.



   (B)   Any person requesting an appeal must notify the Commission in
writing of his or her desire to appeal prior to the expiration of the time
limit for compliance stated in the notice of violation.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.006  VARIANCES.



   It shall be the function of the Commission in its sound discretion to
vary or modify the application of any of the provisions of §§ 53.001
through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through
53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089 when strict enforcement would result in
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, and when such situations are
not caused by or contributed to by such applicant.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED



§ 53.020  DISPOSITION OF OBJECTIONABLE ITEMS IN UNSANITARY MANNER
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal
excrement or other objectionable waste in an unsanitary manner as indicated
in the Public Health Code of the state.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.021  TREATMENT REQUIRED PRIOR TO DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLET.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020
through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085
through 53.089 or with the provisions of the Public Health Code of the state.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.022  CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER; PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Responsibility of owner to provide sanitary facilities and
connect upon availability of public sewer. The owners of all houses,
buildings or other structures used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes, situated within the town and abutting on any
street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or where
construction has been funded for public sewers in the town, are hereby
required at their expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through
53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through
53.089, within 120 days after being ordered to do so by the Commission. This
section is subject to the public hearing and appeal rights provided for in
Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 7-257 et seq.



   (B)   Utilization of existing disposal system. An existing
subsurface disposal system may only be utilized in lieu of the public
sanitary sewer when, in the sole discretion of the Commission, unique
circumstances exist to justify such utilization, provided that the existing
system has been approved in writing by both the Commission and the Director
of Health, which approval shall be given only after said Director’s
inspection of the subject system, and a finding is made that the same
satisfies prevailing public health, sanitation and safety standards. Unique
circumstances to allow utilization of an existing system shall be excessive
distance from property line to structure, extensive presence of ledge, or
other geographical or topographical conditions such as wetlands or grade
changes which make sewer connection extremely impractical. Should the system
fail at any time after said approval, a connection to the sewer system must
be made within 120 days after being ordered to do so by the Commission,
subject to the public hearing and appeal rights provided for in Conn. Gen.
Stat. §§ 7-257 et seq.



   (C)   Connection to sewers installed wholly or partly at the expense
of a party other than the town. When a public sanitary sewer has been
constructed and installed wholly or partly at the expense of a party other
than the town, the owner of houses, buildings or other structures used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the
town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which said public
sanitary sewer is located may connect said houses, building or structures to
the sewer upon his or her request and at his or her expense. Before the
public sanitary sewer is installed, the owners of such houses, buildings or
structures shall be notified of their opportunity to connect to the sewer and
that their existing subsurface disposal systems will be inspected by the
Director of Health. An existing subsurface disposal system may be utilized
for such houses, buildings, structures, provided that the existing system has
been approved in writing by the Director of Health, which approval shall be
given only after inspection of the system and a finding that it satisfies
prevailing public health, sanitation and safety standards. Should such
existing system not be approved by the Director of Health, or should the
system fail at any time after said approval, or should a change in use of the
premises require an expansion or improvement of an existing subsurface
disposal system, a connection to the sewer system must be made within 120
days after being ordered to do so by the Commission, subject to the public
hearing and appeal rights provided for in Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 7-257 et seq.
Any houses, buildings or structures constructed during or after the
installation of any such public sanitary sewer system shall be connected
directly with the sewer in accordance with the provisions of §§ 53.001
through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through
53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089, within 120 days after being ordered to do
so by the Commission.



   (D)   Abandonment of private disposal system. At such time as a
public sewer becomes available to the property served by a private sewage
disposal system, and when a direct connection is made to the public sewer in
compliance with this section within the specified period, any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned,
cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.023  NEW CONSTRUCTION REQUIRING SEWER BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.



   No person shall be allowed to construct any building which is
accessible under § 53.022 unless he or she first obtains a written sewer
building construction permit from the Commission for direct connection to a
public sewer.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 53.035  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. In this case
the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer. Where there exists a
group of buildings belonging to one commercial, multi-family complex,
industrial or municipal complex, separate individual buildings sewers may be
connected to a single sewer line designed in accordance with § 53.037 and a
single connection made to the public sewer system, provided that it is
approved by the Water and Sewer Commission.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.036  USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, upon examination and test by the Director, to meet all
requirements of §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035
through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.037  SIZE, SLOPE, ALIGNMENT AND MATERIALS OF BUILDING SEWER
CONSTRUCTION.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the latest
requirements of the Connecticut State Building Code, the Public Health Code
of the state or the applicable rules and regulations of the town. In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in the appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the Commission before
installation.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.038  LAYING OF BUILDING SEWER IN RELATION TO WATER LINE.



   No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any
bearing wall. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignments
insofar as possible. The changes in direction shall be made only with curved
pipe and fittings which have been approved by the Commission. Whenever sewer
lines, the building drain or building sewer must cross water mains or private
water lines, the sewer shall be laid at such an elevation that the top of the
sewer is at least 18 inches below the bottom of the water line.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.039  LAYING OF BUILDING SEWER IN RELATION TO WELLS.



   No building sewer shall be constructed within 25 feet of a water supply
well. If a building sewer is constructed between 25 and 75 feet of a water
well supply, it shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable
guidelines promulgated by the DEP Commissioner.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.040  ELEVATION REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING SEWER.



   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged through a
pressurized pipe to the building sewer, and suitable check and backwater
valves shall be installed. Such means of lifting the sewage shall be provided
and maintained by the town and be installed and operated at the owner’s
expense.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.041  EXCAVATIONS FOR BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
All excavations located on public property shall receive prior approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commissions in accordance with their regulations.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property shall be restored
equal to or better than its original condition prior to construction. All
excavations for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trenchwork
unless otherwise approved by the Commission. Pipe laying and backfill shall
be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification (C12). The contractor
shall obtain a permit pursuant to § 53.043 and shall give notice of the date
of commencement of work more than 24 hours before work begins.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.042  CLASSES OF PERMITS; APPLICATIONS.



   There shall be three classes of sewage connection permits; Class A for
the installation of private sewer disposal facilities; Class B for
multi-family residential and commercial building sewers; and Class C for
service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In all cases, the
owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished
by the Commission. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Commission.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.043  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION.



   No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Commission unless he or she
represents the Commission in performing maintenance, repair or extension of
the system. The fee for said permit shall be set pursuant to § 53.002.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.044  LICENSED PLUMBER TO PERFORM WORK; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   All work shall be performed by a licensed plumber (P-1, P-3)
licensed under Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 20-330 et seq. or as indicated in
division (B) below. The system shall be subject to inspection and approval by
the Director when the laying of a building sewer is completed and before
filling of the trench.



   (B)   Should an owner of a single-family residence have a Class A
installation performed by a subsurface sewage disposal system installer
licensed under Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 20-341a et seq., the system shall be
further subject to inspection and approval by the Town Building Inspector
when laying of a building sewer is completed and before filling of the trench.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.045  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer or combined sanitary and storm sewer.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.046  INSPECTION BY DIRECTOR.



   The applicant for the sewer connection permit shall notify the Director
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. All connections to public sewers will be inspected by the Director or
his or her Deputy.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.047  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER FOR COST OF INSTALLATION OR CONNECTION.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
town for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.048  DISUSED BUILDING SEWER LINES TO BE SEALED.



   When a building is taken down and there is no other building using the
sewer line, it shall be sealed at the old wall with concrete so that no dirt
from the cellar fill will wash into the sewer.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.049  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Permits to connect to the public sewer may be revoked or annulled by
the Commission for such cause and at such times as the Commission may deem
sufficient and the town is hereby held harmless as a consequence of said
revocation or the cause thereof. All other parties in interest shall be held
to have waived the right to claim damages from the town or its agents on
account of said revocation.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




REGULATION OF DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 53.060  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
The steam cleaning of automotive or other mechanical equipment over manhole
covers is prohibited as well as the depositing of wastes from such operation
into the sewer system.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.061  LIMITATIONS ON DISCHARGES OF UNUSUAL STRENGTH OF CHARACTER;
CRITERIA FOR CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters or other wastes which can
harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property or constitute a nuisance. The acceptability of these wastes
will be based on consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the wastewater treatment process,
capacity of the wastewater treatment plan, degree of treatability of wastes
in the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors.



   (B)   The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any petroleum distillates or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (2)   Any water or wastes containing toxic pollutants,
malodorous or poisonous solids, liquids or gases, in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving
waters of the wastewater treatment plant, or of preventing entry into sewers
for their maintenance and repair. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be
limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act;



      (3)   Any water or waste, acid and alkaline in reaction,
having a pH lower than five and five-tenths or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewerage works. The upper limit of pH for any industrial
wastewater discharge shall be established under the dischargers’ state
discharge permit. Free acids and alkalies must be neutralized, at all times,
within the above pH range;



      (4)   Solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction of the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewerage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, chemical residues, cannery waste, bulk solid, cardboard,
styrofoam, beer or distillery slops, lime residues, lime slurry, paint
residues, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, whey and the like, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders. In no case shall a substance discharged
cause the facilities to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act, or
under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act or State criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used;



      (5)   Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant;



      (6)   Any storm water, roof drains, spring water, cistern or
tank overflow, footing drain, discharge from any vehicle wash rack or water
motor, or the contents of any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool, or the
discharge of effluent from any air conditioning machine or refrigeration unit;



      (7)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (8)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 50 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150°F (0
and 65°C);



      (9)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.75 horsepower metric) or greater shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Director;



      (10)   Any water or waste containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;



      (11)   Any water or waste containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or waste exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received
in the composite sewage at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Commission and by the state regulatory agencies for such
materials;



      (12)   Any water or waste containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, in such concentrations, exceeding limits which may
be established by the Commission as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;



      (13)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the applicable state or
federal regulations;



      (14)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fuller’s earth and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
wastewater treatment works; and



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein.



      (15)   Unusual quantities of wastes or substances which the
treatment plant cannot treat to the minimal level recommended by the state or
federal regulatory agencies;



      (16)    All discharge of wastewater shall also conform with
the agreements established between the City of New London, the Town of
Waterford and the Town of East Lyme; and



      (17)   Sewage with a concentration of pollutants in excess of
the following limits:



 

Pollutant
 
Concentration Parts/million(mg/l)




Arsenic as As
 
0.05


Barium as Ba
 
5.0


Boron as Bo
 
5.0


Cadmium
 
0.1


Chromium (Cr + 6)
 
0.05


Chromium (total)
 
1.0


Copper as Cu
 
1.0


Cyanides as Cn (amendable)
 
0.1


Fluoride as F
 
20


Lead
 
0.1


Magnesium as Mg
 
100


Manganese as Mn
 
5.0


Mercury
 
0.01


Nickel
 
1.0


Silver
 
0.1


Tin
 
2.0


Zinc as Zn
 
1.0




 



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.062  ALTERNATIVE METHODS FOR HANDLING RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 53.061 and which may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, process equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Commission may:



   (A)   Reject the waste;



   (B)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;



   (C)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or



   (D)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the waste not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.063  RESTRICTED DISCHARGES SUBJECT TO REVIEW BY COMMISSION;
PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.



   (A)   The admission into public sewers of any water or waste having
or containing the following shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Commission:



      (1)   Having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than
240 parts per million by weight;



      (2)   Containing more than 240 parts per million;



      (3)   Containing more than 15 parts per million of chlorine
demand;



      (4)   Containing any quantity of substances having the
characteristics above the previously described limits; or



      (5)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the
average daily sewage flow of the town.



   (B)   Where necessary, the owner shall provide at his or her own
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:



      (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 240 parts per
million and the suspended solids to 240 parts per million by weight;



      (2)   Reduce the chlorine demand to 15 parts per million;



      (3)   Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to
within the maximum limits provided for in § 53.061; or



      (4)   Control the quantities and rate of discharge of such
water or waste.



   (C)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted to the
Commission for approval and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.064  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Commission and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors
shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt
and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when
bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Proper operation must be
assured by proper maintenance.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.065  MAINTENANCE OF PRELIMINARY TREATMENT AND FLOW-EQUALIZING
FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities (including,
but not limited to, grease, oil and sand interceptors) are provided for any
water or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense. These facilities
shall be readily accessible and open to inspection by the Director at any
time.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.066  CONTROL MANHOLES.



   (A)   When required by the Commission, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes.



   (B)   Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Commission.



   (C)   The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)  Penalty, see § 53.999



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.067  AUTHORITY OF COMMISSION TO REQUIRE CERTAIN INFORMATION FROM USER.



   (A)   The Commission may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with §§ 53.001 through 53.006,
53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and
53.085 through 53.089.



   (B)   These requirements may include:



      (1)   Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a
specific time period;



      (2)   Chemical analyses of wastewater;



      (3)   Information on raw materials, processes and products
affecting wastewater volume and quality;



      (4)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge,
oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control;



      (5)   A plot plan of sewers on the user’s property showing
sewer and pretreatment facility location;



      (6)   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and



      (7)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of
materials through spills to the municipal sewer.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.068  STANDARD FOR MEASUREMENT; TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   All measurement, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020
through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085
through 53.089 shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by
the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Samplings
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally,
but not always, BOD and suspended solid analyses are obtained from a 24-hour
composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic samples.
Samples will be made by the Commission or its authorized representative and
any fee for such services is the sole responsibility of the owner.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.069  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   No statement contained in §§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through
53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through
53.089 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Commission and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste
of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Commission for
treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.070  STATE REQUIREMENTS OF PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTION.



   (A)   State permits required.



      (1)   In accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 25-54i, as
amended, a permit from the Commissioner of Environmental Protection is
required prior to the initiation of a discharge of any of the following
wastewaters to a public sewer:



         (a)   Industrial wastewater of any quantity; and



         (b)   Domestic sewage in excess of 5,000 gallons per day
through any individual building sewer to a public sewer.



      (2)   A potential discharger must submit a permit application
to the Department of Environmental Protection not later than ninety (90) days
prior to the anticipated date of initiation of the proposed discharge.



   (B)   Protection from accidental discharges.



      (1)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by §§
53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060
through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089.



      (2)   Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user’s cost and
expense as required by the Commission. The Commission may require that plans
showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted for review and
approval prior to construction of the facilities.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




SEWER EXTENSIONS



§ 53.085  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND TOWN REQUIREMENTS; COMMISSION APPROVAL
OF PLANS REQUIRED.



   All extensions to the sanitary sewer system owned or to be owned and
maintained by the town shall be properly designed in accordance with the
Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, as adopted by the Great Lakes-Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers (Ten State Standards) and
in strict conformance with all requirements of the state and the town and
other appropriate town agencies. Plans and specifications for sewer
extensions shall be submitted to and approval obtained from, the Commission
before construction may proceed. The design of sewers must anticipate and
allow for flows from all possible future extensions or developments within
the immediate drainage area; the drainage area being that area which can be
easily sewered by gravity.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.086  CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER EXTENSIONS AND BUILDING SEWERS BY TOWN;
ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.



   Sewer extensions, including individual building sewers from the public
sewer to the property line, may be constructed by the town under public
contract if, in the opinion of the Commission, the number of properties to be
serviced by such extension warrants its costs. Under this arrangement the
property owner shall pay for and install the building sewer from the property
line to his or her residence or place of business in accordance with the
requirements of §§ 53.035 through 53.049. Property owners may propose sewer
extensions to the town by drafting a written petition, signed by a majority
of the benefitting property owners, and filing it with the Commission. The
cost of such extensions may be assessed to the benefitted property owners.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.087  CONSTRUCTION BY PROPERTY OWNER, BUILDER OR DEVELOPER;
RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS; COMPLIANCE WITH SECTION.



   If the Commission does not elect to construct a sewer extension under
public contract, the property owner, builder or developer must construct the
necessary sewer extension, including lateral connections from the sewer main
to the property line of each property served by any such extension and
lateral connections to the street line of any public street or way
intersecting with the street or way in which any such extension is
constructed or installed, if such extensions are approved by the Commission,
in accordance with the requirements of § 53.085. He, she or they must pay
for the entire installation, including all expenses incidental thereto. Each
building sewer installed must be installed and inspected as required by §§
53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049, 53.060
through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089 and the inspection fees as required
by the Commission shall be paid. Design of sewers shall be as specified in §
53.088. The installation of the sewer extension must be subject to inspection
by the Director and the expenses for these inspections shall be paid for by
the owner, builder or developer. The Director’s decision shall be final in
matters of quality and methods of construction. The sewer as constructed must
pass the exfiltration and infiltration test required in § 53.089 before it
is to be used. The cost of sewer extensions thus made shall be absorbed by
the developers or the property owners, including all building sewers.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.088  TO BE DESIGNED BY REGISTERED ENGINEER.



   All designs for sewer extensions shall be accomplished by an engineer
who is registered and authorized to practice in the field of sanitary
engineering in the state. The designs and plans prepared by such engineer
shall be reviewed by the Commission. No construction shall be undertaken
until approval of the plan is obtained from the Commission and other agencies
as required by the town and the proper permits are issued.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




§ 53.089  EXTENSIONS TO BE TESTED PRIOR TO ACCEPTANCE BY COMMISSION.



   Upon completion of construction of any sewer extension, but before
final acceptance by the Commission, the sewer system shall be tested for
infiltration and exfiltration of both sewer lines and the manholes by
approved means and under the direction and inspection of an engineer
registered and authorized to practice in the field of sanitary engineering in
the state with the presence of the Director. When the sewers have passed
tests to demonstrate that they meet the best standards of American
workmanship, then the engineer shall certify in writing to the Commission as
to the nature of the tests and results thereof, and the fact that the tests
meet acceptable standards.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




RESOLUTION REGARDING ADOPTION OF SEWER USE CHARGES;
SEWER RATES AND CHARGES GENERALLY



§ 53.100  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation or organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure at five days at 20°C express in milligrams per liter
(mg/l).



   COMMERCIAL USER. All retail stores, restaurants, office buildings,
laundries and other private businesses and service establishments.



   COMMISSION. The Water and Sewer Commission of the Town of East Lyme,
Connecticut.



   GOVERNMENTAL USERS. Includes legislative, judicial, administrative and
regulatory activities of the federal, state and local governments.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. Includes any non-governmental, nonresidential user of
publicly owned treatment works as defined in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and
supplemented, under the following divisions:



      (1)   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;



      (2)   Division B - Mining;



      (3)   Division D - Manufacturing;



      (4)   Division E - Transportation, Communication, Electric,
Gas and Sanitary; and



      (5)   Division I - Services.



   INSTITUTIONAL USER. Includes social, charitable, religious and
educational activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes,
penal institutions and similar institutional users.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater that has a BOD concentration of
not more than 240 parts per million by weight; and suspended solids
concentration of not more than 240 parts per million; or containing more than
15 parts per million of chlorine demand; or containing any quantity of
substances having the characteristics above the previously described limits;
or having an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage
flow of the town.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Those functions that result in expenditures
during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities
and other items which are necessary for managing and for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
replacement.



   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance of such works
for which such works were designed and constructed.



   RESIDENTIAL USER. Any contributor to the town’s treatment works whose
lot, parcel or real estate or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes
only.



   SEWER DIRECTOR. The person appointed by the Commission as an
administrative officer who shall at all times be responsible to and subject
to the Commission and subject to removal for cause. The Commission may also
appoint a Deputy Director who in the Director’s absence shall have the same
powers and duties as the Director.



   SHALL. Is mandatory, MAY is permissible.



   SS (DENOTING SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids in which are
removable by laboratory filtering.



   TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage and liquid
industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewer
collection systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and
alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply
of such standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works,
including side acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from
such treatment (including land for composting, sludge, temporary storage of
such compost and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land
treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of
municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water
and sanitary sewer systems.)



   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the treatment works
shall be operated.



   USER CHARGE. The portion of the total wastewater service charge which
is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the wastewater treatment works.



   WATER METER. A water volume measuring and recording device, furnished
and/or installed by a user and approved by the Town Sewer Director or other
duly authorized employee of the Town Water and Sewer Commission.



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



§ 53.101  SEWER OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT FUND.



   (A)   The revenues collected, as a result of the user charges levy,
shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Sewer
Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund.



   (B)   (1)   Fiscal year-end balances in the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund shall be used for no other purpose than
those designated. Monies which have been transferred from other sources to
meet temporary shortages in the Operation, Maintenance and Replacement Fund
shall be returned to their respective accounts appropriate adjustment of the
user charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement.



      (2)   The user charge rates shall be adjusted such that the
transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within six
months of the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed.



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



§ 53.102  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Each user shall pay for the services provided by the
Commission based upon use of the treatment works as determined by water meter
readings (or other appropriate methods) acceptable to the Commission.



   (B)   For residential, industrial and commercial users, semi-annual
user charges will be based on actual water usage. If an industrial,
institutional or commercial customer uses water which is not discharged into
the wastewater collection system, and desires not to be billed for use of
such water, upon application to the Commission and approval of such
application flows not discharged to the municipal sewerage system will be
metered separately. A second meter to measure flow to be deducted from the
total metered water consumption at the site. The cost of providing and
plumbing the second meter shall be the sole responsibility of the customer.
Properties for which an exception is granted will be charged a flat fee, to
be applied to each semi-annual usage bill, to offset the Commission’s
burden of additional meter readings and administration expenses associated
with “exception” accounts. This fee will be in an amount equal to the
sewer usage then in effect for 25,000 gallons of sewer usage.



   (C)   (1)   All users of the Commission’s facilities shall pay
a user fee based in terms of dollars per 1,000 gallons of water used. The
user fee is calculated as follows:




Rate per 1000 gallons = (Total annual O, M & R Costs Less Permit Fees)
(Estimated Annual Water Consumption/1,000)




      (2)   Each user shall pay a user charge rate for operation and
maintenance including replacement of capital equipment as set forth in §
53.107. The user fee shall be determined per § 53.107 on an annual basis by
the Commission and subject to the statutory limitations contained in Conn.
Gen. Stat. Chapter 103, § 7-255. The initial user charge rate shall
hereafter be $4 per 1,000 gallons of water usage. This fee is subject to
change by vote of the Commission pursuant to § 53.106 of these regulations.



   (D)   Each user shall pay upon connecting into the wastewater
collection system a permit and inspection fee of $50. This fee is subject to
change by vote of the Commission pursuant to § 53.106 of these regulations.



   (E)   Those residential users that derive potable water from on site
wells without metered water service shall install a water meter for measuring
volume or, as approved by the Commission, have their bills computed based on
water use associated with similar residential users within the system.



   (F)   Any user that discharges any toxic pollutants (as defined in
§§ 53.001 through 53.006, 53.020 through 53.023, 53.035 through 53.049,
53.060 through 53.070 and 53.085 through 53.089) which causes an increase in
the cost of managing the effluent of the sludge from the town’s treatment
works, or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by
interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost
of operation, maintenance or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay
for such increased cost. The charge to each such user shall be determined by
the Sewer Director and approved by the Commission.



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



§ 53.103  BILLING AND LATE CHARGES.



   (A)   All users shall be billed semi-annually. Semi-annual bills
shall be due and payable to the Commission on November 1 and May 1 of each
year. Any payment not received within 30 days after the due date shall be
delinquent and subject to interest and penalties pursuant to law.



   (B)   A late payment penalty of 1% of the user charge bill will be
added to each delinquent bill for each 30 days or a portion thereof of
delinquency. When any bill is more than 90 days in default, water and/or
sewer service to such premises may be discontinued until such bill is paid.



   (C)   When any bill (including interest and penalty) remains unpaid
for one year after the date due, such bill shall be recorded in the land
records of the town by the Chairperson of the Commission and shall constitute
a lien on the property. If such lien (including interest and penalty) remains
unpaid for a period of one year after the date of recordation, such property
shall be subject to public sale pursuant to law.



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



§ 53.104  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   All users contributing more than 200,000 gallons per month and whose
waste strength is greater than 240 mg/l BOD/l or 240 mg/l SS/l shall prepare
and file with the Commission a report that shall include pertinent data
relating to the wastewater characteristics, including the methods of sampling
and measurement to obtain these data, and these data shall be used to
calculate the user charges for that user. The Commission shall have the right
to gain access to the waste stream and make its own samples. Should the
Commission do so and should the results be substantially different as
determined by the Commission from the data submitted by the user, the user
charge for that user shall be revised for the next billing cycle/period.



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



§ 53.105  REVIEW OF CHARGES BY COMMISSION.



   (A)   Any user(s) who feels their user charge is unjust or
inequitable may make written application to the Commission requesting a
review of their user charge. Said written request shall, where necessary,
show the actual or estimated flow and/or strength of his or her wastewater in
comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the
measurements or estimates were made.



   (B)   Review of the request shall be made by the Water and Sewer
Commission and, if substantiated, the user charges for that user shall be
recomputed on the basis of the revised flow and/or strength data and the new
charges shall be applicable to the next billing cycle/period.



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



§ 53.106  ANNUAL CHARGES BY COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission will review the user charges when it deems
appropriate and may revise its rates and fees as are necessary to ensure that
adequate revenues are generated to pay the cost of operation and maintenance
including replacement and that the system continues to provide for the
proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement
cost among users and user classes.



   (B)   The Commission will notify each user of any rate change(s) by
publication of said rate change in The Day newspaper on at least two
occasions more than 30 days before said rate change becomes effective.



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



§ 53.107  METHODOLOGY TO BE USED IN CALCULATING USER CHARGE RATES AND
SURCHARGES.



   This section presents the methodology to be used in calculating user
charge rates and surcharges and illustrates the calculations followed in
arriving at the first year’s user charges and surcharges.



   (A)   Expenses: total annual expenses by unit process are:



 


Unit Process

 

Total Annual Amount

 

Volume Amount

 

Permit Fund

 

Gen

 

Costs



Pump stations, collection and conveyance system
 

$269,200

 

85%

 

4.5%

 

10.5%

 




Administrative and general
 

$20,800

 

85%

 

4.5%

 

10.5%

 




Operative reserve
 

0

 


 


 


 




Reserve capital replacement
 

0

 


 


 


 




TOTAL O, M & R Costs = $290,000



 



   (B)   Loadings: the total water consumption is estimated to be
61,750,000 gal/year.



   (C)   Unit costs.



 

Total annual O, M & R costs in

$/1,000 gallons = Total annual O, M & F $  Estimated annual water
consumption/ 1,000 gallons

$/1,000 gallons = $247,000 = 4.00/1,000 gal.

      61,750



 



(Res. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 8-25-1992; Ord. passed 11-27-2001)



SEWER RATES AND CHARGES



§ 53.120  SEWER RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   On October 25, 2016, the Town Water and Sewer Commission
approved the following revised schedule of rates and charges for connection
to and use of the town sewerage system.



 



Schedule I - Rates for Usage Based on Meter Readings at 6-Month Intervals


 
 

Rate



Up to 2,500,000 gallons per 6-month period
 

$7.90/1,000 gallons



2,500,000 gallons and over per 6-month period
 

$8.59/1,000 gallons



Unmetered, per six 6-month period
 

$208



Schedule II - Miscellaneous Sewer Charges


Application for connection permit
 





   Class A - Residential

 

$105




   Class B - Multi-family and commercial

 

$210




   Class C - Industrial

 

$525




   Demolition/disconnect - any class

 

$55



Inspection services
 





   After normal working hours

 

$110/hour




   During normal working hours

 

$73.50/hour



Sale of stocked material
 

Cost, incl. shipping, plus 12% admin fee





 



   (B)   These revised rates and charges would be effective on November
1, 2017. Rates for usage shall be payable at six-month intervals. All other
rates shall be payable at the time services are rendered.



   (C)   The owners of properties against which the revised rates and
charges are to be levied are hereby notified that any appeals from the
revised rates and charges must be taken within 21 days after the date this
notice was filed with the Town Clerk on November 3, 2017.



(Ord. passed 11-1-2006; Ord. passed - -2009; Ord. passed 10-24-2012; Ord.
passed 10-29-2014; Ord. passed 10-25-2016; Ord. passed 11-2-2017)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 49



   AMENDED BELOW



      TM Volume 15, page 229; TM Volume 16, page 19; TM Volume 16, page
126; TM Volume 20, page 5; TM Volume 22, page 150; TM Volume 22, page 624



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   The filling of a trench before inspection is complete shall
subject the owner to whom a permit is issued to a penalty of $100 for each
offense and the owner may be required to reopen the trench for inspection.



(Ord. passed 3-17-1991; Ord. passed 9-12-1998)



Editor’s note:




TM Volume 18, page 63; TM Volume 21, page 584




TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES



      71.   ABANDONED, INOPERABLE AND UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES



      72.   PARKING



      73.   SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES



      74.   GOLF CARTS



CHAPTER 70:  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   70.01   Operation of motor vehicles on town-owned property



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON TOWN-OWNED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (D) below, no person shall
operate on any town-owned property, any motor vehicle, as defined in division
(C) below, which is not registered for highway operation by the individual,
commission, department or agency of any state having authority for the
registration of motor vehicles.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D) below, no person
shall operate on any town-owned property any motor vehicle, as defined in
division (C) below, unless such person is licensed by the individual,
commission, department or agency of any state having authority for licensing
operators of motor vehicles on highways or unless such person is
participating in a course of study of motor vehicles operation given under
the authority of the Town Board of Education.



      (2)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, as defined in
division (C) below, on any town-owned property, except on paved roads,
driveways and parking lots unless such person is a town, state or federal
official engaged in government business or a person authorized to do so by
the town board having responsibility for the care and maintenance of such
property.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, MOTOR VEHICLE means any vehicle
propelled or drawn by any power other than muscular, but does not include
construction equipment being operated on any project of the town, electric
battery-operated wheel chairs when operated by physically handicapped persons
and self-propelled snow plows, snow blowers and lawn mowers.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the operation of any
motor vehicle, as defined in division (C) above, on any town-owned property
during participation in any program on any such property authorized by the
town board having responsibility for the care and maintenance of such
property and supervised by any town board.



(Ord. passed 2-5-1971; Ord. passed 1-3-1977)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 10, page 348; TM Volume 12, page 292, Amended



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of § 70.01 shall be fined not more
than $100.



(Ord. passed 2-5-1971; Ord. passed 1-3-1977)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 10, page 348; TM Volume 12, page 292, Amended



CHAPTER 71:  ABANDONED, INOPERABLE AND UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   71.01   Zoning Enforcement Officer’s duties



   71.02   Vehicle not removed



   71.03   Notice



§ 71.01  ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER’S DUTIES.



   Upon receipt of notice that there is an abandoned, inoperable or
unregistered motor vehicle within the limits of any highway, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall:



   (A)   Give written notice by U.S. mail, postage prepaid, to the last
owner of record of such vehicle, if such owner can be determined; and



   (B)   Publish notice once in a newspaper having a substantial
circulation in the town.



(Ord. passed - -)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, page 138



§ 71.02  VEHICLE NOT REMOVED.



   If such vehicle is not removed within 30 days after the notice provided
for in § 71.01, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall:



   (A)   If the current market value of such vehicle is not more than
the expenses of Zoning Enforcement Officer and the cost of removing such
vehicle to the nearest motor vehicle junk yard, provide for the removal there
of such vehicle; and



   (B)   If the current market value of such vehicle is more than the
expenses of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the cost of removing such
vehicle to the nearest motor vehicle junk yard, proceed in accordance with
the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-150(b) and (c), as the same may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. passed - -)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, page 138



§ 71.03  NOTICE.



   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall give written notice by U.S. mail,
postage prepaid, of the disposition of such vehicle to the Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles and the owner of such vehicle, if such owner can be determined.



(Ord. passed - -)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, page 138



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING



Section



   72.01   Restricting parking of commercial vehicles in residential
zones



 



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  RESTRICTING PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   No commercially operated or licensed vehicle having a gross weight of
10,000 pounds or more, shall be parked or stored on any public street in a
residential zoned area except as follows:



   (A)   When actively engaged in the conduct of business, i.e.,
loading, unloading, installation or repair, and directly related to property
located in a residential zone;



   (B)   In connection with any legally existing, nonconforming,
nonresidential use located in a residential zone. Any on-street parking of
such vehicles shall be restricted to the abutting street frontage related to
the nonresidential use; and



   (C)   On an occasional basis, not exceeding an average of once a
month, when such use is in conjunction with the need for emergency repair
response such as by a utility serviceman or mechanical systems repairman, or
other incidental use approved in writing by the First Selectman.



(Ord. passed 9-24-1986)  Penalty, see § 72.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 15



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Each violation of § 72.01 shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $99.



   (C)   The fine for parking in the town in violation of the General
Statutes or the rules enacted by the Board of Selectmen, as the traffic
authority of the town, shall be $5 for each offense.



(Ord. passed 6-24-1976; Ord. passed 9-24-1986)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 240



   TM Volume 16, page 15



CHAPTER 73:  SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES



Section



   73.01   Operation of snow mobiles and all-terrain vehicles on frozen
surface of public bodies of water



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  OPERATION OF SNOW MOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES ON FROZEN
SURFACE OF PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER.



   No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle, as defined
in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-379, at any time on the frozen surface of the
following public bodies of water within the town:



   (A)   Dodge Pond;



   (B)   Gorton Pond;



   (C)   Niantic River;



   (D)   Pattagansett Lake; and



   (E)   Pattagansett River.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 73.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, page 103



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of § 73.01 shall be fined not more
than $100.



(Ord. passed - -)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, page 103



CHAPTER 74:  GOLF CARTS



Section



   74.01   Golf carts



 



   74.99   Penalty



§ 74.01  GOLF CARTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-300g, as
amended, the Board of Selectmen, acting herein as the duly constituted
traffic authority of the town, hereby permits the operation of golf carts
within the town in accordance with the terms of this regulation.



   (B)   Gas or electric powered golf carts permitted on town roads
must be equipped with a minimum of four wheels, capable of a maximum speed of
no more than 25 miles per hour, capable of transporting no more than four
persons and comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Equipped with a locking brake, main power switch, head
lamp(s), tail/brake lamps, operable horn as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat. §
14-80(e), rear view mirror and seatbelts/passenger safety restraints for
rear-facing passengers.



      (2)   A flag with a minimum height of 72 inches from the
ground and at least one foot above any installed roof shall be placed on the
left rear of the golf cart to assist pedestrians and motor vehicle operators
in observing the location and operation of a golf cart.



      (3)   A valid registration sticker from the Police Department
placed in a visible location on the rear of the golf cart.



   (C)   Prior to operation of a golf cart the owner shall register it
with the Police Department. The Police Department shall prepare a
registration form and registration sticker for the registration of golf
carts. The registration shall expire on May 31 of each calendar year. The
owner of a golf cart shall at all times meet the following standards to
obtain and maintain a valid golf cart registration.



      (1)   The owner must submit proof of ownership, such as a
certificate of title or bill of sale, and a certificate of insurance covering
the golf cart that meets the State of Connecticut minimum liability insurance
requirements for a motor vehicle or insurance requirements that are
established by the Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicle Regulations
concerning golf carts upon adoption of same.



      (2)   The golf cart must satisfy the standards of division (B)
above.



      (3)   The payment of a fee in the amount of $35 is due for
each registration period. From time to time the Board of Selectmen may amend
the amount of such fee to an amount sufficient to cover all costs associated
with the implementation and enforcement of the requirements of this
regulation.



   (D)   The following conditions shall apply to the operation of a
golf cart:



      (1)   Operators must possess a valid Connecticut motor vehicle
operator's license, proof of insurance and a valid golf cart registration.



      (2)   All applicable Connecticut and local laws and
regulations governing the operation of a motor vehicle, including but not
limited to parking rules and regulations, are applicable to the operation of
a golf cart.



      (3)   Operation of a golf cart shall be permitted only between
one-half hour after sunrise and one-half hour prior to sunset.



      (4)   Passengers shall be limited to one passenger per seat,
with no more than four passengers in a golf cart.



   (E)   Golf carts may be operated only on roads located in the
following areas of the town:



      (1)   The Crescent Beach community, more particularly
described on a map or plan entitled “Plan Indicating Street Layout at
Crescent Beach Niantic, Connecticut. Scale 1"  =  100' Sept. 15, 1961
Revisions December 15,1961 Revisions Feb. 14,1962” prepared by Dwight S.
Vibbert.



      (2)   The Oak Grove Beach community, more particularly
described on a map or plan entitled “Map Showing Oak Grove Beach Niantic,
Conn. Prepared for Oak Grove Beach Association, Inc. Dec. 1, 1994 Scale 1" =
100' Rev. 4/15/95 4/12/96” prepared by David M. Coonrod L.L.S.



      (3)   The Black Point Beach Club Association. Inc. community,
more particularly described on a maps or plans entitled “Plan No. 2 Black
Point Beach Club Property as Niantic, Town of East Lyme, Conn. Owned By Jas.
Jay Smith” and “Black Point Beach Club Property at Niantic, Town of East
Lyme, Conn. Owned by Jas Jay Smith, sheets 1 of 2 and 2 of 2.”



      (4)   The Old Black Point community, more particularly
described on the Town of East Lyme Assessor's Maps Nos. 02.1, 02.2 and 02.3,
dated October 2008 and Town of East Lyme Assessor's Map No. 02.4, dated
October 2009.



      (5)   The Saunders Point community, more particularly
described on a maps or plans entitled “Revised Plan of Building Lots owned
by The Estate of George S. Smith, East Lyme, Conn. Original Survey and Layout
by Chandler & Palmer June 1922. Revised Layout by Daboll & Crandall April
1925 Scale 11N = 40 FT.” and “Plan of Hoskins Point, East Lyme Ct. As
Surveyed and Plotted by Robt. B. Gorton of Niantic Ct. Scale 1/300 or 1" to
25' - September 10 AD 1901” and “Bishop's Bay Park Owned and Developed by
Merton W. Bassett of Hartford Conn. Scale 40 ft = 1 Inch. Survey and Plan By
LE. Daboll Civil Engineer New London Conn 1936.”



   (F)   The Public Works Department shall prepare a map or plan
depicting the roads described in division (E) hereof, shall file the original
thereof with the Town Clerk, and shall make copies thereof available to
members of the public.



(Ord. passed 4-23-2014)



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who operates a golf cart in violation of any provision of
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-300g(a), any insurance requirement established in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-300g(b) or any conditions or
limitations established by the Board of Selectmen for the operation of golf
carts shall have committed an infraction and will be subject to the same fine
structure of motor vehicles as defined in Connecticut General Statutes.



(Ord. passed 4-23-2014)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   NOISE CONTROL



      91.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      92.   MASS GATHERINGS



      93.   CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR



      94.   FAIR HOUSING



      95.   FIRE PREVENTION



      96.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      97.   STREETS



      98.   ANIMALS



CHAPTER 90:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   90.01   Purpose



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Noise levels



   90.04   Exclusions



   90.05   Exemptions



   90.06   Refuse collection noise



   90.07   Motor vehicle noise



   90.08   Variances



   90.09   Severability



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to the general authority of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-148
and the specific authority of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-73(c) it is hereby
resolved that to preserve and promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the town; it is in the common interest to enact a
reasonable regulation pertaining to the reduction, control and/or prevention
of noise as to promote a general environment free from excessive noise and
vibration.



   (B)   This chapter is enacted to preserve, protect and promote the
public health, safety, convenience, general welfare, peace, quality of life
and property values for the citizens of the town, and to facilitate the
enjoyment of natural resources and tranquility of the town, through the
reduction, control and prevention of excessive noise and vibration.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMBIENT NOISE or BACKGROUND NOISE. Noise of a measurable intensity
which exists at a point as a result of a combination of many distant sources
individually indistinguishable.



   BOARD OF SELECTMEN. The Board of Selectmen of the Town of East Lyme or
a duly authorized officer.



   COMMERCIAL ZONE. As set forth in the town zoning regulations and all
associated therewith either permitted as a right or as a special use.



   CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or similar action, for or of public or private
rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar properties, but excluding
demolition.



   CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Any equipment or device operated by any fuel or
electric power used in construction or demolition work.



   DAYTIME HOURS. The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, and the hours 9:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. on Sundays.



   DECIBEL. A logarithmic unit of measure in measuring magnitudes or
sound. The symbol of dB.



   DEMOLITION. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-or-way surfaces or similar
properties.



   DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT. Including, but not limited to, power saws,
drills, grinders, lawn and garden tools and other domestic power equipment
intended for use in residential areas by a homeowner.



   EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
perceived imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle authorized by the State of
Connecticut to have sound warning devices, such as sirens and bell, which can
lawfully be used when responding to an emergency. (Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-283)



   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure of imminent danger.



   IMPULSE NOISE. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.



   INDUSTRIAL ZONE. As set forth in the town zoning regulations and all
uses associated therewith, either permitted as a right or a special use.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Per Conn. Gen. Stat. § 14-1.



   MUFFLER. A device for abating sounds such as escaping gases.



   NIGHTTIME HOURS. The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Sunday
evening through Saturday morning, except that NIGHT shall mean the hours
between 10:00 p.m. Saturday and 9:00 a.m. Sunday.



   NOISE. Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set
forth in § 90.03.



   NOISE LEVEL. The sound pressure level as measured with a sound level
meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designed db(A) or
dBA.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or political or
administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind.



   PREMISES. Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including
all appurtenances, and shall include yard, lots, courts, inner yards and real
properties without building or improvements owned or controlled by a person.
The emitter’s PREMISES includes contiguous publicly dedicated street and
highway rights-or-way, all road rights-or-way and waters of the state.



   PROPERTY LINE. That real or imaginary line along the ground surface and
its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled by
any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by another
person and separates real property from the public right-of-way.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place which is owned or controlled
by a governmental entity.



   RECREATIONAL MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any motorized vehicle, whether or not
duly licensed and registered, including, but not limited to, commercial or
noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, dirt bikes, go-carts, ATVs,
snowmobiles, amphibious craft, campers and dune buggies, but not including
motorboats or aircraft.



   RESIDENTIAL ZONE. Those residential districts as defined and set forth
in the town zoning regulations and all uses associated therewith either
permitted as a right or as a special use.



   SOUND. A transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media
in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or
position of the particles in the medium and which, in air, evoke
physiological sensations, including, but not limited to, an auditory response
when impinging on the ear.



   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument used to take sound-level measurements
and which should conform, as a minimum, to the operational specifications of
the American National Standards Institute for Sound Level Meters S1.4. 1971
(Type S2A).



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the
ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of 20 micronewtons
per square meter and is expressed in decibels (dB).



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 90.03  NOISE LEVELS.



   (A)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of excessive noise
beyond the boundaries of his or her premises in excess of the following noise
levels:



 


Property Use Emitter

 

Property Use Receptor





 

Residential

 

Nonresidential





 

Day

 

Night

 

Day

 

Night



Nonresidential zone emitter
 

55 dBA

 

45 dBA

 

52 dBA

 

45 dBA



Residential zone emitter
 

55 dBA

 

45 dBA

 

55 dBA

 

45 dBA




 



   (B)   Measurements shall be taken at a point on the property line of
the emitter closest to the receptor and/or at the property line at any
neighboring property (that may or may not be contiguous) with a more
restrictive decibel allowance. In cases where the emitter is located on
jointly owned property, such as industrial parks and condominiums, the noise
measuring equipment (i.e., microphone) shall be placed at a 50-foot distance
from the noise source. The microphone shall be placed no closer than five
feet from any wall and not less than three feet above ground that is located
about one foot beyond the boundary of the emitter’s premises within the
receptors premises. The emitter’s premises include his or her individual
unit of land or group of contiguous parcels under same ownership as indicted
by public land records.



      (1)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse
noise in excess of 80 dBA peak sound pressure level during the night time to
any residential noise zone.



      (2)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse
noise in excess of 100 dBA peak sound pressure level at any time to any zone.



      (3)   In those individual cases where the background noise
levels caused by sources not subject to this chapter exceed the standards
contained herein, a source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if
the noise emitted by such source exceeds the background noise level by 5 dBA,
provided that no source subject to the provisions of the noise levels in
division (A) above, shall emit noise in excess of 80 dBA at any time, and
provided that this section does not decrease the permissible levels of the
other sections of the chapter.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  EXCLUSIONS.



   These levels shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to:



   (A)   Natural phenomena;



   (B)   Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church;



   (C)   Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles
or any other alarm system used in an emergency situation; provided however,
that burglar alarms not terminating in 30 minutes after being activated shall
be unlawful;



   (D)   Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration of other state of federal safety regulations;



   (E)   Farming equipment or farming activity; and



   (F)   Train horns and signals.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 90.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempt from these regulations subject to special
conditions as spelled out:



   (A)   Noise generated by any construction equipment which is
operated during daytime hours. Noise generated by construction equipment
during nighttime hours shall not exceed the maximum noise levels as specified
on § 90.03;



   (B)   Noise created as a result of or relating to an emergency;



   (C)   Noise from domestic power equipment such as, but not limited
to, power saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools or similar devices
operated during daytime hours;



   (D)   Noise from snow removal equipment;



   (E)   Noise from demolition work conducted during daytime hours.
When considered emergency work, demolition shall be exempted at all times
from the noise levels set in this regulation;



   (F)   Noise created by any aircraft flight operations which are
specifically permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration;



   (G)   Noise created by any recreational activities which are
permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the
town or state, including, but not limited to, parades, sporting events,
concerts and firework displays;



   (H)   Noise created by blasting other than that conducted in
connection with construction activities shall be exempted, provided that the
blasting is conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time at specified
hours previously announced to the local public or provided that a permit for
such blasting is obtained from local authorities; and



   (I)   Noise generated by the police and other established shooting
facilities as permitted by state firearms laws, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-74a.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 90.06  REFUSE COLLECTION NOISE.



   All refuse collectors shall comply with the noise level standards as
established in this chapter while engaging in refuse collection at each
location. For purposes of this chapter, the term REFUSE COLLECTORS shall be
synonymous with private haulers, and all other persons that commercially
engage in the collection and transportation of refuse and other debris.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.



   (A)   All motor vehicles as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat. Chapter 246,
§ 14-1, operated within the limits of the town shall be subject to the noise
standards and decibel levels set forth in the regulations authorized in Conn.
Gen. Stat. § 14-80a.



   (B)   No sound-amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles shall
emit noise in excess of the noise levels as specified in the noise levels
section (§ 90.03).



   (C)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any
recreational motorized vehicle off a public right-of-way in such a manner
that the sound level emitted therefrom exceeds the limits set forth in §
90.03.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Any person living or doing business in the town may apply to
the town’s Board of Selectmen for variance from one or more of the
provisions of the chapter which are more stringent than the State Department
of Environmental Protection regulations for the control of noise; provided
that the applicant supplied all of the following information to the Board of
Selectmen at least 20 days prior to the start of said activity:



      (1)   The location and nature of the activity;



      (2)   The time period and hours of operation of said activity;



      (3)   The nature and intensity of the noise that will be
generated; and



      (4)   Any other information required by the Board of Selectmen.



   (B)   No variance from these regulations shall be allowed unless it
has been demonstrated that:



      (1)   The proposed activity will not violate any provisions of
the State Department of Environmental Protection regulations;



      (2)   The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will
not constitute a danger to the public health; and



      (3)   Compliance with the regulations constitutes an
unreasonable hardship on the applicant.



   (C)   The application for variance shall be reviewed and either
approved or rejected at least five days prior to the proposed start of said
activity. The approval or rejection shall be writing and shall state the
condition(s) of approval, if any, or the reason(s) for rejection.



   (D)   Failure to rule on the application in the designated time
shall constitute approval of the variance.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 90.09  SEVERABILITY.



   If any term or provision, or any portion thereof, of this chapter, or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall, to any extent,
be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of the chapter, or the application
of such term or provision to persons or circumstances, other than those as to
which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby, and
each term and provision of this chapter shall be valid and be enforced to the
fullest extent permitted by law. Should a court of competent jurisdiction
find any provision or part of a provision unenforceable as written the court
may reform such provision or part of a provision to render it enforceable
consistent with the general intent of the remaining portion of such provision
and/or this chapter.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The Town Police Department (the “Police Department”) shall
be responsible or investigating and documenting, through acoustic
measurements, violations of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person or entity violating any provision of the chapter
shall be fined $90 and each additional violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Any certified law enforcement agent with jurisdiction in the town is
hereby authorized to issue infraction ticket(s) pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat.
§§ 51-164p(a), 51-164m and 51-164n.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter are in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any other remedies available to the town under the Connecticut
General Statutes and other sections of the Town Charter. The issuance of
infraction tickets under this chapter shall not preclude the exercise of such
other remedies. In addition, the town may seek injunctive relief for
continued or repeated violations.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 91:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   91.01   Purpose



   91.02   Applicability



   91.03   Definitions



   91.04   Registrations



   91.05   Connection to telephone lines restriction



   91.06   Waiver of charges



   91.07   Enforcement



   91.08   Disclaimer of liability



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the registration, operation
and use of burglar, fire, medical or any other alarms or emergency signaling
devices within the town and to support and enforce the maintenance of said
system.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22, page 250



§ 91.02  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person or entity who
operates or owns any alarm system that automatically summons the police,
fire, medical or ambulance personnel or other town agency in response to an
alarm signal.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



§ 91.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM OWNER OR USER. Any person, firm, corporation or other business
entity that owns, controls, installs, operates or maintains any alarm system
as defined in division (1) of the definition for alarm systems below.



   ALARM SYSTEMS.



      (1)   ALARM SYSTEM. Any device or equipment which is capable
of activating the municipal fire alarm system, or is capable of automatically
calling and relaying recorded emergency messages to any state police or
municipal police or fire department telephone number, or which is capable of
automatically calling and relaying recorded emergency messages or other forms
of emergency signals to an intermediate third party which shall thereafter
call and relay such emergency message to a state police or municipal police
or fire department telephone number.



      (2)   ALL ALARM SYSTEM. Any system which sounds an audible
signal that may be heard outside the protected premises. Said systems shall
be equipped with a device that will limit the duration of such audible signal
to not more than ten minutes.



      (3)   BURGLAR ALARM. Any alarm system falling within the
definition of alarm system above which is designed to transmit a signal in
event of intrusion, hold up or other type of emergency situation.



      (4)   FIRE ALARM. Any system which falls within the definition
of alarm system above which is designated to transmit an alarm relating to
fire.



   ALARM APPEAL BOARD. Consists of a three-member panel selected by the
First Selectman from the following officials: the resident state trooper, the
Chief of Police, the Chiefs of the Niantic and Flanders Fire Departments, and
the East Lyme Fire Marshal.



   AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING SERVICE. An alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or
otherwise, a pre-recorded voice message indicating the existence of an
emergency situation that the alarm is designated to detect.



   CENTRAL STATION OPERATING COMPANY. A company equipped to receive
burglar, fire, panic, intruder or hold-up alarms from each of its customers
and which then transmits to the state police or Town Emergency Communications
Center the location and type of any such alarm the central station operating
company receives.



   FALSE ALARM. An alarm (such as a fire or burglar alarm) that is set.



   KEY HOLDER. Any person whose name appears on the registration form as a
key holder or is designated in writing by the alarm owner or user to respond
to the premises of alarm activation when requested by the Police Department
or Fire Department (e.g., reset system, gain entry and the like).



   SELECTMEN. The Board is designated to hear appeals and assess fines and
penalties.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



§ 91.04  REGISTRATIONS.



   (A)   The alarm owner/user or central station operating company
shall, within 30 days of installation or activation of an alarm system,
complete a registration form provided by the town which shall include
information concerning the alarm device, location, key holder(s) and any
other necessary information.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the alarm owner/user or
central station operating company to notify the town within ten days, in
writing, of changes in registration information.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



§ 91.05  CONNECTION TO TELEPHONE LINES RESTRICTION.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or other business entity shall
connect to a telephone company’s network any automatic dialing device or
other alarm system which causes the number “911” to be automatically
dialed.



   (B)   Automatic dialing devices may only be connected to a seven
digit telephone number (excluding area code) assigned by the town. The
automatic dialing device must be equipped to disconnect after three rings.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  WAIVER OF CHARGES.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a timely appeal for a false alarm charge or
registration violation, the Alarm Appeal Board shall hold a hearing to
consider waiving said charge. The Appeal Board shall mail a notice of the
time and place of said hearing to the alarm owner/user at his or her last
known address at least 15 days before the hearing. On the basis of
information provided by the alarm owner/user and other information introduced
at the hearing, the Board shall affirm the charge or waive the charge.



   (B)   An appeal shall be considered timely if written notice thereof
is filed at the office of the First Selectman within 15 days after notice of
the false alarm charge or registration violation is mailed to the alarm
owner/user.



   (C)   If an alarm owner/user notifies the proper agency that will
receive his or her alarm when activated, Town Communications (739-3149) or
State Police Dispatch (848-6500) at least one hour prior to any service test,
repair or adjustment of an alarm system that may activate a false alarm, no
charge shall be imposed. In the case of fire alarm systems, the alarm
owner/user shall notify the Town Communications Center at 739-3149 as soon as
all service, test, repair or adjustment of the alarm system has been
completed.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



§ 91.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   The town may institute civil proceedings to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



§ 91.08  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the town and its
departments, officers, agents and employees shall be under no obligation
whatsoever to ensure or verify the adequacy, proper installation,
maintenance, use or resetting of any alarm device. The town assumes no
liability for the failure of alarm devices. Each alarm owner/user shall be
deemed to hold and save harmless the town and its departments, officers,
agents and employees from any and all liability arising out of, resulting
from or relating to an alarm owner/user’s installation, operation,
maintenance and use of an alarm system.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In the event there are three false alarm responses to the same
location within the same calendar year, a written warning will be issued to
the alarm owner/user upon the occurrence of the third false alarm, notifying
them of impending charges for further false alarms occurring within a
12-month period.



   (B)   A charge of $25 shall be imposed on the alarm owner/user upon
the occurrence of a fourth false alarm response within a 12-month period.



   (C)   A charge of $50 shall be imposed on the alarm owner/user upon
the occurrence of all subsequent false alarm responses after four within the
12-month period.



   (D)   A charge of $50 shall be imposed on the alarm owner/user for
failure to register an alarm system with the town emergency services.



   (E)   A charge of $50 shall be imposed on the alarm owner/user for
failure to provide notification of any changes in registration to the town
emergency services.



   (F)   A charge of $50 shall be imposed on the alarm owner/user for
the failure of a key holder to timely respond to the premises of the alarm
when requested by the Police Department or Fire Department.



   (G)   A charge of $50 shall be imposed on the alarm owner/user upon
the occurrence of any automatic dialing violation as set forth in § 91.05.



   (H)   A charge of $25 shall be imposed on the alarm owner/user for
the failure of an alarm owner/user to notify the Emergency Services
Communication Center of an alarm system service test, repair or adjustment of
an alarm system which results in a false alarm response.



   (I)   Charges for violations will be payable to the town and
collected by the Police Department or the First Selectman’s designee and
deposited into the General Fund.



(Ord. effective 2-18-2003)



CHAPTER 92:  MASS GATHERINGS



Section



   92.01   License required



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Licenses



   92.04   Application



   92.05   Processing of application



   92.06   Revocation of license



   92.07   Appeals



   92.08   Enforcement



   92.09   Exclusions



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   In order to preserve the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of
the town by requiring at assemblies adequate water facilities, sanitary
facilities, illumination and other safety precautions so as to minimize the
risk of injury or illness to any person and in order to promote the safe,
orderly and uninterrupted passage of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, a
license shall be required before an actual or reasonably anticipated assembly
of over 200 people shall be allowed in the town.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASSEMBLY. A company of persons gathered together at any location at any
single time for any purpose.



   PERSONS. Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, company,
association, society or group.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.03  LICENSES.



   (A)   No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise,
act as entrepreneur, organize, manage or sell or give tickets to an actual or
reasonably anticipated assembly of over 200 people, whether on public or
private property, unless a license to hold the assembly has first been issued
by the First Selectman. A license to hold an assembly issued to one person
shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity in connection with
the holding of the licensed assembly.



   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each assembly and
each location in which such people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated
to assemble. No license shall be issued for an assembly for more than three
days, but the First Selectman may extend the permit if it appears that the
requirements of this chapter have been complied with and that a new permit
would be granted if applied for. No extension shall be for more than three
days, but more than one extension may be granted.



   (C)   A license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number
of people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to nor
permit to assemble at the licensed location more than that number of people.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.04  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a license to hold such an actual or
anticipated assembly shall be made in writing to the First Selectman at least
five days in advance of such assembly.



   (B)   The application shall contain a statement made upon oath or
affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct to the
best of the knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed by the individual
making application in the case of an individual or by a duly authorized
officer or agent in the case of a corporation, partnership, unincorporated
association, group or society. Such authorization of the officer or agent
shall be in writing.



   (C)   The application shall contain and disclose:



      (1)   The name, evidence of majority, residence and mailing
address of all persons required to sign the application by division (B) above;



      (2)   The address and legal description of all property upon
which the assembly is to be held, together with the name, residence and
mailing address of the record owner or owners of all such property;



      (3)   Proof of ownership of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held and a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the
record owner or owners of all such property that the applicant has permission
to use such property for such an assembly;



      (4)   The nature or purpose of the assembly;



      (5)   The total number of days or hours during which the
assembly is to last;



      (6)   The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall
permit to assemble at any time, provided the maximum number shall not exceed
the maximum number which can reasonably assemble at the location of the
assembly in consideration of the nature of the assembly and provided, where
the assembly is to continue overnight, the maximum number shall not exceed
the maximum number which is allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the
location of the assembly by the zoning regulations of the town;



      (7)   The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any;



      (8)   The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number
of people permitted to assemble;



      (9)   The plans for supplying potable water meeting all
federal and state requirements for purity, including the source, amount
available and location of outlets. The potable water shall be sufficient to
provide drinking water for the maximum number of people to be assembled at
the rate of at least one gallon per person per day;



      (10)   The plans for supplying toilet and lavatory facilities,
including the source, number, location and type. The plans shall provide for
separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state and local
specifications, conveniently located throughout the grounds, sufficient to
provide facilities for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the
rate of at least one toilet for every 200 females and at least one toilet for
every 300 males, together with an efficient, sanitary means of disposing of
waste matter deposited, which is in compliance with all state and local laws
and regulation;



      (11)   The plans for holding, collecting and disposing of
solid waste material. The plans shall provide for a sanitary method of
disposing of solid waste, in compliance with state and local laws and
regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste production of the
maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least two and
one-half pounds of solid waste per person per day, together with a plan for
collecting all such waste at least once each day of the assembly, sufficient
personnel to perform the task and sufficient trash cans with tight-fitting
lids;



      (12)   If the assembly is to continue during the hours of
darkness, the plans to illuminate the location of the assembly, including the
source and amount of power and the location of lamps. The plans shall provide
for illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly at the
rate of at least five foot candles, but not to shine directly on properties
adjacent to the boundaries of the location of the assembly;



      (13)   The plans for parking vehicles, including size and
location of lots, points of highway access and interior roads, including
routes between highway access and parking lots. The plans shall provide for a
parking area inside of the assembly grounds or off street within a reasonable
distance from the assembly grounds sufficient to provide parking space for
the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one
parking space for every four persons;



      (14)   If the assembly is to continue overnight, the plans for
camping facilities including facilities available and their location. The
plans shall provide for camping facilities, if any, in compliance with all
state and local requirements, sufficient to provide camping accommodations
for the maximum number of people to be assembled;



      (15)   The plans for security, including the number of guards,
their deployment, and their names, addresses, credentials and hours of
availability. Such guards shall be either regularly employed, duly sworn,
off-duty constables or private guards. The plans shall provide for sufficient
guards to provide adequate security for the maximum number of people to be
assembled, giving consideration to the nature of the assembly;



      (16)   The plans for fire protection, including the number,
type and location of all protective devices including alarms and
extinguishers, and the number of emergency fire personnel available. The
plans shall provide for sufficient protective devices, fire lanes and escapes
to meet all state and local standards for the location of the assembly and
for sufficient emergency personnel to operate efficiently the required
equipment;



      (17)   The plans for sound control and sound amplification, if
any, including the number, location and power of amplifiers and speakers. The
plans shall provide for all reasonably necessary precautions to ensure that
the sound of the assembly will not carry beyond the boundaries of the
location of the assembly; and



      (18)   The plans for food concessions and concessioners who
will be allowed to operate the grounds including the names and addresses of
all concessioners and their license or permit numbers.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.05  PROCESSING OF APPLICATION.



   The completed application for a license shall be processed within three
days of its receipt and shall be issued if there is compliance with all
conditions.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the First Selectman at any time if any of the conditions necessary for the
issuing of the license are not complied with, or if any condition previously
met ceases to be complied with.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.07  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a license
under this chapter may appeal to the Board of Selectmen, provided such appeal
is taken within 15 days from such denial or revocation. The Board of
Selectmen shall consider and decide such appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after filing of the appeal provided that such appeal has
been presented to the Board least 48 hours before such regularly scheduled
meeting. In the event such appeal has not been filed at least 48 hours before
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board, such appeal shall be
considered and decided at the second regularly scheduled meeting following
the filing of said appeal. In no event shall more than 16 days elapse between
the filing of such appeal and the rendering of a decision by the Board. If no
regular meeting is scheduled within said 16-day period, the Board of
Selectmen shall hold a special meeting within said 16 days to consider and
decide such appeal.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Selectmen
on any appeal regarding the denial or revocation of a license under this
chapter may appeal to the Superior Court provided such appeal is taken within
15 days from the rendering of a decision by the Board of Selectmen.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by injunction
in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   The holding of an assembly in violation of any provision or
condition contained in this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may
be abated as such.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.09  EXCLUSIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the following assemblies:



   (A)   Religious services;



   (B)   Political meetings and demonstrations;



   (C)   Funerals;



   (D)   Weddings;



   (E)   Assemblies sponsored or authorized by any town agency;



   (F)   Athletic events;



   (G)   Assemblies conducted within any permanent structure; and



   (H)   Assemblies required to be licensed by other provisions of the
Connecticut General Statutes or town ordinances.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.
Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1982)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 286



CHAPTER 93:  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR



Section



   93.01   Consumption restricted



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  CONSUMPTION RESTRICTED.



   No person shall consume alcoholic liquor, as defined in the Connecticut
General Statutes, in any of the following areas in the town, either inside a
motor vehicle or otherwise:



   (A)   In any part of the town designated as a commercial district by
the Town Zoning Commission, except as follows:



      (1)   In accordance with the provisions of a permit granted
therefor by the Connecticut Liquor Control Commission; and



      (2)   On any residential property.



   (B)   On any property owned by the town, except that:



      (1)   At McCook Point Park and Beach, alcoholic liquor may be
consumed in accordance with the ordinance entitled “Ordinance Concerning
Areas Under Jurisdiction of Parks and Recreation Commission” (as codified
in § 96.15 of this code of ordinances);



      (2)   The Board of Selectmen may grant a special permit for
the consumption of alcoholic liquor to any nonprofit organization on the
following terms and conditions:



         (a)   Such organization shall demonstrate that there
will be no disorderly assembly, disturbing noise, traffic control problem or
interference with the peace and safety of the inhabitants of the town;



         (b)   Such organization may be required to show evidence
of financial responsibility and insurance, and to post a bond sufficient to
indemnify the town for any expenses resulting from the use of such permit;



         (c)   The grant of such permit shall be subject to
compliance with the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes relating
to alcoholic liquor; and



         (d)   Such permit may be revoked at any time when, in
the opinion of the Board of Selectmen or its agent, the provisions of this
chapter have been violated.



(Ord. passed 8-26-1975; Ord. passed 11-19-1998)  Penalty, see § 93.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 139; TM Volume 21, page 605 Amended



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $100.



(Ord. passed 8-26-1975; Ord. passed 11-19-1998)



CHAPTER 94:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   94.01   Fair Housing Officer



   94.02   Grievance procedure



§ 94.01  FAIR HOUSING OFFICER.



   A Fair Housing Officer shall be appointed by the First Selectman. Said
Officer shall have the responsibility and authority to administer and
implement the fair housing plan and shall perform duties which include the
following:



   (A)   Keep current on all pertinent state and federal legislation
relating to fair housing;



   (B)   Disseminate information concerning the town’s commitment to
fair housing to community groups, local real estate brokers, local lending
institutions, landlords, developers, town officials and the general public;



   (C)   Participating in educational workshops or seminars concerning
the ramification of fair housing legislation and the town’s commitment to
fair housing;



   (D)   Develop and distribute the forms needed to properly file a
fair housing grievance (see § 94.02);



   (E)   Assist persons who feel they have been discriminated against,
by trying to effect voluntary compliance on the part of the landlord or
seller or by assisting them in filing a complaint with the proper state and
federal agencies (see § 94.02);



   (F)   Attend meetings of the Board of Selectmen and keep the Board
informed of all grievances and other related fair housing activities; and



   (G)   Maintain a separate “fair housing” file which documents
all actions taken to affirmatively further fair housing opportunities in the
town. Said file shall be open for inspection to the public within the bounds
of confidentiality guaranteed by law.



(Ord. effective 7-10-1999)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, Page 666



§ 94.02  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person who feels that he or she has been discriminated
against in an attempt to secure housing within the town may file a complaint
with the Fair Housing Officer of the town at the Town Hall. To facilitate and
standardize the complaint filing procedure, forms provided by the Department
of Housing and Urban Development shall be used and additional forms or
background information will be developed as required.



   (B)   The Fair Housing Officer shall review the complaint, and if
the Fair Housing Officer cannot effect voluntary compliance with the law on
the local level, the complaint shall be referred to the Department of Housing
and Urban Development and the State Commission on Human Rights and
Opportunities. The Fair Housing Officer shall be responsible for keeping
track of all referrals and providing whatever assistance is needed by the
agencies involved.



   (C)   All complaints and follow-ups shall be recorded and kept in
the fair housing file (see § 94.01(G)).



(Ord. effective 7-10-1999)



CHAPTER 95:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Establishment of Fire Zones




   95.01   Definition



   95.02   Establishment



   95.03   Appeal from establishment



   95.04   Marking required



   95.05   Parking prohibited



   95.06   Towing authorized



   95.07   Citation; payment in lieu of fine




Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances and Their Disposal




   95.20   Definitions



   95.21   Enforcement



   95.22   Unlawful discharge



   95.23   Immediate action required



   95.24   Registration



   95.25   Permit required



   95.26   Compliance



   95.27   Testing of tanks



   95.28   Replacement of tanks



   95.29   Appeals



   95.30   Provisions not applicable for a tank capacity of not more
than 1,000 gallons



   95.31   Severability



 



   95.99   Penalty



ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE ZONES



§ 95.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE ZONE. A designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to
permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public
highway to all necessary areas or portions of any private or public property
as hereinafter set forth.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



§ 95.02  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Whenever the Fire Marshal shall determine that the reasonable safety of
persons occupying or using any premises, public or private, having a capacity
of at least 15 persons requires the establishment of a fire zone for orderly
access of fire and other emergency equipment, he or she shall establish such
fire zone by written order and cause to be made public announcement of such
fire zone establishment. He or she shall cause a copy of such order to be
delivered to the owner or owners, or agents thereof, of any private land on
which such fire zone is established and file a copy of such order with the
First Selectman.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



§ 95.03  APPEAL FROM ESTABLISHMENT.



   Any person aggrieved by such order may file with the Board of Selectmen
within 30 days after date of such order written notice of appeal, setting
forth therein reasons of aggrievement. After hearing, the Board of Selectmen
may affirm, modify or vacate such order.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



§ 95.04  MARKING REQUIRED.



   Upon establishment of a fire zone, the Board of Selectmen shall cause
to be erected or installed, adequate signs, marking and other devices to
delineate said fire zone.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



§ 95.05  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park, or permit to stand, a motor vehicle in a fire
zone which has been established in accordance with this subchapter, except
when actually picking up or discharging passengers. The registered owner of a
motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the operator of such vehicle.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



§ 95.06  TOWING AUTHORIZED.



   Any motor vehicle found standing in a fire zone which has been
established in accordance with this subchapter may be towed, upon direction
of any constable or state police officer, to any public or private parking
facility, and all expense of such towing and of any subsequent storage shall
be borne by the registered owner of such vehicle.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



§ 95.07  CITATION; PAYMENT IN LIEU OF FINE.



   Whenever a vehicle is found standing in violation of this subchapter,
any constable or state police officer shall serve upon the owner or operator
of such vehicle or place upon such vehicle a notice directing the owner or
operator thereof to appear at the Police Department prior to a time specified
in said notice. If any person receiving said notice shall appear as directed,
and shall pay an amount of $5 as specified in said notice, such payment shall
bar a prosecution for violation of the subchapter.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES AND THEIR DISPOSAL



§ 95.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FAILURE. Any leak, split, blockage, malfunction, improper installation
or similar occurrence which can or does result in a discharge of a hazardous
substance out of a liquid storage system.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. All liquid, hydrocarbon products, including, but
not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil and diesel oil, and any other toxic and
corrosive chemicals, industrial waste, radioactive materials or any substance
injurious to the environment, the aquifer or waterways. This also includes
solid materials which if exposed to water will partially dissolve, forming a
hazardous liquid and any substance that is defined as hazardous by the
federal government or the State of Connecticut.



   IMPERMEABLE MATERIAL. A layer of natural and/or human-made material of
sufficient thickness, density and composition as to prevent the discharge
into the underlying ground water of any hazardous substances for a period of
at least as long as the maximum anticipated time during which the hazardous
substances will be in contact with the material.



   LIQUID STORAGE SYSTEM. Any combination of tanks, barrels, transmission
pipes, vents and pipe fittings which are used or designed to be used for the
storage and/or transmission of hazardous substances, except a sewage
treatment system approved by the Town Director of Health or his or her agent,
or by the State Department of Health.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, or
any and all combinations of individuals acting in concert as well as
individuals.



   WATERWAY. All surface waters, fresh and salt waters, within the Town of
East Lyme.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.21  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This law shall be enforced by the Building Official who is
hereby authorized to make inspections of all types of liquid storage systems
throughout the town, to solicit and maintain inventory of such systems and to
ensure that such systems conform with the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Board of Selectmen may adopt rules and regulations to
enforce and carry out the intent of this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.22  UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge hazardous substances upon
the surface or into the subsurface land, aquifer or waterway anywhere in the
town by whatever method such discharge may occur.



   (B)   Unlawful discharge includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Failure of underground liquid storage tanks, pipes or
connections;



      (2)   Failure of above-ground liquid storage systems;



      (3)   Disposal in landfills, drainage systems, any waterways
or on the land surface;



      (4)   Spills which occur during transport on public or private
property; and



      (5)   Disposal or storage of hazardous substances including,
but not limited to, contaminated material, soil, sand or gravel anywhere in
the town.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.23  IMMEDIATE ACTION REQUIRED.



   Should the discharge of hazardous substances from any storage system
occur as described in this subchapter, the responsible person, in addition to
any other penalty as authorized in this subchapter will be required to take
immediate action to reclaim the discharged material, restore the environment
to its original state and repair any physical damage caused by the spill,
explosion or clean-up operations.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.24  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Any person owning a liquid storage system must register with
the Building Official by providing a site plan of the property and a complete
description of the system, including the location, number, size, composition,
type of liquid being stored and date of original installation of tanks and
transmission pipes. Such registry must be done within one year from the
effective date of this subchapter on forms prescribed by the Building
Official.



   (B)   Liquid storage systems installed in a building basement in
accordance with existing codes are exempted from this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.25  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to install, or replace, any liquid
storage system without first securing a permit for the same and paying a
permit fee as established by the Board of Selectmen. The permit request shall
be prepared on forms prescribed by the Building Official and shall include
any information required by him or her including the manufacturer’s
installation instructions.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to repair any leak in a liquid storage
system without notifying the Building Official and the Fire Marshal within 24
hours of discovering the leak. No permit or notification is required for
mechanical repairs.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.26  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   All storage systems which are to be constructed or installed
after the effective date of this subchapter shall comply with the following
construction, installation and testing specifications in addition to any
requirements of state and federal law.



      (1)   All underground liquid storage systems of more than
1,000-gallon capacity shall be of vaulted construction, equipped with a
failure detection system and protected both internally and externally from
corrosion and structural failure. Non-corrosive tanks and transmission pipes
listed by Underwriters’ Laboratories may be used in lieu of vaulted
construction.



      (2)   Installation must be done strictly in accordance with
manufacturer’s specifications and in accordance with installation
procedures approved by the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal.
Construction may proceed from stage to stage only upon approval by the
inspecting official.



      (3)   The entire system shall be tested before it is covered
as required by the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal. If a failure is
detected, work may not proceed until the failure is repaired and the system
is retested and no additional failures are found.



   (B)   (1)   Above ground liquid storage systems above
1,000-gallon capacity must be placed within drainage collection areas sized
and designed to capture and hold the entire contents of the largest tank of
the storage system and to facilitate the recovery of any spillage, in the
event of failure. Such drainage areas shall be constructed of impermeable
material.



      (2)   Above ground storage of solid material which can produce
a hazardous liquid when it comes into contact with water, must also be stored
within a drainage area designed to collect the rain run-off and to recover
the dissolved material. Such material may be permanently roofed in lieu of a
drainage collection system, but the material must still be stored on a solid
surface impermeable to any liquid produced from the material.



      (3)   Above ground systems and above ground parts of
underground systems must be reasonably protected from damage by motor
vehicles, trucks and vandalism.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.27  TESTING OF TANKS.



   (A)   Every existing underground liquid storage system over 1,000
gallons which does not conform on the effective date of this subchapter must
be tested for failure, using the final test in the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) #329 or other test of equivalent or superior accuracy as
approved by the official and in accordance with the following schedule:



 

Age of System at Registration (In Years)
 
Year to Be Tested



1—9

 

Every 4 years




10—19

 

Every 3 years




20 or more

 

Every 2 years




 



   (B)   Such testing must be performed by a qualified professional
testing service doing business in the state and the test results must be
presented to the Building Official in a signed and notarized report before
December 31 of the year indicated in the schedule.



      (1)   Fiberglass tanks shall be tested ten years after
registration and vaulted tank tests are to be waived at the discretion of the
Building Official.



      (2)   If failure is detected, that part of the system which
failed must be pumped out immediately and cannot be reused until the system
is repaired or replaced as provided for in this subchapter. Recovery of the
hazardous substance shall proceed in accordance with the law.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.28  REPLACEMENT OF TANKS.



   Any replacement of underground liquid storage systems in whole or in
part as directed by the Building Official must conform with specifications
for new construction.



   (A)   Any underground liquid storage system which fails, but is less
than ten years old may be repaired at the direction of the Building Official
and in accordance with specifications approved by the Building Official. Any
system which fails and which is ten years old or more, must be replaced in
accordance with this subchapter.



   (B)   Any underground liquid storage system which has not been or
intended to be in continual use for a period of one year shall be reported
within 60 days by the owner to the Building Official.



   (C)   Any underground liquid storage system which is not intended to
be in service shall comply with § 29-62-88 of the Regulations of Connecticut
State Agencies covering the storage, use and transportation of flammable
liquids as follows:



      (1)   Tanks rendered “temporarily out of service”.



         (a)   All flammable liquid that can be pumped out with
the service pump shall be removed;



         (b)   The fill line, gauge hatch and pump suction shall
be capped and secured against tampering; and



         (c)   The vent line shall be left open.



      (2)   Abandoning underground tanks in place.



         (a)   All flammable liquid shall be removed from the
tank and from all connecting lines;



         (b)   The suction, inlet gauge and vent lines shall be
disconnected;



         (c)   The tank shall be flooded with water;



         (d)   The tank and any remaining pipe stubs shall be
filled with an inert solid material; and



         (e)   All connecting lines below ground level shall be
capped or plugged.



      (3)   Removal of underground tanks.



         (a)   All flammable liquid shall be removed from the
tank and from connecting lines;



         (b)   The suction, inlet, gauge and vent lines shall be
disconnected;



         (c)   The tanks shall be flushed with water and rendered
gas free as indicated by combustible gas indicator;



         (d)   Inlets and outlets shall be capped or plugged and
kept capped or plugged during the transportation and storage of the tank; and



         (e)   A tank which is to be disposed of as junk shall be
retested for explosive vapors and rendered gas free. After the tank is junked
and before it is released to a junk dealer, a sufficient number of holes or
openings shall be made in it to render it unfit for further use.



   (D)   New underground liquid storage tanks not designated flammable
but hazardous will be treated in the same manner as divisions (A), (B) and
(C) above.



   (E)   Conformation with division (D) above shall be performed within
60 days after notification of the Building Official.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.29  APPEALS.



   Anyone who wishes to appeal directives of the Building Official where
such directive was based on his or her judgment requiring the replacement of
a system, must file a written request for a hearing with the Board of
Selectmen within ten days of receipt of the directive. Failure to do so will
be considered as an agreement to perform the directed work.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.30  PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE FOR A TANK CAPACITY OF NOT MORE THAN
1,000 GALLONS.



   The provisions of §§ 95.24, 95.25, 95.26 and 95.27 shall not apply to
any fuel oil storage tank with a capacity of not more than 1,000 gallons.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.31  SEVERABILITY.



   Each section and every part of each section of this subchapter is
hereby declared independent of every other section or part hereof and the
finding or holding of any section or part hereto to be void or ineffective
for any cause shall not be deemed to affect any other section or part thereof.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 117



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating § 95.05 shall be fined not more than
$100.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any applicable
provision of §§ 95.20 through 95.31 or failing to comply with a lawful
order of the Building Official under §§ 95.20 through 95.31, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation occurs or
continues. In addition, the Building Official may declare the liquid storage
system a public nuisance or an immediate hazard and order immediate
corrective action; upon failure to take such action immediately, using town
employees and equipment or through independent contractors, and shall charge
all the costs incurred to the person whose property contains the nuisance or
hazard, and to any person whose act or omission was in violation of §§
95.20 through 95.31, who shall be jointly and severally liable.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 8-11-1981)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 115



   TM Volume 14, page 117



CHAPTER 96:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




Parks and Recreation Commission




   96.01   Duties and responsibilities




Areas Under Jurisdiction of Parks and Recreation Commission




   96.15   Regulations



 



   96.99   Penalty



PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 96.01  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The responsibility for the management, control and development
of all recreational and park facilities and programs of the town, except
those under the exclusive control of the Board of Education, and for
expenditures made in connection therewith, is hereby vested in the Parks and
Recreation Commission.



   (B)   The Parks and Recreation Commission is authorized to enter
into agreements with the Board of Education for the use of facilities under
the exclusive control of the Board of Education.



   (C)   The Parks and Recreation Commission is authorized to set
reasonable fees for the use of such facilities and participation in such
programs.



   (D)   The Parks and Recreation Commission is authorized to hire such
employees as shall be necessary for the performance of its duties.



   (E)   All ordinances relating to the McCook Point Park Commission,
also known as the Town Park Commission and the Veterans Memorial Park
Committee, are hereby rescinded.



(Ord. passed 6-2-1966)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 9, page 226



AREAS UNDER JURISDICTION OF PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 96.15  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   This section shall apply to McCook Point Park and Beach,
Veterans Memorial Park, Boardwalk, Cini Park, Samuel Peretz areas and all
other areas within the town designated as under the control of the Parks and
Recreation Commission by vote of the Board of Selectmen.



   (B)   No person shall enter any area which is close to the public as
plainly designated by signs.



   (C)   No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except
either in fireplaces provided for that purpose, or in portable fireplaces in
areas plainly designated for that use.



   (D)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
alcoholic beverages in areas where it is prohibited as plainly designated by
signs.



   (E)   No person shall park any motor vehicle except in areas plainly
designated by sign or other marking as parking areas.



   (F)   No person shall discard or abandon any refuse, rubbish or
garbage except in containers provided for that purpose.



   (G)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
glass bottle or crockery in areas where it is prohibited as plainly
designated by sign.



   (H)   No person shall bring any dog (other than certified service
dogs) on to the Niantic Bay Boardwalk.



   (I)   No person shall bring any dog (other than certified service
dogs) onto any town-owned beach and McCook Point Park from Memorial Day to
Labor Day.



(Ord. effective 6-19-1971; Ord. passed 12-21-2005; Ord. passed 4-20-2017) 
Penalty, see § 95.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 10, page 369, Amended



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of § 96.15 shall
be fined not more than $50.



(Ord. effective 6-19-1971; Ord. passed 12-21-2005; Ord. passed 4-20-2017)



CHAPTER 97:  STREETS



Section



   97.01   Regulating excavations, cuts, fill and change of grade in
public highways



   97.02   Changes in grade, excavating, paving and filling



   97.03   Designation of scenic roads



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  REGULATING EXCAVATIONS, CUTS, FILL AND CHANGE OF GRADE IN PUBLIC
HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   No person shall excavate in, fill, cut or change the grade of
or cause any excavation, fill, cut or change of grade to be made of any
highway or street maintained by the town without first having obtained a
permit so to do from the Selectmen of the town.



   (B)   No permit to excavate, fill, cut or change the grade of any
such highway or street shall be granted to any person until he or she shall
have filed with the Selectmen a surety bond in an amount equal to the cost,
as estimated by the Selectmen, of the restoration of any such highway or
street to as good a condition as it was before such excavation, fill, cut or
change of grade, with the same surface material and that he or she will
comply with the plan of the work to be done, as filed with and approved by
the Selectmen, and also that such person shall have given the Selectmen
satisfactory evidence of insurance protecting both the town and the permittee
against personal injuries and property damage in an amount to be determined
by the Selectmen depending upon the location, amount of traffic, estimated
length of time the work will require, type of material to be excavated or cut
and any other conditions which might affect the risk involved.



   (C)   As used herein highway or street shall include any portion of
the entire width of the right-of-way, including the traveled portion, the
shoulders of any unimproved or undeveloped portion of the highway or street.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to work being done by or on
behalf of the town.



(Ord. passed 1-28-1965)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 9, page 94



§ 97.02  CHANGES IN GRADE, EXCAVATING, PAVING AND FILLING.



   (A)   No person shall change the grade of any land, or excavate,
pave or fill any land in such a manner as to cause surface water to drain
from said land to the highway in such amounts or in such locations as to
interfere with public travel, damage the highway, collect on the highway or
drain from the highway on to land of any other person.



   (B)   No person shall change the grade of any land or excavate, pave
or fill any land in such a manner as to cause surface water to drain from
said land to the highway, without first obtaining a permit from the First
Selectman. No such permit shall be granted until and unless the First
Selectman shall determine that the work proposed will not violate division
(A) above.



   (C)   Applications for such permits shall be made in such manner and
form as shall be determined by the First Selectman. Where in his or her
opinion the interests of the town make it advisable, the First Selectman may
require an engineering plan and profile at the expense of the applicant, and
may require the posting of a surety bond in an amount sufficient to protect
the town.



   (D)   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the action of the First
Selectman hereunder may appeal therefrom to the Board of Selectmen within 30
days from the date of the action appealed from. The appeal shall be made in
such manner and form as shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen, which
shall, within 30 days from the date of the appeal, hold a public hearing
thereon, first giving such notice as it shall consider sufficient to all
interested parties. The Board of Selectmen may approve, disapprove or modify
the action appealed from or take such other action as it shall consider
appropriate to the purposes of this section.



   (E)   The Board of Selectmen may, from time to time, set fees for
such permits.



(Ord. passed 5-2-1970)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 10, page 255



§ 97.03  DESIGNATION OF SCENIC ROADS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-149a, as
amended, the Planning Commission of the town (the “Commission”) may
designate town highways or portions thereof as scenic roads. No state highway
or portion thereof and no private highway or portion thereof may be
designated as a scenic road under this section.



   (B)   No highway or portion of a highway may be designated as a
scenic road unless the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the
highway or portion of the highway agree to the designation by filing a
written statement of approval with the Town Clerk.



   (C)   Any owner of land located within the town may file an
application with the Commission requesting that a town highway or portion
thereof be designated as a scenic road. Alternatively, the Commission by
motion may initiate the procedures to designate a town highway or portion
thereof as a scenic road.



   (D)   Property owners seeking scenic road designation shall submit
an application to the Commission. The application shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;



      (2)   The name of the town highway and the total length (in
feet) of the portion to be designated as a scenic road;



      (3)   A brief description of the town highway and those
characteristics of the town highway or portion thereof which meet the
criteria specified in division (H) below; and



      (4)   The names, addresses and the amount of frontage (in
feet) of all owners of lots abutting the town highway or any portion thereof
proposed for designation as a scenic road.



   (E)   Simultaneously with the filing of an application for the
designation of a scenic road with the Commission, the applicant, or the
Commission if it initiates the procedures to designate a town highway as a
scenic road, shall file with the Town Clerk written statement(s) of approval
as required in division (B) above. The statements of approval shall contain
the name, mailing address, street address, total distance of applicable lot
frontage in feet and the signature of owner(s) of a majority of the lot
frontage abutting the portion of the town highway proposed for such
designation.



   (F)   Upon receipt of the written statement(s) of approval the Town
Clerk shall forward certified copies thereof to the Assessor. The Assessor
shall ascertain the ownership and the total lot frontage of the owners
signing the statement(s), and shall determine whether said total lot frontage
constitutes a majority of lot frontage abutting the highway or portion of the
highway to be designated as a scenic road. The Assessor shall report such
findings to the Commission within 14 days from the date that the Assessor
receives the statement(s) from the Town Clerk.



   (G)   (1)   Upon receipt of a report from the Assessor that the
owners of a majority of the lot frontage abutting the highway or portion of
the highway to be designated as a scenic road have signed statements of
approval as required by division (B) above, the Commission shall conduct a
public hearing to consider an application for a designation of a scenic road.
The public hearing shall commence within 65 days after the Commission’s
receipt of the Assessor’s report, and shall be completed within 35 days
after it commences. The Commission shall render a decision within 65 days
after the completion of such public hearing. The applicant, or the Commission
if it initiates the scenic road designation procedures, may consent to one or
more extensions of any period specified in this section, provided the total
extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days, or may
withdraw such application.



      (2)   The Commission shall prepare a notice of the public
hearing, post a copy of the notice in the office of the Town Clerk for public
viewing and shall publish the notice in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the town at least twice, at intervals of not less than two
days, the first not more than 15 days or less than ten days and the last not
less than two days before the date set for the hearing. The applicant, or the
Commission when it initiates the scenic road designation procedure, shall
mail copies of the notice by way of a certificate of mailing to the owners of
all of the property having frontage abutting the portion of the town highway
proposed for designation as a scenic road. Such mailing shall be made no
later than ten days before the date of the hearing inclusive of the date of
mailing but not the date of the hearing. The applicant, or the Commission if
it initiates the scenic road designation procedure, shall submit proof of
such mailing to the Commission at or before the commencement of the public
hearing.



   (H)   (1)   The Commission may approve the application as
submitted or may designate a lesser portion of the highway as a scenic road,
provided that prior to designating a town highway or any portion of a highway
as a scenic road, the Commission shall first find that the owners of a
majority of the lot frontage abutting the highway or portion of the highway
to be designated as a scenic road have signed statements of approval as
required by division (B) above. The Commission shall also find the highway or
proposed portion thereof is free of intensive commercial development and free
of intensive vehicular traffic. In addition, the Commission must find that
the town highway or portion thereof meets at least one of the following
criteria:



         (a)   It offers scenic views;



         (b)   It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls;



         (c)   It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain;



         (d)   It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams,
lakes or ponds;



         (e)   The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in
width; and



         (f)   It is unpaved.



      (2)   If the Commission approves the designation of a scenic
road or a lesser portion thereof, it shall state the scenic characteristics
for which the Commission determines protection is warranted.



      (3)   If the Commission fails to act on the application within
the time frames set forth in this section, the application shall be deemed to
be denied in its entirety.



   (I)   The Commission shall publish a notice of its decision
designating a scenic road in a newspaper having a general circulation within
the town within 15 days after the date of the decision. The notice shall
specify the highway or portion thereof, which the Commission designates as a
scenic road. If the Commission approves the application, it shall notify the
First Selectman, the Zoning Commission, the Town Highway Superintendent,
Director of Public Works and the Town Tree Warden of the designation within
15 days after the date of the decision, specifying the scenic characteristics
for which the Commission determines protection is warranted. The town shall
create and maintain a map that depicts the name, location and distance (in
feet) of any town highway designated as a scenic road. Any failure to provide
such notice to such town officials or to create or maintain such map shall
not affect the validity of the designation.



   (J)   Any person aggrieved by a designation of a town highway or
portion thereof as a scenic road pursuant to this section, may appeal such
designation in the same manner and utilizing the same standards of review
provided for appeals from the decisions of the Commission under Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 8-8.



   (K)   (1)   A scenic road designation shall not affect the
town’s obligation to maintain and repair such road by such methods and in
such a manner as may be necessary to keep the road in a safe and passable
condition at all times. Such work shall as nearly as practicable preserve the
scenic characteristics of the highway for which the Commission determines
protection is warranted. Such work may be performed by or on behalf of the
town without prior approval of the Commission.



      (2)   Any tree trimming, excavating or maintenance work
performed in a designated scenic road by or on behalf of public service
companies, as more particularly described in Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 16-229,
16-234 and 16-235, may be performed without prior approval of the Commission.



   (L)   (1)   No road which has been designated as a scenic road
shall be altered or improved, including, but not limited to, widening of the
right-of-way or the travel portion of the road, changes of grade or roadway
surface treatment, removal of stone bridges, straightening, removal of stone
walls, or removal of mature trees, except for good cause determined by the
Commission. The Commission may hold a public hearing on any such proposed
alterations or improvements if it deems that the public interest might be
best served by doing so.



      (2)   This division (L) is in addition to, and not in lieu of,
the requirements for such work as more particularly set forth in the
following ordinances:



         (a)   “Ordinance Regulating Excavations, Cuts, Fill
and Change of Grade in Public Highways”, adopted January 28, 1965, as
codified in § 97.01 of this code of ordinances;



         (b)   “Ordinance Concerning Change in Grade,
Excavating, Paving and Filling”, adopted May 2, 1970, as codified in §
97.02 of this code of ordinances; and



         (c)   “Ordinance Concerning Damage to Highways”,
adopted September 21, 1975, as codified in § 150.070 of this code of
ordinances.



   (M)   A scenic road designation may be rescinded by the Commission,
using the same procedures provided herein for designation of a scenic road
and having written concurrence of the owners of a majority of lot frontage
abutting the highway or portion of the highway.



(Ord. passed 5-30-2009; Ord. effective 7-1-2011)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates § 97.01 may be fined not more than
$100 a day for each day that a violation shall exist.



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of § 97.02 shall be fined
not more than $100 for each day that the violation shall continue.



(Ord. passed 1-28-1965; Ord. passed 5-2-1970)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 9, page 94; TM Volume 10, page 255



CHAPTER 98:  ANIMALS



Section



   98.01   Removal of animal feces from town property



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  REMOVAL OF ANIMAL FECES FROM TOWN PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any person, whose dog or other domesticated animal defecates
on town-owned property or a public highway within the town, shall dispose of
the animal feces left by that animal in a proper receptacle.



   (B)   Any person who walks or otherwise brings a dog or other
domesticated animal onto town-owned property or onto a public highway within
the town, must be prepared to dispose of said animal’s feces by whatever
means necessary, which may include carrying plastic bags, a pooper scooper or
other necessary tools to remove said waste.



   (C)   The provision of this section shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind person.



(Ord. effective 10-5-1995)  Penalty, see § 98.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone who shall violate § 98.01 shall be fined the sum of not more
than $50 for each violation.



(Ord. effective 10-5-1995)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 21, page 99



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR



      112.   PEDDLING



      113.   SOLICITATION OF CHARITABLE FUNDS



      114.   BAZAARS AND RAFFLES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




Notice of Intent to Establish a Trade,
Manufacture, Business or Profession




   110.01   Introduction



   110.02   Notification



   110.03   Information required



   110.04   Town action



 



   110.99   Penalty



NOTICE OF INTENT TO ESTABLISH A TRADE, MANUFACTURE, BUSINESS
OR PROFESSION



§ 110.01  INTRODUCTION.



   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 7-194 and 7-148(c)(7)(H)(ii), and in
order to facilitate the town’s ability to regulate and prohibit the
carrying on within the municipality of any trade, manufacture, business or
profession which is or may be so carried on as to prejudice the public
health, or lead to fraud or cheating, or be dangerous to or constitute an
unreasonable annoyance to, those living or owning property in the town, and
in order to furnish notice to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal,
Tax Assessor and Director of Health of the establishment of new businesses,
this chapter is hereby enacted.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1986)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 380



§ 110.02  NOTIFICATION.



   Every person intending to establish any trade, manufacture, business or
profession within the town must notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer of such
intent not less then ten calendar days prior to commencing operations. Such
notification will not be considered given unless and until it is received by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1986)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 380



§ 110.03  INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   The notice of intent shall identify the owner of the business, the
location of the business premises by street address, the nature of the
business, the anticipated hours of its operation and such other information
as may be appropriate to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer may provide a form for such notice.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1986)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 380



§ 110.04  TOWN ACTION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the required notice, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall give notice of such information to the Fire Marshal, Tax
Assessor, Director of Health and, if requested, to any other town official.



   (B)   This chapter shall not be construed to confer upon the Zoning
Enforcement Officer any authority or discretion to deny any person the right
to conduct any business, trade, profession or manufacturing operation within
the town which is otherwise lawful under federal, state and local law.



   (C)   The giving of a notice of intent pursuant to this chapter is
for the purpose of notification only and no action or failure to act with
respect to the receipt of such notice by the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
be deemed to authorize the establishment or operation of any such business,
trade, profession or manufacturing operation within the town in violation of
any federal, state or local statute, regulation, ordinance or other law.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1986)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 380



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Failure to give the required notice within the time period stated in §
110.02 shall result in a fine of not more than $99.



(Ord. passed 8-11-1986)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 15, page 380



CHAPTER 111:  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR



Section




Sale of Alcoholic Liquor




   111.01   Sale of alcoholic liquor



SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR



§ 111.01  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.



   The sale of alcoholic liquor is allowed on Sunday in the town as
permitted by the General Statutes of the state in all places operated under
hotel, restaurant and club permits as issued by the Liquor Control Commission
of the state.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1938)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 5, page 244



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLING



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Limitations



   112.03   License



   112.04   License fees



   112.05   Application



   112.06   Processing



   112.07   Use of streets



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLING. Includes traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from
street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise, books, magazines, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck,
farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or
making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or without traveling from
place to place, selling or offering the same for sale from a wagon,
automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance on public or
private property; and further provided that soliciting orders and as a
separate transaction making deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or
design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed PEDDLING
subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word PEDDLING shall include
the words HAWK and VEND. However, the word PEDDLING shall not include
solicitation of funds by any charitable organization as defined in the
ordinance entitled “Ordinance Concerning Solicitation of Charitable
Funds” (as codified in Chapter 113 of this code of ordinances).



   PERSON. Includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm or corporation, association, club, co-partnership or
society, or any other organization.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



§ 112.02  LIMITATIONS.



   No person shall peddle within the limits of the following highways or
at any house or other building having frontage on such highway:



   (A)   The portion of Main Street from the Niantic River Bridge to
Black Point Road; and



   (B)   The portion of Pennsylvania Avenue from Main Street to Roxbury
Road.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



§ 112.03  LICENSE.



   With respect to all other highways, no person except as otherwise
authorized by law, shall peddle upon any of the public highways of the town,
or from house to house within the town, unless he or she shall have obtained
a license pursuant to § 112.04.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



§ 112.04  LICENSE FEES.



   The First Selectman of the town is authorized to issue licenses to
peddle, upon the payment of the following license fees:



   (A)   For each foot peddler, $10 per day;



   (B)   For each organization of or company employing peddlers, at the
option of such organization or company in lieu of the license fee established
by division (A) above, $40 per week; and



   (C)   For each peddler, using a team or vehicle, $45 per year.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



§ 112.05  APPLICATION.



   Prior to the issue of any license, the applicant shall file a sworn
written application in duplicate with the First Selectman which must contain
or be accompanied by the following data:



   (A)   Name and description of applicant, with permanent home address
and local address, if any;



   (B)   A description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;



   (C)   If employed, name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;



   (D)   The length of time for which the right to do solicitation is
desired, not to exceed, in any event, a period of 12 months;



   (E)   The proposed method of contacting homeowners prior to
initiating solicitation;



   (F)   The place from which ordered goods are to be delivered;



   (G)   The proposed method of delivery;



   (H)   A copy of any and all brochures, order and/or contract forms,
or other material to be used in connection with the solicitation;



   (I)   A two-inch square photograph of the applicant taken within 60
days;



   (J)   The names of at least two property owners of the town who will
certify to the applicant’s good character and business responsibility or in
lieu of the names of references, such other evidence as to the good
characters and business responsibility of the applicant, as will enable
verification of such character and business responsibility;



   (K)   The towns or locations, within or without the state, if any,
where the applicant has conducted such solicitation prior to coming to the
town;



   (L)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense, and the penalty assessed therefore; and



   (M)   An agreement to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



§ 112.06  PROCESSING.



   (A)   Upon receipt by the First Selectman of the original
application, he or she will have ten days within which to determine whether
any reason exists for denial of the requested license. In making such
evaluation, the determination of qualification shall be governed by the
following standards (as applied to the applicant’s principal or employer,
or, if there be more than one applicant, members of that group):



      (1)   Veracity of statements in the application;



      (2)   Financial solvency; compliance with disclosure and
rescission laws;



      (3)   Prior claims or fraudulent practices,
misrepresentations, trespass, breach of the peace or other unlawful conduct,
or intimidating tactics, in the course of making home solicitations; or



      (4)   Any similar information which indicates that the
applicant lacks the moral or business character to be permitted to conduct
home solicitations.



   (B)   Upon conclusion of the evaluation, the applicant shall be
endorsed for approval or denial.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



§ 112.07  USE OF STREETS.



   No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, nor shall any be
permitted to operate in any congested area where peddling might impede or
inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a
police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)  Penalty, see § 112.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $100 and each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a
separate violation.



(Ord. passed 9-23-1983; Ord. passed 7-1-2011)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 269



CHAPTER 113:  SOLICITATION OF CHARITABLE FUNDS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Permit required



   113.03   Permit issuance



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. The Solicitation of Charitable Funds Act (Conn. Gen. Stat. Chapter
299a, Revision of 1958, as amended from time to time).



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any benevolent, educational, philanthropic,
humane, patriotic or eleemosynary person or one holding itself out to be a
charitable organization or one which has received a tax exemption from the
United States government or any state or municipality by reason of its
charitable nature or any person, other than a professional fund-raising
counsel or professional solicitor, who solicits or obtains contributions
solicited from the public for charitable purposes.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 223



§ 113.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No charitable organization and no religious organization shall solicit
contributions within the town, or have funds solicited on its behalf, unless
prior to any solicitation, it obtains a permit from the First Selectman.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)  Penalty, see § 113.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 223



§ 113.03  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   Any applying charitable organization which is exempt from registration
requirements under the Act, and any charitable organization which has filed a
current registration statement and is in good standing with the State
Department of Consumer Protection shall, after verification of its status, be
issued a permit for a period not to exceed one year. Any person applying for
a religious organization shall, after establishing his or her identity and
his or her authority to act for such religious organization, be issued a
permit for a period not to exceed one year.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 223



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not more than $100 for each such offense. Any violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of the Act shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a permit.



(Ord. passed 4-6-1976)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 12, page 223



CHAPTER 114:  BAZAARS AND RAFFLES



Section



   114.01   Adoption of state law



§ 114.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   The provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, as
amended, providing for the operation of bazaars and raffles in the town, are
adopted.



(Ord. passed - -)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, pages 231 233



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Bathing and dressing



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  BATHING AND DRESSING.



   (A)   No person shall bathe in any public place or be upon any
bathing beach or upon any highway in the town without being properly clothed.



   (B)   No person shall dress or undress on any highway or in any
public place or in an automobile in any public place or on any private
property without the owner’s permission.



   (C)   No person shall sleep in any motor vehicle or use such vehicle
for sleeping quarters when said vehicle is on any highway or in any public
parking place in said town.



   (D)   No person shall sleep or make one’s bed on any public
ground, beach, park or highway within said town.



(Ord. passed 8-4-1947)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 6, page 103



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
130.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $25.



(Ord. passed 8-4-1947)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 6, page 103



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING



      151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      152.   HARBOR MANAGEMENT



      153.   INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES



      154.   HISTORIC PROPERTIES



      155.   PLANNING COMMISSION, ZONING COMMISSION AND ZONING BOARD
OF APPEALS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING



Section




General Provisions




   150.001   Penalties for violation of the State Building Code and
orders issued thereunder



   150.002   Exempting certain municipal property from zoning
regulations



   150.003   Adopting the provisions of the Municipal Planning Act



   150.004   Adopting the Zoning Enabling Act



   150.005   Demolition delay




Fees




   150.015   Fees for building and demolition permits




Blight




   150.030   Purpose



   150.031   Definitions



   150.032   Exemptions



   150.033   Prohibition



   150.034   Special consideration



   150.035   Notice of blight violation



   150.036   Enforcement citation



   150.037   Recording of lien



   150.038   Municipal performance to correct; costs



   150.039   Exceptions and pending approvals



   150.040   Conflict and separability




Posting and Displaying Numbers on Buildings




   150.055   Posting and displaying numbers on buildings




Damage to Highways




   150.070   Damage to highways



 



   150.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THE STATE BUILDING CODE AND ORDERS
ISSUED THEREUNDER.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate a provision of the State Building
Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall
erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of any
approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of the Code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment
not exceeding one year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
building after having been served with a stop order, except such work as he
or she is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions,
shall be liable to a fine of not less than $25 or more than $500. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. effective 4-15-1972)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 11, page 91



§ 150.002  EXEMPTING CERTAIN MUNICIPAL PROPERTY FROM ZONING REGULATIONS.



   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 8-2, Revision of 1958 as amended,
property of the town now or hereafter used for the town water system or the
town sewer system is exempt from regulation by the town zoning regulations.
This exemption shall not be applicable to any building to be constructed for
purposes of administrative offices, garage or maintenance facility for either
system.



(Ord. passed 4-21-1991)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 18, page 108



§ 150.003  ADOPTING THE PROVISIONS OF THE MUNICIPAL PLANNING ACT.



   Adopting the provisions of the Municipal Planning Act or Commission as
is set out by Conn. Gen. Stat. Chapter 45, §§ 853 through 862 inclusive,
Revision of 1949.



(Res. passed 6-7-1951)



§ 150.004  ADOPTING THE ZONING ENABLING ACT.



   Adopting the provisions of the Zoning Enabling Act entitled “Public
Act No. 418 enacted by the General Assembly”, which act becomes effective
October 1, 1947.



(Res. passed 10-6-1947)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 6, page 113



§ 150.005  DEMOLITION DELAY.



   (A)   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 29-406, there shall be a
90-day waiting period before a permit to demolish any structure located in
the town may be issued. The 90-day waiting period shall commence upon the
filing of a demolition permit application with the Building Department.



   (B)   The applicant for a demolition permit must install, within
seven business days of submitting the application, a sign provided by the
building department, upon submission of a $200 deposit, on the front wall of
the structure, or such other location as directed by the Building Official.
The sign must remain in place until such time that the waiting period has
expired.



   (C)   Within seven days of the filing of the application, the
Building Official shall determine if the structure proposed for demolition is
included in the historic property inventory, as it may be amended from time
to time. If the structure is included in the inventory, the Building Official
shall notify the Historic Properties Commission in writing within seven
business days of such determination. If the structure is not included in the
inventory, the Building Official may issue the permit forthwith.



   (D)   Upon notification as set forth above, the Commission shall
review the application at its next scheduled meeting. The Commission may
waive the balance of the waiting period or may determine that the waiting
period must remain in effect. The Commission shall provide notice of its
decision to the applicant and the Building Official in writing within seven
business days of said decision.



(Ord. passed 6-6-2018)



FEES



§ 150.015  FEES FOR BUILDING AND DEMOLITION PERMITS.



   (A)   The fee for any building permit shall be at the rate of $10
for each $1,000 of construction value or fraction thereof. The minimum fee
shall be $50.



   (B)   The Chief Building Official shall determine the value of the
work to be done, based upon such standard referral data as he or she deems
appropriate. Such reference data shall be posted in the Building Department.
The Chief Building Official, at his or her discretion, may direct an
applicant to hire the International Code Council or any other consulting firm
to perform plan review for any project. The cost of said review service shall
be paid by the applicant directly to the firm performing the plan review. The
cost of this service shall be deducted from the total fee as per items one
and two of this section.



   (C)   The fee for a demolition permit shall be $50.



   (D)   No permit fee shall be payable for any work to be done by or
for the town.



   (E)   The Board of Selectmen may waive any permit fee, in whole or
in part, for any work to be done by or for a non-profit organization, when
the Board deems it in the public interest to do so.



   (F)   (1)   A re-inspection fee of $50 will be charged to the
property owner or contractor for any of the following conditions:



         (a)   Failure to comply with Building Code requirements
that were cited during a previous inspection;



         (b)   If the work to be re-inspected is not ready for
inspection upon arrival of the Building Inspector or Assistant Building
Inspector;



         (c)   If no one is present to meet the Inspector and
prior arrangements have not been made. The Inspector, at his or her
discretion, may waive the fee if an emergency situation is demonstrated; and



         (d)   If the scope of work has changed and prior
approval was not obtained from the building official.



      (2)   The fee must be paid prior to scheduling another
inspection.



(Ord. passed 11-26-1990; Ord. passed 3-30-1995; Ord. passed 6-15-2001; Ord.
passed 5-15-2008; Ord. passed 5-18-2015; Ord. effective 1-30-2016; Ord.
passed 2-21-2018)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 17, page 370, Amended; TM Volume 21, page 9; TM Volume 22,
page 787, Amended; TM Volume 23, page 233; TM Volume 23, page 508, Amended



BLIGHT



§ 150.030  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to authority granted by
the Connecticut General Statutes, including, without limitation, Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), as amended by Public Act 12-146, §§ 2 and 4;
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 148-o(b) and Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152c.



   (B)   This subchapter prohibits any owner, occupant, agent, tenant
and/or person in control of real property located in the town, from allowing,
creating, maintaining or causing to be created or maintained blighted
premises.



   (C)   This subchapter shall apply to public and private property,
regardless of principal or accessory uses, and is intended to protect,
preserve and promote public health, safety and welfare, including the
preservation of property values.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.031  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLIGHT ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A town official and/or employee designated
by the Board of Selectmen to enforce this subchapter and to issue citations
and/or take other actions he or she deems necessary to compel compliance with
it.



   BLIGHT HEARING CITATION OFFICER. An official appointed by the Board of
Selectmen who is not a town employee who will preside over blight citation
hearings, issue decisions and if necessary, convert assessments into
judgments in the State Superior Court.



   BLIGHTED PREMISES. Any building, structure or parcel of land where at
least one of the following conditions exists:



      (1)   A condition exists that poses a serious or immediate
threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the community;



      (2)   A building or structure is a fire hazard; or



      (3)   The property is in a state of disrepair or is becoming
dilapidated. STATE OF DISREPAIR or BECOMING DILAPIDATED shall mean in a
physically deteriorating condition causing unsafe or unsanitary conditions or
a nuisance to the general public and be evidenced by one or more of the
following conditions:



         (a)   Missing, broken or boarded up windows and doors
longer than six months;



         (b)   Collapsing or missing exterior walls or roof, or
other exterior features including, but not necessarily limited to, stairs,
porches, railings, hatchways, chimneys or floors;



         (c)   Seriously damaged or missing siding or roofing;



         (d)   Unrepaired fire or water damage longer than six
months;



         (e)   Rodent harborage and/or infestation;



         (f)   Persistent household garbage or trash on the
property;



         (g)   Abandoned or unused objects such as automobiles,
boats and recreation vehicles which are inoperable or unregistered or in an
obvious state of disrepair;



         (h)   Parking lots in excess of ten parking spaces in a
state of disrepair or abandonment evidenced, for example, by cracks,
potholes, overgrowth of vegetation within the surface, pavement or macadam,
or within medians and buffers;



         (i)   Shrubs, hedges, grass, plants, weeds or any other
vegetation that have been left to grow in an unkempt manner that are covering
or blocking means of egress or access to any building or that are blocking,
interfering with, or otherwise obstructing any sightline, road sign or
emergency access to or at the property, when viewed from any property line.
Maintained gardens, flower beds and xeriscape landscaping as part of a
landscape design are excluded from enforcement under this division (3)(i);



         (j)   The overall condition of the property structure
and/or grounds causes an unreasonable impact on the value of neighboring
properties; and



         (k)   Vacant buildings or structure left unsecured or
unguarded against unauthorized entry.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.032  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following properties shall be exempt from this subchapter:



   (A)   Farms as defined in the town zoning regulations: A tract of
land used for necessary farm buildings in connection with the raising and/or
caring for agricultural, livestock, poultry or dairy products, but excluding
the raising of fur bearing animals and the maintaining of dog kennels; and



   (B)   Historic properties as defined in the town ordinance entitled
“Ordinance Designating Historic Properties and Establishing a Historic
Properties Commission” as codified in Chapter 154 of this code of
ordinances.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.033  PROHIBITION.



   No owner, agent, occupant and/or a tenant required by a lease to
maintain a property, and/or any person in control of real property located in
the town shall allow, maintain or cause to be maintained a blighted premises.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.034  SPECIAL CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   Special consideration may be given to individuals that are
disabled, elderly or low income in the town’s effort to correct housing
blight. If an individual cannot maintain a reasonable level of upkeep of his
or her owner-occupied residence because the individual is disabled, elderly
or low income, and no capable individual resides in the residence, the town
may give said individual a reasonable amount of time to correct the problem,
the duration of which shall be in the discretion of the Blight Enforcement
Officer. If needed, assistance in finding solutions will be offered by the
town.



   (B)   (1)   CAPABLE INDIVIDUAL shall mean a person who can be
reasonably expected to perform maintenance and yard work around a property or
premises. This shall include children above 16 years of age, without a
physical or mental disability as defined herein.



      (2)   DISABLED INDIVIDUAL shall mean, in the case of an
owner-occupied residence, an individual who has a disability meeting the
definitions for the mental or physical disability as defined under the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and does not have a household member
capable of providing the necessary maintenance.



      (3)   ELDERLY INDIVIDUAL shall mean an individual over the age
of 65, who does not have a household member capable of providing the
necessary maintenance.



      (4)   LOW INCOME INDIVIDUAL shall mean, in the case of an
owner-occupied residence, an individual, or where more than one person
resides in the premises, a family unit, that has an income below the highest
level of “qualifying income” established by Conn. Gen. Stat. §
12-170d(a)(3).



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.035  NOTICE OF BLIGHT VIOLATION.



   (A)   The Blight Enforcement Officer shall give written notice of a
violation of this subchapter to the owner and occupant of the premises and
may give written notice to his or her agent(s), and/or any other person
responsible for the blighted premises. The notice should be mailed by both
certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to the last known
address of the person to whom it is directed, to the owner of the property at
the last known address on file in the Tax Collector’s records and a copy by
first class mail to any lienholder’s current or last known address pursuant
to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-148gg.



   (B)   Such notice shall state the violation and demand its abatement
within 60 days. If the violation is not corrected at the end of the 60-day
period, the Blight Enforcement Officer may issue an enforcement citation
and/or take other enforcement action as specified in § 150.036.



   (C)   Any person who is a new owner or new occupant of blighted
premises shall, upon request in writing to the Blight Enforcement Officer, be
granted a 30-day extension of the notice and opportunity to remediate. For
purposes of this subchapter, NEW OWNER shall mean any person or entity who
has taken title to a property within 30 days of the notice of blight
violation, and NEW OCCUPANT shall mean any person who has taken occupancy of
a property within 30 days of said notice.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.036  ENFORCEMENT CITATION.



   (A)   A citation hearing procedure per Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152c is
hereby established for purposes of this subchapter. The Board of Selectmen
shall appoint one or more Citation Hearing Officers for the town. The
Citation Hearing Officer may not be a police officer, a Blight Enforcement
Officer or an employee of the town.



   (B)   If a violation remains unabated after 60 days as set forth in
the notice of violation issued per § 150.035, the Blight Enforcement Officer
may issue a citation to the owner and occupant, and may issue a citation to
any other person responsible for the violation in accordance with this
subchapter. The citation shall state the penalty amount in accordance with §
150.999, and date (15 days plus three business days) by which the uncontested
payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees shall be made. The blight citation
shall be mailed by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular
mail to the owner of the property at the last known address on file in the
Tax Collector’s records and to any other person responsible at his or her
last known address. In addition, the Blight Enforcement Officer shall make
reasonable efforts to send a copy by first class mail to any lienholder’s
current or last known address pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-148gg.



   (C)   Any person/entity issued a citation pursuant to this
subchapter shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the citation pursuant to
the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152c.



   (D)   (1)   At any time within 12 months from the expiration of
the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or
fees set by a citation issued pursuant to this subchapter, the town shall
send notice to the person or persons or entity cited to inform the person or
persons:



         (a)   Of the allegations against him, her or it and the
amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due;



         (b)   That he, she or it may contest liability before a
Citation Hearing Officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice to
the office of the First Selectman, 108 Pennsylvania Avenue, Niantic,
Connecticut 06357, within ten days of the date thereof;



         (c)   That if he, she or it does not demand such a
hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him, her or it;
and



         (d)   That such judgment may issue without further
notice.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, notice shall be presumed
to have been properly sent if such notice was mailed to such person’s last
known address on file with the Tax Collector. If the person to whom notice is
issued is a registrant, the town may deliver the notice in accordance with
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-148H, provided nothing in this section shall preclude
the town from providing notice in another manner permitted by applicable law.
The notice shall also be sent by first class mail to any lienholder’s
current or last known address pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-148gg.



   (E)   If the person to whom notice is sent pursuant to this section
wishes to admit liability, he, she or it may, without requesting a hearing,
pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in
person or by mail to an official designated by the town.



   (F)   Any person to whom notice is sent who does not deliver or mail
written demand for a hearing within 15 days plus three business days of the
date of the first notice provided for by division (B) above shall be deemed
to have admitted liability, and the designated municipal official shall
certify such person’s failure to respond to the hearing officer. The
Citation Hearing Officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fine,
penalties, costs or fees provided for by this subchapter and shall follow the
procedures for obtaining a judgment from the Superior Court set forth in
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 152c(f).



   (G)   A person who makes a timely request for a hearing shall be
given written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing
shall be held at a time and conducted in the manner provided by Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 7-152c(e).



      (1)   The Citation Hearing Officer shall issue a written
decision within 30 days of the hearing. If he or she determines that the
person is not liable, he or she shall dismiss the matter and enter his or her
determination in writing accordingly. If he or she determines that the person
is liable for the violation, he or she shall forthwith enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by this
subchapter and issue a notice of assessment by first class mail to the person
found liable and to any lienholders pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. §7-148gg.
The property owner and the entity liable has 30 days from the notice of
assessment to pay the fine.



      (2)   If the person responsible fails to pay the fine, not
less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing of the notice of
assessment, the Citation Hearing Officer shall file a certified copy of the
notice of assessment and an entry fee with the Clerk of a Superior Court
facility designated by the Chief Court Administrator.



      (3)   The person against whom an assessment has been entered
by the Citation Hearing Officer pursuant to this section is entitled to
judicial review by way of appeal pursuant to the provisions and requirements
of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152c(g).



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.037  RECORDING OF LIEN.



   Any unpaid fine imposed shall constitute a lien upon the real estate in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-148aa. Each such lien shall be
continued, recorded and released as provided for in Conn. Gen. Stat. §
7-148aa and the General Statutes. Each lien shall be mailed to lienholders
pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-148gg.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.038  MUNICIPAL PERFORMANCE TO CORRECT; COSTS.



   (A)   In the event any owner, occupant, agent, tenant or person in
control of real estate shall fail to abate or correct any violation specified
in any notice, after the issuance of an enforcement citation for such
failure, which citation has become final through the failure of such owner,
agent, tenant or person in control of real estate to appeal from the issuance
of said citation, or by such appeal being sustained, the town, acting through
its Blight Enforcement Officer, may cause or take such action as is necessary
to correct such violation. The cost to take such action shall be a civil
claim by the town against such owner, agent, tenant or person responsible for
such property and the town may bring an action to recover all such costs and
expenses incurred.



   (B)   The owner of a blighted premises may choose to cooperate with
the Blight Enforcement Officer and permit the town to cure the blight;
provided said owner shall secure the payment of the town’s expenses of
remediation by way of a lien on the property, or such other document
satisfactory to the Town Attorney.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.039  EXCEPTIONS AND PENDING APPROVALS.



   Any blighted premises for which any land use or building permit
application for improvements to the blighted premises is pending, or which
has been sold to a bona fide purchaser, shall be exempt from the provisions
of this subchapter for a period of 90 days from the date of submittal of a
complete application to the town or from the date of sale.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 150.040  CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to
prevent the enforcement of other statutes, codes, ordinances or regulations
which prescribe standards other than are provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   If a court of competent jurisdiction finds any provision of
this subchapter to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect
of such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly
stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions
of this subchapter shall continue to be separately and fully effective. If
any other ordinance or parts of ordinances are in conflict herewith, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.



(Ord. passed - -)



POSTING AND DISPLAYING NUMBERS ON BUILDINGS



§ 150.055  POSTING AND DISPLAYING NUMBERS ON BUILDINGS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to promote public safety and
convenience, and enhance the new E-9-1-1 telephone system by providing a
rational street numbering system by which addresses may be identified with
the ease and speed which is essential to the quick response of emergency
services, including police, firefighting and medical care.



   (B)   The Assessor shall assign a street identification number to
every residential, commercial, industrial or other structure located on
premises abutting a public street within the town except accessory structures
such as barns, garages or outbuildings which are located on the same premises
as the numbered structure.



   (C)   Every owner or occupant of a structure to which a number has
been assigned shall, within 120 days of the effective date of this section or
the date of assignment of a street identification number, whichever date is
earlier, prominently display the street number of such structure, by placing
said number in the manner herein provided.



   (D)   The numerals used to indicate the street identification number
of structures shall be located on the exterior front of the building or on a
signpost, mailbox or other device located between the building and street.



   (E)   Such numerals shall be a minimum of four inches high and be of
a color contrasting with the background material to which they are affixed.
The location and size of such numerals shall be sufficient to assure their
visibility from the street.



   (F)   For buildings containing more than three dwelling units which
have entrances from interior passageways, numerals shall be affixed within
five feet of every door by which the building may be entered.



   (G)   No certificate of occupancy for a new structure shall be
issued until compliance with this section is completed.



   (H)   The compliance officer for enforcement of this section shall
be the Building Official.



(Ord. passed 4-16-1988)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 196



DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS



§ 150.070  DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall, or shall cause another to, change
the grade of any land, or excavate, pave or fill any land in such a manner as
to cause surface water to drain from said land to a highway, without first
obtaining a permit in accordance with division (B) below. No such permit
shall be granted until and unless it is determined that the work will not
cause surface water to drain from such land to a highway in such amounts or
in such locations as to interfere with public travel, damage the highway,
collect on the highway or drain from the highway on to land of any other
person.



      (2)   No person shall, or shall cause another to, excavate in,
fill, cut or change the grade of any highway, or perform any other work
within the highway limits without first obtaining a permit in accordance with
division (B) below.



      (3)    No person shall construct, alter or move any building
or other structure, or perform any other work which requires a building
permit under the State Building Code, without first obtaining a permit in
accordance with division (B) below.



   (B)   (1)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the
Town Engineer, or to such other person as may be designated by the First
Selectman, on a form prescribed by the Town Engineer. Such permits shall be
signed by the Town Engineer or such other designated person.



      (2)   The Town Engineer shall require from the applicant such
information as may be necessary to enable him or her to determine the nature
of the proposed work and what construction methods and details should be
required to satisfy the provisions and intent of this section.



      (3)   When, in his or her opinion, the best interests of the
town make it advisable, he or she may require a plan and profile prepared by
a professional engineer at the expense of the applicant.



      (4)   The First Selectman, upon the recommendation of the Town
Engineer, may require from the applicant evidence of liability insurance and
a surety bond, in such amounts as may be, in the opinion of the Town
Engineer, advisable for the protection of the town. The Town Engineer shall,
from time to time, recommend to the First Selectman reductions and releases
of such surety bonds insofar as that may be done consistent with satisfying
the provisions and intent of this section, and the First Selectman may
thereupon reduce and release such bonds.



   (C)   (1)   This section shall not apply to work undertaken by or
for the state or the town.



      (2)   When the Town Engineer determines that the proposed work
will not affect a town highway, he or she shall waive the provisions of this
section.



   (D)   Any permit granted hereunder may be suspended, modified or
revoked by the Town Engineer if unforeseen conditions or events occur or if
there shall be failure to comply with the provisions of the permit.



   (E)   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by the action of the Town
Engineer hereunder may appeal therefrom to the First Selectman within 30 days
from the date of the action appealed from. Any person claiming to be
aggrieved by the decision of the First Selectman on such an appeal, or by the
action of the First Selectman under division (B)(4) above, may appeal
therefrom to the Board of Selectmen within 30 days from the date of the
decision by the First Selectman on such an appeal or the date of the action
of the First Selectman under division (B)(4) above. Any such appeal shall be
made in such manner and form as shall be determined by the First Selectman.
Within 30 days from the date of the appeal, a hearing shall be held thereon
after notice is given to all parties deemed to have an interest. The decision
or action appealed from may be approved, disapproved or modified in order to
satisfy the purposes of this section.



(Ord. passed 9-21-1975)  Penalty, see § 150.999



Editor’s note:   



   TM Volume 12, page 149



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Violations of §§ 150.030 through 150.040 shall be punishable
by a civil penalty of $10 per day for the first 90 days of a violation. If,
after 90 days the violation continues, the fine thereafter shall be $50 per
day for each day a violation continues. Each day after due notice of the
violation has been served shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of § 150.055 or
refuses or neglects to comply with the same, shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction and shall be fined $10 for each offense, and each and every
ten-day period of refusal or neglect to comply with the provisions of §
150.055 shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (D)   Any person violating any provision of § 150.070 may be fined
up to $100. Each day on which a violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate violation.



(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 9-21-1975; Ord. passed 4-16-1988)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section




Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact,
Purpose and Objectives




   151.01   Statutory authorization



   151.02   Findings of fact



   151.03   Statement of purpose



   151.04   Method of reducing flood losses




Definitions




   151.15   Definitions




General Provisions




   151.30   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151.31   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   151.32   Compliance



   151.33   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.34   Interpretation



   151.35   Warning and disclaimer of liability




Administration




   151.50   Establishment of development permit



   151.51   Designation of Building Official and Zoning Enforcement
Officer



   151.52   Duties and responsibilities of the Building Official and
Zoning Enforcement Officer



   151.53   Variance procedure




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   151.65   General standards



   151.66   Specific standards



   151.67   Coastal high hazard area



   151.68   Floodways



STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES



§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of Connecticut has in the General Statute
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Selectmen of the town does ordain as
follows.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights
and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas.
Uses that are adequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;



   (G)   To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is
in an area of special flood hazard; and



   (H)   To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood
hazard assume responsibility for their actions.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.04  METHOD OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:



   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



DEFINITIONS



§ 151.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or VO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three
feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BREAKAWAY WALLS. Any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and
whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other
suitable building material which are not part of the structural support of
the building and which are so designed as to break away, under abnormally
high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the
building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be
carried by flood waters.



   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. The area subject to high velocity waters,
including, but not limited to, hurricane wave wash or tsunamis. The area is
designated on a FIRM as Zone V1-30.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located
within the area of special flood hazard.



   EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for
rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot
on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the
effective date of this chapter.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION.
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete
or the construction of streets).



   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The usual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Hazard Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1.0 feet.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Area between the floodway and the boundary of the
100-year flood area.



   HABITABLE FLOOR. Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes
working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A
floor used only for storage purposes is not a HABITABLE FLOOR.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure that is transportable in one or more sections,
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not
include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.



   NEW MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for
rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is
completed on or after the effective date of this chapter.



   SAND DUNES. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first placement of permanent construction of
a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other
than a mobile home) without a basement or poured footings, the START OF
CONSTRUCTION includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the
structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes
not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. For
mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, START OF
CONSTRUCTION is the date on which the construction of facilities for
servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building or mobile home that is
principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure
taking place during a ten-year period, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure, either:



         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or



         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure.



      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.30  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the jurisdiction of East Lyme, Connecticut.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.31  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study for the Town of East Lyme, Connecticut” dated December 15,
1980, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance
Study is on file in the Town Hall, East Lyme, Connecticut.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 6-19-1984; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



   TM Volume 15, page 93



§ 151.32  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.33  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another chapter, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.34  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.35  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions.



   (B)   Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.



   (C)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.



   (D)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
town, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.50  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
151.31. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Officer and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the
location of the foregoing.



   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:



      (1)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement ) of all structures;



      (2)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
structure has been floodproofed;



      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure
meet the floodproofing criteria in § 151.66(B);



      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and



      (5)   Plans for any walls to be used to enclose space below
the base flood level.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.51  DESIGNATION OF BUILDING OFFICIAL AND ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Officer are hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.52  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL AND ZONING
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   Duties of the Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
include, but not be limited to:



   (A)   Permit review.



      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;



      (3)   Review all development permits in the area of special
flood hazard except in the coastal high hazard area to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the
area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY
AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at
any point;



      (4)   Review all development permits in the coastal high
hazard area of the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters mangrove stands or sand dunes so as to increase potential
flood damage; and



      (5)   Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below
the base flood level in accordance with § 151.67(B)(4).



   (B)   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data
has not been provided in accordance with § 151.31, the Building Official and
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in
order to administer § 151.66(A), residential construction, and § 151.66(B),
nonresidential construction.



   (C)   Information to be obtained and maintained.



      (1)   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures;



      (2)   For all new substantially improved floodproofed
structures:



         (a)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in
relation to mean sea level); and



         (b)   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required
in § 151.66(B).



      (3)   In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be
obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect that the
structure is securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in
order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash; and



      (4)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Alteration of watercourses.



      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the Southeastern
Connecticut Regional Planning Agency, prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration; and



      (2)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.



   (E)   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in § 151.33.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.53  VARIANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Appeal Board.



      (1)   The Board of Selectmen shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The Board of Selectmen shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



      (3)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Selectmen or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court as
provided in the Connecticut General Statutes.



      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Board of
Selectmen shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others;



         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable;



         (f)   The availability of alternative locations, for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development;



         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area;



         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and



         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



      (5)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in division (A)(4)(a)
through (A)(4)(k) above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variance increases.



      (6)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (A)(4)
above and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Selectmen may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.



      (7)   The Building Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance
Administration upon request.



   (B)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard
to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard to afford
relief.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)    A determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in division (A)(4) above, or
conflict with existing local laws or chapters.



      (5)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the lowest floor elevation.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 151.65  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are
required.



   (A)   Anchoring.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.



      (2)   All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to
ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that:



         (a)   Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four
corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations, with mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional
tie per side;



         (b)   Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home
with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile homes
less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;



         (c)   All components of the anchoring system be capable
of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and



         (d)   Any additions to the mobile home be similarly
anchored.



   (B)   Construction materials and methods.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   (C)   Utilities.



      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and



      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   (D)   Subdivision proposals.



      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage;



      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and



      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.66  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data
has been provided as set forth in § 151.31 or in § 151.52(B), the following
standards are required.



   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:



      (1)   Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;



      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect of buoyancy; and



      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such
certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
151.52(C)(2).



   (C)   Mobile homes.



      (1)   Mobile homes shall be anchored in accordance with §
151.65(A).



      (2)   For new mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions;
for expansions to existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions;
for existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions where the repair,
reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or
exceeds 50% of value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for mobile homes not placed
in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, require that:



         (a)   Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or
on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above
the base flood level;



         (b)   Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler
are provided; and



         (c)   In the instance of elevation on pilings, that:



            1.   Lots are large enough to permit steps;



            2.   Piling foundations are placed in stable soil
no more than ten feet apart; and



            3.   Reinforcement is provided for pilings more
than six feet above ground level.



      (3)   No mobile home shall be placed in a coastal high hazard
area, except in an existing mobile home park or an existing mobile home
subdivision.



      (4)   No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway, except in
an existing mobile home park or an existing mobile home subdivision.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.67  COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA.



   Coastal high hazard areas (V Zones) are located within the areas of
special flood hazard established in § 151.31. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane
wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply.



   (A)   Location of structures.



      (1)   All buildings or structures shall be located landward of
reach of the mean high tide.



      (2)   The placement of mobile homes shall be prohibited,
except in an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.



   (B)   Construction methods.



      (1)   Elevation. All buildings or structures shall be elevated
so that the lowest supporting member is located no lower than the base flood
elevation level, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as
not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as provided for
in division (B)(4) below.



      (2)   Structural support.



         (a)   All buildings or structures shall be securely
anchored on pilings or columns.



         (b)   Pilings or columns used as structural support
shall be designed and anchored so as to withstand all applied loads of the
base flood flow.



         (c)   There shall be no fill used for structural support.



      (3)   Certification. Compliance with the provisions of
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) shall be certified to by a
registered professional engineer or architect.



      (4)   Space below the lowest floor.



         (a)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or
improvement to a structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall
not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls are used
as provided for in this section.



         (b)   Open wood constructed lattice breakaway walls
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided they are not a part
of the structural support of the building and are designed so as to
breakaway, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the
structural integrity of the building on which they are to be used.



         (c)   If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed
space shall not be used for human habitation.



         (d)   Prior to construction, plans for any structure
that will have breakaway walls must be submitted to the Building Official for
approval.



   (C)   Sand dunes and mangrove stands. There shall be no alteration
of sand dunes or mangrove stands which could increase potential flood damage.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



§ 151.68  FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
151.31 are areas designated as floodways.



   (B)   (1)   Since the floodway is in an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply.



      (2)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development except that
public utilities and public works projects, or town-approved public
improvements by others including drainage improvements and crossing of the
watercourse, will be permitted provided that the Town Engineer determines
that such work has been designed to be consistent with generally accepted
engineering and hydrological standards and that the proposed use, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated uses, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any point.



   (C)   Floodway Fringe.



      (1)   In general any work in Floodway Fringe is to be
discouraged.



      (2)   Encroachments, including fill, new construction and
substantial improvements may be permitted with the “Floodway Fringe”
provided a registered professional engineer presents a hydraulic analysis to
demonstrate that the proposed encroachment will not cause the water surface
to rise more than one foot in the base flood (100-year flood) elevation
upstream. In determining the floodway required to convey the base flood the
engineer must apply equal encroachments on each side of the stream so that
all abutters will have equal rights.



      (3)   This additional hydraulic analysis will only be required
when in the opinion of the Administrator the distances between the stream
cross sections used in the original hydraulic study are too great to arrive
at a proper conclusion.



(Ord. passed 6-22-1981; Ord. passed 12-19-1988)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 14, page 122; TM Volume 16, page 262, Amended



CHAPTER 152:  HARBOR MANAGEMENT



Section




In General




   152.01   Purposes



   152.02   Boundaries



   152.03   Definitions



   152.04   General provisions



   152.05   Use of the harbor management area



   152.06   Mooring and anchoring vessels



   152.07   Marine sanitation




Harbor Management Commission




   152.20   Establishment, jurisdiction and membership



   152.21   Powers, duties and responsibilities



   152.22   Consultation and coordination with other town boards and
commissions



 



   152.99   Penalty



IN GENERAL



§ 152.01  PURPOSES.



   (A)   The town has established a Harbor Management Commission which
also acts pursuant to law as the Town Shellfish Commission.



   (B)   The Harbor Management Commission has prepared a harbor
management plan pursuant to the requirements of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§
22a-113k through 22a-113s and other related legislation.



   (C)   The town desires to manage its harbor resources in the most
effective manner and plan for the most desirable use of the town harbor
management area for conservation, recreation and development.



   (D)   Therefore, the Board of Selectmen hereby enacts the following
regulations for the management of the town harbor management area.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.02  BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   Harbor management area boundaries. The overall boundaries of
the East Lyme harbor management area include all navigable waters and
intertidal areas below the mean high water line of the shoreline of the town
and bounded on the east by the East Lyme/Waterford town line; on the south by
a straight line running from Millstone Point to Black Point and by a straight
line running from Black Point to Hatchetts Point; and on the west by the East
Lyme/Old Lyme town line.



   (B)   Shellfish grounds boundaries. The Town Harbor Management
Commission shall have charge of all shellfisheries and shellfish grounds
lying in the town not granted to the Waterford-East Lyme Shellfish Commission
by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 26-287, Revision of 1958, as amended, and not under
the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of Agriculture, including all rivers,
inland waters and flats adjacent to all beaches and waters within the limits
and marine bounds (below the mean high water line) of the town.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABODE. The principal, non-water dependent use of a structure or vessel
as a dwelling or home.



   AIDS TO NAVIGATION. All markers on land or in the water placed for the
purpose of enabling navigators in the harbor management area to avoid
navigation hazards and/or fix their position. AIDS TO NAVIGATION include
federal aids placed and maintained by the U.S. Coast Guard, and “private”
aids placed and maintained by all other government and private interests
under permit from the Coast Guard, Corps of Engineers and State Department of
Environmental Protection. Private aids include any buoys, signs and other
markers identifying restricted speed areas.



   ANCHOR.



      (1)   A heavy device, fastened to a chain or line, and dropped
to the bottom of a waterbody to hold a vessel in position, including an
anchor used to secure a vessel at a mooring. Specifically excluded from this
definition are engine blocks and other devices which, when used as ANCHORS,
could result in the degradation of water quality or otherwise damage coastal
resources; and



      (2)   To secure a vessel temporarily to the bottom of a
waterbody by dropping an anchor or anchors or other ground tackle from a
vessel.



   ANCHORAGE. Those water areas designated for anchoring with ground
tackle carried on board a vessel.



   CHANNEL. Water areas specifically reserved for unobstructed movement of
vessels, shown on navigation charts, and marked in-water by aids to
navigation.



   COASTAL SITE PLAN REVIEW. The process whereby specific development
plans proposed within the town’s coastal boundary are reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Commissions for consistency with the town’s Municipal
Coastal Program and the Connecticut Coastal Management Act.



   COMMERCIAL MOORING. A mooring as defined by the Corps of Engineers for
which any type of a fee is charged (excepting a fee charged by the town for a
mooring permit issued by the Harbor Master) and which must be authorized by
an individual permit from the Corps of Engineers, the State Department of
Environmental Protection and the Harbor Master. COMMERCIAL MOORINGS include
moorings offered by marinas for transient or seasonal rental, and moorings
controlled by private clubs if the annual membership fee includes a
club-controlled mooring.



   COMMERCIAL VESSEL. Any vessel, licensed or unlicensed, used or engaged
for any type of commercial venture, including, but not limited to, the
carrying of cargo and/or passengers for hire and commercial fishing.



   DEPUTY HARBOR MASTER. The Deputy Harbor Master appointed by the
Governor of Connecticut in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 15-1 through
15-10, and who shall carry out his or her duties under the direction of the
Harbor Master.



   EMERGENCY. A state of imminent or proximate danger to life or property
in which time is of the essence.



   FAIRWAY. A specific water area to be kept free of obstructions to
ensure safe passage of recreational and commercial vessels to, from, through
and alongside navigation channels, mooring areas, anchorages and berthing
areas.



   FLOATING HOME. Any structure constructed on a raft, barge or hull,
moored or docked in any water that is used primarily for single or
multiple-family habitation or that is used for the domicile of any
individual(s) for a period of more than two weeks.



   HARBOR MANAGEMENT ACCOUNT. A town account, within the town’s General
Fund, as authorized by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-113s into which shall be
deposited all fees for mooring and anchorage permits and other activities
within the scope of the harbor management plan and which shall be used for
the maintenance and improvement of the town harbor management area for the
public and for expenses for personnel and equipment directly related to the
function of the Harbor Management Commission and the Harbor Master or Deputy
Harbor Master.



   HARBOR MANAGEMENT ACT. The legislation contained within the Conn. Gen.
Stat. §§ 22a-113k through 22a-113t, as may be amended from time to time,
and which authorizes municipalities to establish harbor management
commissions and prepare harbor management plans.



   HARBOR MANAGEMENT AREA. The area of jurisdiction of the Town Harbor
Management Commission as defined in the harbor management plan and § 152.02.



   HARBOR MANAGEMENT COMMISSION. The duly appointed body of the town with
responsibilities for carrying out the harbor management plan as set forth
under the Harbor Management Act and any other duties granted by state
ordinance including having charge of all shellfisheries and shellfish grounds
lying in the town not granted to the Waterford-East Lyme Shellfish Commission
and not under the jurisdiction of the State Commissioner of Agriculture.



   HARBOR MANAGEMENT CONSISTENCY REVIEW PROCESS. The process authorized by
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-113p and described in the harbor management plan
whereby the Harbor Management Commission shall review for consistency with
the harbor management plan, specific development proposals submitted to, or
proposed by, town commissions and departments, and state and federal agencies.



   HARBOR MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE. This chapter establishing rules and
regulations for the use and enjoyment of the town harbor management area as
recommended by the Town Harbor Management Commission and adopted by the Town
Board of Selectmen.



   HARBOR MANAGEMENT PLAN. A plan for the balanced use of town’s harbor
management area for recreational and other purposes and for the protection of
environmental resources as prepared by the Harbor Management Commission,
adopted by the Board of Selectmen and approved by the Connecticut Departments
of Environmental Protection and Transportation in accordance with Conn. Gen.
Stat. §§ 22a-113k through 22a-113t and §§ 152.20 through 152.22.



   HARBOR MASTER. The Harbor Master appointed by the Governor of
Connecticut in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 15-1 through 15-10, and
who shall advise the Harbor Management Commission with respect to matters
concerning the waters under the jurisdiction of the town and have special
responsibilities for implementing the harbor management plan.



   HAZARD TO NAVIGATION. An obstruction, usually sunken, that presents
sufficient danger to navigation so as to require expeditious, affirmative
action such as marking, removal or redefinition of a designated waterway to
provide for navigational safety.



   INDIVIDUAL-PRIVATE MOORING. A mooring belonging to an individual and
authorized for use by a mooring permit issued by the Harbor Master and a
general permit from the Corps of Engineers.



   INSPECTION SERVICE. Any person or business known to the Harbor Master
who has equipment and knowledge suitable for making mooring tackle
inspections.



   MARINE FACILITY. Any facility (including, but not limited to, docks,
floats, piers, ramps, hoists, parking areas, concessions and service
facilities), either publicly or privately owned, intended primarily to be
used by or for the service of vessels and located within the harbor
management area.



   MEAN HIGH WATER LINE. The average height of the maximum elevation
reached by each rising tide over a 19-year period immediately preceding the
current year. Proposed work and structures seaward of the MEAN HIGH WATER
LINE are subject to federal regulatory authorities carried out by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers as well as state regulatory authorities. (State
regulatory authorities also extend above the MEAN HIGH WATER LINE to the high
tide line which is defined by a higher elevation than the MEAN HIGH WATER
LINE.) All land and water areas seaward of the MEAN HIGH WATER LINE are
subject to the Public Trust Doctrine and held in trust by the state for
public use. The MEAN HIGH WATER LINE also marks the seaward boundary of the
jurisdiction of the town’s Planning and Zoning Commissions.



   MOOR. To secure a vessel to the bottom of a water body by the use of
mooring tackle.



   MOORING. A semi-permanent anchorage installation consisting of a heavy
anchor (usually of the mushroom type), chain, a mooring buoy and other
equipment so designed that, when the attachment of such equipment to a vessel
is terminated, some portion of the equipment remains below the surface of the
water and is not under the control of the vessel or its operator.



   MOORING AREA. An area designated by the Harbor Management Commission,
and including special anchorage areas designated by the U.S. Coast Guard,
within which vessels may be moored provided a valid permit for such mooring
is obtained from the Harbor Master.



   MOORING LOCATION. A place where a buoyant vessel is permanently secured
to the bottom of a waterbody by mooring tackle and by permit from the Harbor
Master.



   MOORING TACKLE. The chain, anchor, buoys and other equipment used to
moor a vessel. Specifically excluded from this definition are engine blocks
and other devices which, when used as anchors, could result in the
degradation of water quality or otherwise damage coastal resources.



   OBSTRUCTION TO NAVIGATION. Anything that restricts, endangers or
interferes with navigation.



   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A vessel propelled by machinery which satisfies
one or both of the following criteria:



      (a)   Has a width not greater than 24 inches; and



      (b)   Is capable of carrying at least one individual who while
operating the vessel has no means of steerage other than shifting his or her
body weight.



   PERSONS. Those, including individuals, corporations, societies,
associations and partnerships, using the facilities and areas within the
harbor management area and subject to the provisions of this chapter.



   QUALIFIED INSPECTOR. Any person approved as an inspector of mooring
tackle by the Harbor Master.



   SHALL and MAY.SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.



   SLIP. Berthing space for a single vessel alongside a pier, finger float
or walkway.



   SPECIAL ANCHORAGE AREA. A water area designated by the Coast Guard,
identified on navigation charts, and where vessels may be anchored or moored.
Within such areas, vessels less than 65 feet are not required to display
anchorage lights.



   STATE. The State of Connecticut.



   STRAY VESSEL. An abandoned vessel, a vessel with unknown owner or a
vessel underway without a competent person in command.



   TRANSIENT. A person traveling to the harbor management area by boat and
staying for a temporary period of time.



   TRANSIENT ANCHORAGE. Any area reserved and designated in the harbor
management area for the exclusive short term use (not to exceed seven
consecutive days) of commercial and recreational vessels and any vessels
seeking emergency shelter.



   VESSEL. As defined by state statute, every description of watercraft,
other than a seaplane on water, used or capable of being used as a means of
transportation on water.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.04  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter and any rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be applicable, and shall
govern the use of the harbor management lands, waters and facilities under
the jurisdiction of the Town Harbor Management Commission. This chapter shall
be subordinate to all existing federal and state statutes and regulations
affecting the town harbor management area, and is not intended to preempt any
other valid laws.



   (B)   Invalidity of provisions. Should any provision or provisions
of this chapter be held invalid or inoperative, the remainder shall continue
in full force and effect.



   (C)   Authorities and enforcement.



      (1)   The Town Harbor Master or his or her designee, under the
direction of the Town Harbor Management Commission, shall have the authority
to carry out harbor management directives and enforce all provisions of the
harbor management plan, including this chapter.



      (2)   The Harbor Master or his or her designee may cite any
alleged violators of this chapter.



      (3)   Any police officer or constable of the town shall have
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Harbor Management Account. A Harbor Management Account is
hereby created in the town’s General Fund to receive and expend monies for
harbor management purposes determined by the Harbor Management Commission.
All revenues generated by: mooring permits; fines levied under the provisions
of this chapter as it applies to the harbor management area; and fees
generated by designation of oyster, clam and shellfish beds pursuant to Conn.
Gen. Stat. §§ 26-240 et seq., shall be deposited into this account. Other
funds generated or allocated specifically for harbor management shall also be
deposited in this account. Funds shall be disbursed for purposes directly
associated with the management of the town’s harbor management area and
implementation of the town harbor management plan. Monies from this account
may be allocated to the Harbor Master or his or her designee for the purpose
of carrying out the provisions of the town harbor management plan and/or this
chapter.



   (E)   Compensation of harbor personnel. The Harbor Master, Deputy
Harbor Master and administrative personnel may receive compensation to be
determined by the Harbor Management Commission. Additionally, monies from the
Harbor Management Account may be used to reimburse the Harbor Master, Deputy
Harbor Master and administrative personnel for necessary expenses incurred in
the performance of their duties. Monies from this account may also be used to
compensate contractors hired to perform work as may be deemed necessary by
the Harbor Management Commission or the Harbor Master.



   (F)   Coordination with other governmental laws and regulations.
Nothing hereon contained shall bar or prevent the Harbor Master or Deputy
Harbor Master from performing those duties which have been assigned to them
under the General Statutes of the state.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.05  USE OF THE HARBOR MANAGEMENT AREA.



   (A)   Vessel speed and wake.



      (1)   The operation of any vessel, including personal
watercraft, within the town harbor management area shall proceed in a manner
which protects all persons and property from any damage caused by a wake.



      (2)   In no event shall any vessel under power exceed a speed
limit of six mph within:



         (a)   The federal navigation channel;



         (b)   Two hundred feet of shore in the Upper Niantic
River north of the federal navigation channel;



         (c)   The Pattagansett River Estuary Restricted Speed
Area as marked by state speed limit signs; and



         (d)   One hundred feet of shore or any dock, pier, float
or anchored or moored vessel in any other part of the harbor management area.



   (B)   Obstruction of channels, fairways and berthing space. No
vessel shall be moored or anchored so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use of any channel, fairway or berthing space within the harbor
management area.



   (C)   Swimming and underwater diving. Swimming and underwater diving
are prohibited in all designated channels except in an emergency or for
inspection purposes.



   (D)   Fishing. Fishing from vessels and shellfishing shall not occur
in any designated channels, fairways and anchorages in a manner that poses a
hazard to navigation. The placement of lobster pot floats and fixed fishing
nets is prohibited in all channels marked by U.S. Coast Guard channel
markers, within any fairway as designated in the harbor management plan and
within any mooring area designated in the harbor management plan.



   (E)   Waterskiing.



      (1)   Waterskiing is prohibited in all designated channels,
and in anchorages and mooring areas in the harbor management area when
vessels are anchored or moored therein.



      (2)   Waterskiing is prohibited within 200 feet of shore in
the Upper Niantic River north of the federal navigation channel, within the
Pattagansett River Restricted Speed Area as marked by state speed limit signs
and within 100 feet of shore or any dock, pier, float or anchored or moored
vessel in any other part of the harbor management area.



   (F)   Personal watercraft.



      (1)   Use of personal watercraft shall be in accordance with
all applicable statutes and regulations concerning the operation of vessels.



      (2)   Use of personal watercraft is prohibited in all
designated channels except as necessary to reach personal watercraft activity
areas, and within designated anchorages and mooring areas when vessels are
anchored or moored therein.



   (G)   Board sailing. Board sailing is prohibited within designated
channels, anchorages and mooring areas except as necessary to cross a
designated channel, anchorage or mooring area in a manner that does not pose
a hazard or inconvenience to navigation.



   (H)   Public docks and boat launch ramps.



      (1)   The use of any public dock and boat launch ramps shall
be in accordance with rules and regulations established by the Harbor
Management Commission.



      (2)   No vessel shall remain at a public dock or boat launch
ramp for a period longer than the time limit posted at the dock. If a vessel
is left unattended for a period of time in violation of the posted limit,
then the vessel’s owner of record shall be held responsible.



   (I)   Use of vessels as abodes or floating homes. The use of any
vessel in the town harbor management area as an abode or floating home is
prohibited. Sleeping aboard vessels on a temporary basis is allowed as a
secondary use to the vessel’s principal recreational or commercial use.



   (J)   Identification of vessels. All vessels moored, or tied up to
wharves, piers or docks in the harbor management area, except those on
temporary call, shall maintain identification legible without boarding the
vessel, in one of the following forms:



      (1)   Federal or state registry number as reported to the
Harbor Master or Deputy Harbor Master;



      (2)   A boat name reported to the Harbor Master or Deputy
Harbor Master; and



      (3)   The name and address or telephone number of the
owner.   



   (K)   Derelict or abandoned vessels and structures.



      (1)   No vessel, mooring, mooring float or other object within
the harbor management area shall be abandoned or sunk or placed where it may
constitute a danger to navigation or to the safety of persons or property or
where it may prevent optimum use of the area. Any vessel, mooring tackle or
other object abandoned or sunk or so placed may be removed or relocated by
direction of the Harbor Master, if corrective action is not taken by the
owner, if known, within seven days after notification, or, if not known,
after notice has been posted for that period on the vessel, mooring or object.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Harbor Master
or Deputy Harbor Master from taking measures with or without notice, if, in
their judgment, it is necessary in order to provide for the safety of persons
or property. The expense of such removal or relocation and any liability
arising from injury to person or property incurred thereby shall be the
responsibility of the owner.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.06  MOORING AND ANCHORING VESSELS.



   (A)   Mooring permits required.



      (1)   In order to provide for adequate access for vessels, for
the safety of persons and property and for the optimum use of the town’s
harbor management area, the Harbor Master must approve the location of all
moorings within the town harbor management area. The Harbor Master shall
issue a permit for each approved location. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person to place any individual/private or commercial mooring
in the harbor management area without a permit from the Harbor Master.



      (2)   No provision contained in this section shall limit the
powers of the Harbor Master to station and remove vessels as provided in
Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 15-8 and 15-9 and 22a-113r.



   (B)   Mooring records.



      (1)   The Harbor Master shall keep a detailed record of each
mooring, its location and the owner’s name, resident and business address,
telephone number, date mooring was set, and name, length, registration number
or documentation, and type of vessel to be attached thereto.



      (2)   The Harbor Master shall maintain in a public place a
waiting list for mooring space in the harbor management area, as necessary,
and a list for assignment of mooring space, and these lists shall be updated
annually or at any more frequent interval that may be appropriate.



   (C)   Allocation of moorings.



      (1)   The Harbor Master shall establish and post in a public
place, an allocation procedure and priority list for moorings in the harbor
management area.



      (2)   In allocating mooring locations, the Harbor Master shall
give first priority to those persons applying for the renewal of permits
granted in the preceding year, second priority to relocation requests in
order of application, and third priority to new applicants in order of
application.



      (3)   In allocating mooring locations, the Harbor Master
shall, to the extent possible, assign priority for mooring allocations to
shorefront property owners who apply for moorings offshore of their property.



      (4)   In allocating mooring locations, the Harbor Master shall
give consideration to size, draft and type and use of vessels, including use
for commercial purposes.



      (5)   Within the limits of type and size of vessels, available
mooring locations shall be offered to the senior applicant on the mooring
waiting list, subject to the requirements of this chapter. If an available
mooring location is not suitable to accommodate the senior applicant’s
vessel or specific needs, it shall be offered to the next senior qualified
applicant. The senior applicant shall retain his or her place on the waiting
list in this case. The Harbor Master shall continue efforts to provide a
suitable mooring location for the senior applicant. If the senior applicant
refuses a mooring location which is suitable for his or her vessel in the
opinion of the Harbor Master, that applicant shall be moved to the bottom of
the waiting list. In order to obtain the most effective utilization of
mooring areas, lists of applicants will be maintained to include date of
application and type or size of vessel. These lists will be available for
public inspection at a public place during regular office hours.



      (6)   No one individual shall be allocated more than one
mooring location and no one household, partnership or corporation shall be
allocated more than two mooring locations without annual written permission
from the Harbor Management Commission. Only one mooring space shall be
allocated to any one vessel.



      (7)   Mooring permits shall be issued by the Harbor Master
only to those applicants owning a vessel properly registered in accordance
with laws of the state.



   (D)   Application for mooring permit.



      (1)   Any person, including associations, corporations or
other group, may apply for a mooring permit by completing in full the
application provided for that purpose and submitting the completed
application to the Harbor Master.



      (2)   The Harbor Master shall accept applications for approval
or renewal of moorings at any time.



   (E)   Mooring permits valid for one year only. Mooring permits are
valid for a period not to exceed one year unless renewed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The permit expiration date shall be entered
on the permit.



   (F)   Renewal of mooring permits. All renewal applications shall be
due on or before March 1, of each calendar year so as to allocate new mooring
locations in unrenewed locations. At least 30 days before the renewal due
date, notice of such date shall be published in a newspaper having
circulation in the town.



   (G)   Annual mooring permit fee. All applications for a new mooring
permit or renewal of an existing permit shall be accompanied by an
appropriate fee as may be established by the Harbor Management Commission and
adopted by the Board of Selectmen. All applications for renewal of moorings
shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee, payable to the town, before the
application shall be processed. In the event an application is not approved
or the applicant is placed on a waiting list, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant within ten days after notice of denial of such application or
placement on a waiting list. New applications may be charged at the time they
are granted permission for a mooring. Any fee collected pursuant to this
section shall be deposited in the town’s Harbor Management Fund and shall
be used exclusively for purposes directly associated with management of the
town harbor management area.



   (H)   Mooring permits non-transferable.



      (1)   No transferable rights shall be conferred as the result
of the approval of a mooring location. Whenever the holder of a mooring
permit transfers the title or interest in or otherwise parts with possession
of the vessel identified in the mooring permit to another person by any
arrangement whatsoever, the mooring permit shall expire. The new possessor,
transferee or owner shall have no right to use the mooring space covered by
the mooring permit.



      (2)   The original holder of the mooring permit may, upon
written application to and approval by the Harbor Master, retain the mooring
space assigned under the mooring permit provided that another vessel owned by
the permittee is moved onto the mooring within 30 days (unless the period is
extended by the Harbor Master because of special circumstances such as
seasonal constraints). If the replacement vessel is significantly smaller,
larger or of different draft or type, the Harbor Master shall have the right
to relocate the vessel to another, more suitable mooring if one is available.



   (I)   Mooring locations.



      (1)   Vessels may be moored within the town harbor management
area in designated mooring areas as established by the Harbor Management
Commission and identified in the harbor management plan; and other safe and
suitable locations. No mooring permits shall be granted for areas in which
mooring is prohibited by the harbor management plan, and all permits granted
shall be consistent with all provisions of the harbor management plan.



      (2)   Moorings shall under no circumstances interfere with the
free use of channels or fairways.



   (J)   Mooring placement. When an applicant has been registered for a
mooring within the town’s harbor management area, the Harbor Master shall
assign a specific location. No moorings shall be placed or maintained in any
portion of the harbor management area until the location of such mooring
shall have been approved by the Harbor Master or Deputy Harbor Master.



   (K)   Transient anchoring.



      (1)   The Harbor Management Commission may designate transient
anchorage areas free from the placement of any moorings. These areas,
reserved for the exclusive, short-term use of recreational vessels shall be
available on a first-come, first-served basis for a period not to exceed
seven consecutive days.



      (2)   The Harbor Master may require any person anchoring in
the harbor management area to display for inspection for anchors, chains and
other equipment used at such anchoring for soundness of condition.



   (L)   Abandonment of mooring.



      (1)   (a)   Any mooring not used in a calendar year may be
considered abandoned and subject to removal or relocation.



         (b)   No mooring may be left unused for more than one
calendar year without written permission of the Harbor Management Commission.



      (2)   Any registered owner who owns mooring tackle and is
abandoning their mooring space may offer to sell the tackle occupying such
space to the next person assigned that space. Failure of the registered owner
to remove such tackle shall constitute the abandonment thereof, and such
tackle may be removed by the Harbor Master at the expense of such registered
owner.



   (M)   Secure berthing and anchoring of vessels.



      (1)   The owner of any vessel moored or anchored within the
harbor management area shall be responsible for causing such vessel to be
tied and secured or anchored with proper care and equipment and in such
manner as may be required to prevent breakaway and resulting damage, and
shall thereafter provide for periodic inspection as the Harbor Master deems
necessary. Each vessel owner is deemed to be the owner of the mooring tackle
he or she uses.



      (2)   Utilization of proper mooring tackle is necessary to
secure vessels adequately at their moorings. Recommended guidelines for
mooring tackle may be provided by the Harbor Management Commission but these
guidelines shall be advisory only. Storms, wind, waves, tides, currents and
wash must be considered when selecting appropriate mooring tackle. Each
person mooring a vessel within the town harbor management areas is
responsible for any damage to that vessel or to any other vessel or property
caused by the failure of the mooring tackle used to secure that vessel.



   (N)   Mooring inspection.



      (1)   The Harbor Master may require that all new moorings,
anchors, chains and other equipment used in connection with such moorings in
the harbor management area shall be submitted to the Harbor Master or to an
inspector so designated by the Harbor Master or Harbor Management Commission
for inspection to determine soundness of condition.



      (2)   No more than once each calendar year the Harbor Master
may require any person who holds a mooring permit in the harbor management
area to display for inspection the anchor, chains and other equipment used at
such mooring for soundness of condition. Each mooring shall be subject to
inspection by the Harbor Master at the discretion of the Harbor Master. A
list of mooring inspection services shall be made available to the mooring
permit holder by the Harbor Master. An official inspection form shall be
filed with the Harbor Master by the owner once every three years.



      (3)   The Harbor Master shall maintain a record of each
inspection for a period of three years. If, as the result of such inspection
it shall be determined that any chain, shackle, swivel or other piece of
mooring tackle has become unsafe or otherwise inadequate, all such chain,
shackle, swivel or other piece of mooring tackle shall be replaced
accordingly. Failure to make such replacement shall be grounds for revocation
of the mooring permit by the Harbor Master.



   (O)   Identification of approved moorings. The Harbor Master shall
establish and maintain reasonable standards for the marking of mooring buoys
of all approved moorings in the harbor management area. Notice of such
standards shall be provided in writing to all owners of mooring permits at
their record resident address.



   (P)   Removal of moorings.



      (1)   The Harbor Master may require any mooring or vessel to
be moved to a new location whenever, in his or her judgment, the safety of
any other vessels or optimum use of the mooring area so requires.



      (2)   If directions given by the Harbor Master with respect to
removing unauthorized moorings, changing the location of existing moorings
for the purpose of ensuring safety and optimum use of the mooring area or
replacing mooring tackle determined to be inadequate are not taken by the
owner, if known, within 14 days after notification, or, if not known, after
notice has been posted for that period on the vessel or mooring, the Harbor
Master may cause such moorings to be removed or changed or may drop the same
to the bottom. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Harbor Master or
his or her designee from taking measures with or without notice, if, in his
or her judgment, it is necessary in order to provide for the safety of
persons or property. The expense of such mooring removal or relocation and
any liability arising from injury to person or property incurred thereby
shall be the responsibility of the mooring permit holder.



   (Q)   Designation of channels or fairways to be kept free of
moorings. For the purpose of this section, and in order to provide safe
navigation access to all parts of the harbor management area, the Harbor
Management Commission, with the advice of the Harbor Master, is empowered to
designate the location of channels or fairways within which approved moorings
shall not be located, and to make changes in such designations where
conditions or needs require. These channels or fairways shall be identified
in the harbor management plan.



   (R)   Suspension of requirements and imposition of emergency
requirements. In order to most effectively respond to any emergency as may be
caused by a severe storm or other natural or human-made conditions, the
Harbor Master is empowered to suspend the requirements of this section and/or
impose additional requirements in the interest of public safety.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.07  MARINE SANITATION.



   (A)   Littering and discharge of pollutants prohibited. No person
shall place, throw, deposit or discharge or cause to be placed, thrown,
deposited or discharged into the harbor management area any litter or other
materials, including, but not limited to, any refuse or waste matter, sewage
petroleum products or by-products, paint, varnish, dead animals or debris of
any kind which renders the waters unsightly, noxious, unwholesome or
otherwise detrimental to the public health or welfare or to the enjoyment of
the water for recreational purposes. The provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. §
22a-250 shall be strictly enforced with respect to discharge of refuse.



   (B)   Marine toilets. No person shall operate a marine toilet at any
time so as to cause or permit to pass or be discharged into the harbor
management area any untreated sewage or other waste matter or contaminant of
any kind. Any discharge shall be in compliance with current federal standards
concerning marine sanitary discharge and State and Town Health Code
regulations. The provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 15-170 through 15-175
shall be strictly enforced with respect to marine toilets.



   (C)   Responsibility for sanitation of facilities. The owner,
lessee, agent, manager or person in charge of any waterfront development or
facility adjacent to the harbor management area shall at all times, maintain
the premises under his or her charge in a clean, sanitary condition, free
from malodorous materials and accumulations of garbage, refuse, debris and
other waste materials.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



HARBOR MANAGEMENT COMMISSION



§ 152.20  ESTABLISHMENT, JURISDICTION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   Establishment of the Harbor Management Commission. There is
constituted a seven-member Harbor Management Commission which shall have the
powers and duties conferred on such commissions by Conn. Gen. Stat. Chapter
444a, Revision of 1958, as amended, and the Harbor Management Commission is
designated as the East Lyme Shellfish Commission and shall further have all
of the authority and responsibility granted to local shellfish commissions by
Conn. Gen. Stat. Chapter 492, Revision of 1958, as amended, except to the
extent that the Waterford-East Lyme Shellfish Commission has been granted
powers and duties by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 26-287.



   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Commission shall have jurisdiction over the
navigable waters as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 15-3a(b), within the town
harbor management area as defined in § 152.02. The Commission shall also
have charge of all the shellfisheries and shellfish grounds lying in the town
not granted to the Waterford-East Lyme Shellfish Commission by Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 26-287, Revision of 1958, as amended, and not under the jurisdiction
of the Commissioner of Agriculture, including all river, inland waters and
flats adjacent to all beaches and waters within the limits and marine bounds
(below the mean high water line) of the town.



   (C)   Membership and terms of service. The members of the Harbor
Management Commission shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, four for
terms to expire on the first Monday of January, 1988, and three for terms to
expire on the first Monday of January, 1990. Upon expiration of each of the
initial terms, appointment shall be made to fill such terms for four years.
Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with
Chapter 4 of the Charter. The Harbor Master shall be a non-voting ex officio
member of the Commission, and if there shall be a vacancy in the office of
the Harbor Master, the Deputy Harbor Master shall so serve until the vacancy
is filled.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.21  POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Rules and regulations. The Commission shall adopt and publish
such rules and regulations as may be required to implement its
responsibilities as herein provided.



      (1)   Prior to adopting any such rules and regulations, the
Commission shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of considering
their adoption. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing, which
notice shall include the title and summary of the rules or regulations
proposed, shall be published twice in a local newspaper having substantial
circulation in the town at least five days, but not more than 15 days, prior
to the date of said hearing. A copy of the full text of the proposed
regulation or rules shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for public
inspection at least ten days prior to such hearing.



      (2)   Following such public hearing, the Commission shall act
upon such rules and may make such changes or alterations in the form or
content of the proposed rules or regulations as seen appropriate or necessary
as a result of the public hearing held in connection therewith. Such changes,
additions or alterations shall not require further public notice.



      (3)   Such rules, if adopted by the Commission and after
approval by the Board of Selectmen of the town, shall become effective after
publication once in a local newspaper having substantial circulation in the
town within 21 days following Board of Selectmen approval.



   (B)   Harbor management plan. The Harbor Management Commission shall
implement the town harbor management plan as adopted by the Harbor Management
Commission and Board of Selectmen effective as of May 4, 1994, and approved
by the state in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-113m. The Commission
shall provide for review of the plan and shall make any additions and/or
modifications to the plan that may be deemed appropriate subject to the
process set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 22a-113m through 22a-113o or other
subsequent harbor management legislation enacted by the Connecticut General
Assembly.



   (C)   Harbor management chapter. The Commission shall review town
ordinances affecting harbor management and recommend any necessary changes.
The Commission shall submit the ordinances required to implement the plan to
the Board of Selectmen for adoption.



   (D)   Review of development proposals. The Commission shall have the
authority to review and make recommendations on proposals affecting real
property in and contiguous to the town’s harbor management area as
submitted to or proposed by any commission or department of the town.



   (E)   Operating budget. The Commission shall prepare and present to
the Board of Selectmen an annual operating budget. The operating budget shall
include a section reflecting estimated revenues and a section covering
requested expenses by project or activity.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.22  CONSULTATION AND COORDINATION WITH OTHER TOWN BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS.



   (A)   Harbor management plan consistency review. A town “harbor
management consistency review” process shall be carried out by the Harbor
Management Commission to ensure effective implementation of the harbor
management plan and to provide coordinated, efficient and comprehensive
review of the proposed projects and activities affecting the harbor
management area.



   (B)   Coordinating with other town boards and commissions. As
authorized by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-113p, the Harbor Management Commission
may review, and make recommendations consistent with the harbor management
plan, on any proposal affecting the real property on, in or contiguous to the
harbor management area as submitted to, or proposed by, all other town
commissions and departments, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Planning Commission;



      (2)   Zoning Commission;



      (3)   Zoning Board of Appeals;



      (4)   Water and Sewer Commission;



      (5)   Department of Public Works;



      (6)   Parks and Recreation Commission;



      (7)   Economic Development Commission; and



      (8)   Conservation Commission



   (C)   Proposals subject to consistency review. The Harbor Management
Commission may review for consistency with the harbor management plan:



      (1)   All development proposals subject to the town’s
coastal site plan review process and located on parcels contiguous to the
harbor management area, with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings;



      (2)   All proposed uses or activities occurring below the mean
high water line; and



      (3)   All proposed revisions and amendments to town plans,
rules and regulations affecting the harbor management area and lands
contiguous to the harbor management area, including, but not limited to,
proposed revisions and amendments to the zoning regulations and plan of
development, regulations for use of the town beaches and boat launching
facilities, and regulations governing tidal wetlands and flood and erosion
control.



   (D)   Referral schedule. The town boards and commissions identified
in division (B) above shall send to the Harbor Management Commission a copy
of any proposal subject to the harbor management consistency review process
at the request of the Commission. The Commission shall be notified of any
such proposal at least 35 days prior to the commencement of any hearings
thereon or, where no hearing is held, at least 35 days prior to the taking of
any final action on the proposal.



   (E)   Determination of consistency. The Harbor Management Commission
shall determine the consistency of proposed projects with the harbor
management plan and make recommendations to the appropriate board or
commission. The local agency authorized to act on the proposal shall consider
the recommendations of the Commission. A two-thirds vote of all the members
of the local agency having authority to act on the proposal shall be required
to approve a proposal which has not received a favorable recommendation from
the Commission, provided that the provisions of this section shall not be
deemed to alter the authority of the agency having primary jurisdiction over
the proposal to deny, modify or condition the proposal. Failure of the
Commission to submit a recommendation shall be deemed to be approval of the
proposal.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any section of this chapter
in any portion of the harbor management area shall be liable to a fine of $50
for each offense. Each day that a violation continues after seven days
following notification of the offending party or, if the offending party is
not known, after notice has been posted for that time on any vessel, mooring
tackle or other object that is the cause of the violation, shall be
considered a separate offense. The provisions of this division (B) are in
addition to and do not supersede any penalties resulting from simultaneous
violations of state or federal laws.



      (2)   Fines levied under the provisions of this chapter shall
be collected by the town and deposited into the Town Harbor Management
Account. (See § 152.04(D).)



      (3)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter relating
to mooring permits may result in revocation of the mooring permit by majority
vote of the Harbor Management Commission at a duly held meeting after written
notice of the time, place and purpose of such meeting has been given to the
permit owner at his or her residence address more than 15 days before such
meeting. At such meeting, the permit owner shall be heard and shall be
permitted to present evidence to the Commission. A vote of the Commission to
revoke a mooring permit shall be subject to an appeal to the Superior Court
for the Judicial District of New London by trial de novo within 60 days after
the permit owner receives notice of the vote of the Commission to revoke his
or her permit. If no appeal is filed within said 60 days period, the permit
shall be revoked and the Harbor Master may thereafter cause such mooring to
be removed from its location.



(Ord. passed 5-4-1994)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 20, page 144



CHAPTER 153:  INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES



Section



   153.01   Inland Wetlands Agency established



   153.02   Fees for Inland Wetlands Agency



   153.03   Fines for violation of inland wetlands and watercourses
regulations



§ 153.01  INLAND WETLANDS AGENCY ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Whereas clauses:



      (1)   WHEREAS, by an ordinance adopted on June 20, 1966
entitled “Ordinance Establishing a Conservation Commission for the
Development and Conservation of Natural Resources, including Water Resources,
Within East Lyme” the town created a Conservation Commission with the
powers and duties of conservation commissions as set forth in the General
Statutes; and



      (2)   WHEREAS, by an ordinance adopted on April 24, 1975
entitled “Ordinance Concerning Inland Wetlands and Watercourses” the town
designated the Conservation Commission as its inland wetlands agency, and
authorized it to exercise the powers and duties of inland wetlands agencies
as set forth in the General Statutes; and



      (3)   WHEREAS, the volume of business regarding the
Commission’s duties as the town’s inland wetlands agency has become such
that it is burdensome for the Commission to attend to its duties as the
town’s Conservation Commission; and



      (4)   WHEREAS, it is necessary and desirable that the
Commission continue to exercise its powers and duties as the town’s inland
wetlands agency, and that the Commission’s powers and duties of the
town’s Conservation Commission be assigned to another commission.



   (B)   The name of the Conservation Commission is hereby changed to
the Inland Wetlands Agency.



   (C)   The Inland Wetlands Agency shall continue to act as the
town’s designated and authorized inland wetlands agency, with all the
authority, powers and responsibilities of local inland wetlands agencies set
forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. §§22a-42 et seq., as amended from time to time.
All regulations heretofore adopted by the Conservation Commission shall
remain in full force and effect. All matters pending before the Conservation
Commission on the effective date of this amendment including, but not limited
to, applications, permits, hearings investigations, enforcement actions and
open or pending items of business of any nature whatsoever shall continue to
be pending before and administered by the Inland Wetlands Agency.



   (D)   (1)   Effective July 1, 1966 there is constituted a seven
member Inland Wetlands Agency (fka Conservation Commission) which shall have
the duties and powers set forth in the General Statutes.



      (2)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen may consult with local and
regional organizations interested in conservation of natural resources at the
time of making original appointments and filling vacancies.



      (3)   The members of the Commission shall be appointed in the
following manner: four terms shall be filled by appointment to expire on the
first Monday of January, 1968 and three terms shall be filled by appointment
to expire on the first Monday of January, 1970. The four terms that expire in
January, 1968 shall be filled by appointment for four years. The three terms
that expire in January, 1970 shall be filled by appointment for four years.



   (E)   (1)   Pursuant to the authority granted by Public Act 79-84
of the General Assembly, and in accordance with Chapter 4 of the Charter,
there shall be three alternate members of the Inland Wetlands Agency
appointed by the Board of Selectmen.



      (2)   Two terms shall be filled by appointment until the first
Monday of January, 1982, at which time they shall be filled by appointment
for four years. One term shall be filled by appointment until the first
Monday of January, 1984, at which time it shall be filled by appointment for
four years. Upon their expiration, all terms shall be filled by appointment
for four years.



(Ord. passed 6-20-1966; Ord. passed 4-24-1975; Ord. passed 12-11-1979; Ord.
passed 5-15-2008)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 9, page 233;    TM Volume 22, page 787, Amended; See Page
92: Alternates to Conservation Commission



   TM Volume 22 page 787; TM Volume 11, pages 135, 145; TM Volume 12, page
95, Amended



   TM Volume 13, page 326



§ 153.02  FEES FOR INLAND WETLANDS AGENCY.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 8-1C,
Revision of 1958, the following schedule of fees recommended by the Inland
Wetlands Agency is established.



 



Application fee **



   Commercial uses

 

$400




      Plus fee from Schedule A

 





   Residential uses

 

$150 plus* $50/lot




      Plus fee from Schedule A

 





   All other uses

 

$200




      Plus fee from Schedule A

 





   *Each lot with regulated activities




   **$30 fee required by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-27j will be added to the
base fees



Appeal of duly authorized agent decision
 

$300



Approval by duly authorized agent **
 

$100



Complex application fee
 

Actual cost




   The Inland Wetlands Agency may charge an additional fee sufficient to
cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications. Such fee may
include, but not be limited to, the cost of retaining experts, to advise,
analyze, review and report on issues requiring such experts. The Agency or
the duly authorized agent shall estimate the complex application fee, which
shall be paid pursuant to § 19.1 of the Inland Wetland and Watercourses
regulations within 10 days of the applicant’s receipt or notice of such
estimate. Any portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual
cost shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 30 days after
publication of the agency’s decision.



Modification of previous approval
 

$100



Monitoring compliance fee
 

$100



Permitted and nonregulated uses
 





   Permitted uses as of right

 

$0




   Nonregulated

 

$0



Public hearing fee
 
 



   Single residential

 

$200




   Commercial/industrial/multi-family

 

$450



Regulation amendment petitions (does not include notices or regulation
advisories from DEP)
 

$500




   Map amendment petitions

 

$500




      Plus fee from Schedule B

 




Renewal of previous approval
 

$100



Significant activity fee
 

$300










 


Schedule A



For the purpose of calculating the permit application fee, the area in
Schedule A is the total area of wetlands and watercourses and the upland
review area upon which a regulated activity is proposed



Square Feet of Area

 





Less than 1,000

 

$0




1,000 to 5,000

 

$250




More than 5,000

 

$750









 


Schedule B



For the purpose of calculating the map amendment petition fee, linear feet in
Schedule B is the total length of wetlands and watercourses boundary subject
to the proposed boundary change



Linear Feet

 
 



Less than 500

 

$0




500 to 1,000

 

$250




More than 1,000

 

$750




 



   (B)   Fees shall be payable at the time an application is submitted,
except as otherwise provided.



(Ord. passed 6-4-1988; Ord. passed 3-30-1989; Ord. passed 1-18-1995; Ord.
passed 11-9-2001; Ord. passed 2-23-2003; Ord. passed 2-10-2004; Ord. passed
11-17-2004; Ord. passed 5-16-2007; Ord. passed 6-19-2008; Ord. effective
7-1-2011)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 16, page 213; TM Volume 16, page 353, amended; TM Volume 21,
page 6, Amended; TM Volume 21, page 626, Amended; TM Volume 22, page 113,
Amended; TM Volume 22, page 247; TM Volume 22, page 345, Amended fees; TM
Volume 22, page 455; Amended; TM Volume 22, page 674, Amended; TM Volume 22,
page 789, Amended



   TM Volume 21, page 2



§ 153.03  FINES FOR VIOLATION OF INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Citations. Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-42g, as
amended, the Inland Wetlands Agency is hereby authorized to issue citations
for violations of the inland wetlands and watercourses regulations of the
Agency.



   (B)   Fines; schedule of fines.



      (1)   A fine for each violation shall not exceed $1,000. Such
fines, when paid, shall be paid to the Treasurer of the town and deposited in
the General Fund or a special fund designated by the town. No such fine may
be levied against the state or any employee of the state acting within the
scope of his or her employment.



      (2)   Fines for each citation shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:



 


Nature of Violation

 

Fine



Regulated activities conducted without a permit in the upland review area
(within 100 ft. of a wetland or watercourse)
 

$500



Regulated activities conducted without a permit in a wetland or watercourse
 

$1,000



Regulated activities conducted without a permit that under § 12 of the
Inland Wetland and Watercourses regulations would have been eligible for an
administrative approval from the wetlands agent
 

$15




 



   (C)   Who may issue citations. Citations made pursuant to this
section may be issued by a police officer or by any other person authorized
by the First Selectman to do so.



   (D)   Manner of service. A citation issued pursuant to this section
may be served by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the person named in the citation. If the person named in the
citation refuses to accept the citation sent by certified mail, the citation
may be sent by regular United States mail.



   (E)   Payment of fines. A person who receives a citation may make
uncontested payment of the imposed fine within 30 days of receipt of the
citation. If the citation has been sent by regular mail, the date of receipt
shall be the third business day following the date of the citation.



   (F)   Hearing procedure.



      (1)   Any person issued a citation under this section shall be
entitled to a hearing. The procedure for the hearing, disposition and
enforcement shall be in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152c entitled
“Hearing Procedure for Citations,” as it may be amended from time to time
and as set forth herein.



      (2)   The First Selectman shall appoint one or more Citation
Hearing Officers to conduct the hearings held pursuant to this section. A
Citation Hearing Officer shall not be a police officer or a town employee or
a member of the Inland Wetlands Agency.



      (3)   (a)   At any time within the 12 months of the
expiration of the time period for the payment of uncontested fines,
penalties, costs or fees assessed under this section the town shall send a
notice to the person cited.



         (b)   The notice shall inform the person cited:



            1.   Of the allegations against him or her and the
amount of the fines;



            2.   That he or she may contest his or her
liability before a Citation Hearing Officer by delivering in person or by
mail written notice within ten days of the date thereof;



            3.   That if he or she does not demand such a
hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and



            4.   That such judgment may enter without further
notice.



      (4)   If the person who is sent notice pursuant to division
(F)(3) above wishes to admit liability for an alleged violation, he or she
may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine in person
or by mail to an official designated by the town. Such payment shall be
inadmissable in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct
of such person or other person making the payment. Any person who does not
deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of
the first notice provided for in division (F)(3) above shall be deemed to
have admitted liability, and the designated municipal official shall certify
such person’s failure to respond to the Citation Hearing Officer. The
Citation Hearing Officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines,
penalties, costs or fees provided for by this section and shall follow the
procedures set forth in division (F)(6) below.



      (5)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days and not more than 30 days from the date of the
mailing of notice, provided the Hearing Officer shall grant upon good cause
shown any reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or
continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation
issued by the issuing official or police officer shall be filed and retained
by the municipality, and shall be deemed a business record within the scope
of Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein.
The presence of the issuing official or police officer shall be required at
the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his or
her liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his or
her behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the Citation Hearing
Officer, may present evidence on behalf of the town. If such person fails to
appear, the Citation Hearing Officer may enter an assessment by default
against him or her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the
applicable provisions of the inland wetlands and watercourses regulations and
this ordinance. The Citation Hearing Officer may accept from the person who
received the citation copies of police reports, investigatory and citation
reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that
the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The Citation Hearing Officer
shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of
proof as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the
admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony
shall be given under oath or affirmation. The Citation Hearing Officer shall
announce his or her decision at the end of the hearing. If he or she
determines that the person is not liable, he or she shall dismiss the matter
and enter his or her decision in writing accordingly. If he or she determines
that the person is liable for the violation, he or she shall forthwith enter
and assess the fines against such person as provided by this section.



      (6)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry,
the Citation Hearing Officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the
assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days
nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of
assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area Number
10 together with an entry fee of $8. The certified copy of the notice of
assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such 12-month
period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one
record of assessment and court costs of $8, against such person in favor of
the town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes, the
Hearing Officer’s assessment, when so entered as judgment shall have the
effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may
issue without further notice to such person.



      (7)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered
pursuant to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An
appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for small claims cases pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-259, in the Superior Court for Geographical Area
Number 10, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with
the rules of judges of the Superior Court.



   (G)   Cumulative remedies. The fines set forth in this section shall
be in addition to and not in lieu of any other penalties or remedies for
violations of inland wetlands and watercourses regulations of the town, as
more particularly set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-44, as amended from
time to time.



(Ord. passed 5-27-2008)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 22 page 787A



CHAPTER 154:  HISTORIC PROPERTIES



Section



   154.01   Designation of historic property



   154.02   Establishment of Historic Properties Commission



   154.03   Appointment of Commission members



   154.04   Alternate members



   154.05   Commission functions and purposes



§ 154.01  DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTY.



   The Board of Selectmen, having received and reviewed the final report
of the East Lyme Historic Properties Study Committee prepared in accordance
with Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-147q, finds that the hereinafter described
properties are significant in the history, architecture, archaeology and
culture of the town and the state and that the distinctive characteristics of
said properties should be preserved and protected, and hereby designates the
following as historic properties in the town:



   (A)   First Parcel. A certain piece or parcel of land, with the
buildings thereon, located on the southerly side of the West Main Street,
known generally as the “Thomas Lee House”, more particularly bounded and
described as follows:




Beginning at a point that marks the northwesterly corner of the herein
described parcel, said point located N 60 degrees 01' 20" E 189.91 feet from
a Connecticut Highway Department monument recovered located at the
intersection of Giants Neck Road and West Main Street; thence S 22 degrees
23' 40" E 127.25 feet to a point; thence N 79 degrees 11' 02" E 61.66 feet to
a point; thence N 01 degrees 46' 00" E 66.80 feet to a point; thence N 21
degrees 59' 00" W 90.45 feet to a point, said point being at the southerly
side of West Main Street, the last four courses being along land now or
formerly of the town of East Lyme; thence S 60 degrees 01' 20" W 89.17 feet
along the southerly side of West Main Street to the point and place of
beginning.





The above described parcel of land with improvements contains 11,586 square
feet and is depicted on a certain map entitled BOUNDARY SURVEY WEST MAIN
STREET & GIANTS NECK ROAD EAST LYME, CT. PREPARED FOR THE EAST LYME
HISTORICAL SOCIETY, INC. AND THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STATE
OF CONNECTICUT D.E.P. #0441998112001 SCALE 1" = 40' NOV. 20, 1998 REV 2/20/99
AND REV 2/29/00 and signed and sealed by DAVID M. COONROD L.L.S. NIANTIC, CT.
on file with the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, to which
references may be had (hereinafter “the Map”).





Reference may be had to a certain Warrantee Deed from Jerome R. Rathbun to
The East Lyme Historical Society dated April 20, 1914 and recorded at Volume
17 Page 307 of the East Lyme land records. In the event of any discrepancy,
the Map shall control.




   (B)   Second Parcel. A certain piece or parcel of land, with the
buildings thereon, located on the southerly side of West Main Street, known
generally as the “Little Boston School House”, the “Lee House Barn”
and related buildings, more particularly bounded and described as follows:



Beginning at a Connecticut Highway Department monument recovered, located at
the intersection of Giants Neck Road and West Main Street which marks the
northwest corner of land of the State of Connecticut to be conveyed; thence N
60 degrees 01' 20" E 189.91 feet along the southerly side of West Main Street
to a point; thence S 22 degrees 23' 40" E 127.25 feet to a point, thence N 79
degrees 11' 02" E 61.66 feet to a point, thence N 01 degrees 46' 00" E 66.80
feet to a point, thence N 21 degrees 59' 00" W 90.45 feet to a point, the
last four courses along land now or formerly East Lyme Historical Society;
thence N 60 degrees 01' 20" E 23.42 feet to a Connecticut highway Department
monument recovered, thence N 56 degrees 37' 08" E 148.49 feet to an iron pin
recovered, the last two courses along the southerly side of West Main Street,
thence S 35 degrees, 02' 00" E 284.42 feet to a point; thence S 35 degrees
45' 27" E 108.07 feet to a point in a brook, the last two courses along land
now or formerly Phyllis Perkins; thence S 33 degrees 39' 26" W 240.81 feet to
an iron pin set, the last course along other land of the State of
Connecticut, thence N 27 degrees 38' 08" W 108 feet to a point along land now
or formerly Paul and Joyce Riccio; thence N 27 degrees 38' 08" W 75.00 feet
to an iron pin set; thence S 69 degrees 39' 11" W 203.37 feet to an iron pin
recovered; thence S 56 degrees 07' 53" W 65.46 feet to an iron pin recovered,
the last three courses along land now or formerly Robert Ashburn, thence the
following two courses along the east side of Giants Neck Road, N 35 degrees
51' 03" W 200.00 feet to an iron pin set, thence N 24 degrees 10' 30" W 77.98
feet to the point and place of beginning.



The above-described parcel of land with improvements contains 3.497 acres and
is depicted on a certain map entitled BOUNDARY SURVEY WEST MAIN STREET &
GIANTS NECK ROAD EAST LYME, CT PREPARED FOR THE EAST LYME HISTORICAL SOCIETY,
INC AND THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STATE OF CONNECTICUT
D.E.P. #0441998112001 SCALE 1" = 40' NOV 20, 1998 REV 2/20/99 AND REV 2/29/00
and signed and sealed by DAVID M COONROD LLS NIANTIC CT. on file with the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, to which references may
be had (hereinafter “the Map”).



Being the same premises bounded and described within Public Act 98-255 Sec
15(a). Being the same premises bounded and described in a certain lease
between the Town of East Lyme and the East Lyme Historical Society dated
January 1, 2001 and recorded at Volume 515 Page 248 of the East Lyme land
records. In the event of any discrepancy, the Map shall control.



   (C)   Third Parcel. A certain piece or parcel of land, together with
the buildings and improvements located thereon, located on the northerly side
of Plants Dam Road, known generally as the “Samuel Smith House”, more
particularly bounded and described as follows:



Beginning at a Drill Hole, which is on the northerly side of Plants Dam Road
and approximately 65' west of North Bride Brook Road; thence Northwesterly
along a centerline of a brook a distance of 768+/- to a Point connected by a
survey tie line North 30 degrees 01' 35" West a distance of 753.03; thence
South 84 degrees 24' 11" West a distance of 534.36 to a Point; thence South
12 degrees 12'45" East a distance of 300.97 to an Iron Pin; thence North 81
degrees 43'16" East a distance of 110.97 to a Point; thence North 89 degrees
02'26" East a distance of 22.48 to a Drill Hole; thence North 84 degrees
01'07" East a distance of 77.37 to a Point; thence South 86 degrees 55'05"
East a distance of 10.68 to a Point; thence North 85 degrees 12'39" East a
distance of 139.04 to a Drill Hole; thence North 82 degrees 54'28" East a
distance of 146.23 to a Drill Hole; thence North 78 degrees 10'39" East a
distance of 108.14 to a Point; thence North76 degrees 51'12" East a distance
of 149.57 to a Drill Hole; to the Point of Beginning; containing 10.09 acres
+/-.



Being the same premises bounded and described on a map in a certain
“Easements, Declaration of Covenants and Declaration of Preservation
Restrictions” from the Town of East Lyme to the State of Connecticut acting
by the State Historic Preservation Office dated April 25, 2013 and recorded
in Volume 914, Page 380 of the East Lyme land records. In the event of any
discrepancy, the Map shall control.



(Ord. effective 2-19-2014)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 23 page 434, Amended



§ 154.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES COMMISSION.



   There is an existing five member Historic Properties Commission
established by an ordinance dated August 11, 2009 and effective September 16,
2009. Said Commission shall continue to administer the provisions of the
Connecticut General Statutes relative to the historic properties now or
hereafter designated by the town, with all the authority, powers and
responsibilities of historic properties commissions set forth in Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 7-147r, as amended from time to time.



(Ord. effective 2-19-2014)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 23 page 434, Amended



§ 154.03  APPOINTMENT OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.



   The members of the Commission shall continue to be appointed in the
following manner: three terms were filled by appointment until the first
Monday of January, 2010, at which time they were filled by appointment for
four years. Two terms were filled by appointment until the first Monday of
January, 2012, at which time they will continue to be filled by appointment
for four years.



(Ord. effective 2-19-2014)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 23 page 434, Amended



§ 154.04  ALTERNATE MEMBERS.



   There shall continue to be three alternate members of the Commission.
The terms of two alternate members were filled by appointment until the first
Monday of January, 2010, at which time they shall continue to be filled by
appointment for four years. The term of the other alternate member shall
continue to be filled by appointment until the first Monday of January, 2012,
and will continue to be filled by appointment for four years. Such alternate
members shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties of a member of the
Commission.



(Ord. effective 2-19-2014)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 23 page 434, Amended



§ 154.05  COMMISSION FUNCTIONS AND PURPOSES.



   The Historic Properties Commission shall continue to perform all of the
functions and purposes set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 7-147p through
7-147y, inclusive.



(Ord. effective 2-19-2014)



Editor’s note:



   TM Volume 23 page 434, Amended



CHAPTER 155: PLANNING COMMISSION, ZONING COMMISSION AND
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS



Section



   155.01   Fees



§ 155.01  FEES.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 8-1C,
Revision of 1958, the following schedule of fees recommended by the
respective Commissions is established



      (1)   Planning Commission.



         (a)   Subdivision application review. For subdivisions
and re-subdivisions, the following fees shall be paid at the time of
application to the Planning Commission:



 

Base fee
 

$750



Fee per lot
 

$100



Professional/legal consultations
 

Actual cost



Public hearing fee, if applicable
 

$1,250



Road/utility design review fee
 

$1/linear foot of new road



The application fee shall include such additional fees that are required by
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-27j, as it may be amended from time to time



 



         (b)   Subdivision application processing and inspection.
Upon approval of a subdivision/re-subdivision by the Planning Commission, the
following fees shall be paid prior to Chair’s signing the approved
subdivision plan:



 

Base fee
 

$100



Erosion control fee
 

Per lot $50



Inspection fee
 

$2/linear foot of new road



Per lot fee
 

$100



Road/utility document review fee
 

$500




 



         (c)   Coastal area management review application.
$10/lot; $25 minute.



         (d)   Application for subdivision modification. $200.



      (3)   Zoning Commission.



 



Coastal area management site plan
 





   Coastal area management site plan (commercial, industrial, multi-family)

 

$300




   Coastal area management site plan (new single-family dwelling and
additions)

 

$200



Commercial site plan
 

$300



Lot split
 

$200



New business registration
 





   Commercial/industrial

 

$50




   Home occupation

 

$25



Special permit
 

$150




   Special permit (multi-family, commercial, industrial, top-soil, sand
and gravel, plus storm water review fee and site plan review fee

 

$500




   Special permit patio permit (renewal)

 

$20



Stormwater review
 

$300



Zone change (including map change)
 

$400



Zoning permit (commercial/industrial/institutional additions), plus site plan
review fee and storm water review fee
 





   Over 1,500 sq. feet

 

$300




   Under 1,500 sq. feet

 

$100



Zoning permit (commercial/industrial/institutional alterations)
 





   Under 1,500 sq. feet

 

$100




   Over 1,500 sq. feet

 

$200



Zoning permit new commercial/institutional buildings, plus site plan review
fee and storm water review fee
 





   Over 25,000 sq. feet, plus $10 per sq. foot gross floor area

 

$2,000




   Up to 25,000 sq. feet

 

$500



Zoning permit (multi-family dwellings each unit)
 

$300



Zoning permit (new single-family dwellings, including new individual units of
multi-family dwellings)
 

$300



Zoning permit (single-family alterations)
 

$75




   Zoning permit single-family

 





      Dwelling additions, under 1,000 sq. feet

 

$100




      Dwelling additions, over 1,000 sq. feet

 

$200




         Zoning permit pools

 

$50




         Zoning permit accessory structure

 





            Over 150 sq. feet

 

$50




            Under 150 sq. feet

 

$20



Zoning regulation change
 

$300



Zoning status opinion (mortgage)
 

$50



The application fees shall include such additional fees that are required by
Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-27i, as it may be amended from time to time. The
current fee is $30.




 



      (4)   Zoning Board of Appeals.



 

Application fee payable to Zoning Board of Appeals
 

$350




 



   (B)   Fees shall be payable at the time an application is submitted,
except as otherwise provided.



(Ord. passed 6-4-1988; Ord. passed 3-30-1989; Ord. passed 1-18-1995; Ord.
passed 11-9-2001; Ord. passed 2-23-2003; Ord. passed 2-10-2004; Ord. passed
11-17-2004; Ord. passed 5-16-2007; Ord. passed 6-19-2008; Ord. effective
7-1-2011)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   PUBLIC ACTS AND SPECIAL LAWS OF THE TOWN OF EAST LYME



      II.   ABANDONMENT AND DISCONTINUANCE OF STREETS AND ROADS



      III.   STREET NAME CHANGES



      IV.   AGREEMENTS



      V.   WATER



      VI.   SEWERS



TABLE I:  PUBLIC ACTS AND SPECIAL LAWS OF THE TOWN OF EAST LYME



Editor’s note:



   Complete copies of all Public Acts and Special Laws of the Town of East
Lyme are available at the Town Hall.



 

Public Act/Special Law
 
Date Approved
 
Description




Special Laws Vol. 4, page 1242
 
- -
 
An Act incorporating the Town of East Lyme.


Special Laws Vol. 4, page 1244
 
Passed 1840
 
Mileage of the Town of East Lyme.


Special Laws Vol. 4, page 1166
 
Passed 1841
 
Changing name of Second School Society of Lyme to the First School Society of
East Lyme.


Special Laws Vol. 4, page 1135
 
Passed 1844
 
Annexing Austin F. Perkins to Second School District in East Lyme.


Special Laws Vol. 6, page 403
 
7-24-1868
 
Providing for the appointment of a trustee of the fund devised by Elisha
Miller, late of Lyme, deceased, for school purposes.


Special Laws Vol. 9, page 238
 
4-14-1881
 
An Act relating to the encampment of the Connecticut National Guard.


House Joint Res. 25
 
4-14-1882
 
An Act incorporating the Connecticut Spiritualist Camp- Meeting Association.


Special Laws Vol. 9, page 758
 
3-28-1883
 
Establishing school district lines in the Town of East Lyme.


Special Laws Vol. 9, page 849
 
5-3-1883
 
Providing for the purchase of Niantic Bridge by the Towns of East Lyme and
Waterford.


Special Laws Vol. 9, page 923
 
3-5-1884
 
Concerning the Smith Memorial Home.


Special Laws Vol. 10, page 28
 
3-6-1885
 
Changing school district boundaries in East Lyme.


Special Laws Vol. 10, page 312
 
Passed 3-26-1886
 
Concerning the Niantic Burying Ground in East Lyme.


Special Laws Vol. 11, page 574
 
5-25-1893
 
In favor of the Town of East Lyme; burial expenses of Marshall Dean.


Special Laws Vol. 12, page 733
 
3-17-1897
 
An Act relating to the encampment of the Connecticut National Guard.


Special Laws Vol. 13, page 141
 
4-18-1899
 
Amending an act dividing the Town of East Lyme into two voting districts.


TM Volume 11, page 312
 
11-6-1973
 
Repealed by referendum.


TM Volume 21, page 5
 
 
 
Changed to three districts.


Special Laws Vol. 14, page 223
 
3-15-1903
 
Incorporating the East Lyme Fire District.


Special Laws Vol. 14, page 562
 
4-5-1905
 
Providing for the payment of the funeral expenses of Peter Dyer.


Special Laws Vol. 14, page 1095
 
7-18-1905
 
Concerning the purchase by the state of the Rope Ferry Bridge.


Special Laws Vol. 16, page 377
 
7-25-1911
 
An Act making an appropriation for the maintenance of the Drawbridge across
the Niantic River between the Towns of East Lyme and Waterford; for the two
years ending September 30, 1913.


Special Laws Vol. 17, page 1155
 
 
 
An Act directing the Highway Commissioner to construct a bridge over the
Niantic River between the Towns of East Lyme and Waterford.


State of Connecticut
 
Senate, 5-17-1917
 
Reconsidered and passed by Yeas and Nays: Yeas 23, Nays 8, the objections of
the Governor notwithstanding. John Buckley, Clerk.


State of Connecticut
 
House of Representatives, 5-17-1917
 
Reconsidered and passed by Yeas and Nays: Yeas 220, Nays 16, the objections
of the Governor notwithstanding. Edward J. Kenealy, Clerk.


Special Laws Vol. 16, page 597
 
9-5-1911
 
An Act concerning the organization of districts for fire, sewer and other
purposes.


Special Laws Vol. 17, page 1078
 
5-16-1917
 
An Act granting to the Town of East Lyme the use of certain property for
highway purposes.


Special Laws Vol. 18, page 375
 
3-29-1921
 
An Act authorizing the Selectmen of the Town of East Lyme to sell the
schoolhouse in Flanders.


Special Laws Vol. 22, page 797
 
6-8-1937
 
An Act concerning exchange of land between the state and residents in the
Town of Lyme, Old Lyme and East Lyme at Stone’s Ranch.


Special Laws Vol. 22, page 75
 
4-4-1935
 
An Act including a highway in the Town of East Lyme in the trunk line system.


Special Laws Vol. 23, page 124
 
5-2-1939
 
An Act including a highway in the Town of East Lyme in the trunk line system;
Bride Brook Road.


Special Laws Vol. 22, page 66
 
6-3-1939
Approved by town meeting 8-1-1939
 
An Act providing for biennial elections in the Town of East Lyme. (Many
portions of this Act no longer in effect.)


 
 
Received 4-30-1940
 
Perambulations of town line Lyme and East Lyme. (Note: recorded in either
Lyme or Old Lyme.)


Special Laws Vol. 23, page 1000
 
6-16-1941
 
An Act authorizing the Town of East Lyme to construct a water system.


Special Acts 1951, Page 70
TM Volume 11, page 312
 
5-16-1951
 
An Act providing for the appointment of an Assessor and for the filing of
assessment lists in the Town of East Lyme; repealed 11-6-1973 by referendum.


House Bill No. 1462
(417)
 
7-8-1955
 
An Act authorizing the Connecticut Spiritualist Camp-Meeting Association to
levy a tax.


Special Acts 1955, page 404
 
7-8-1955
 
An Act changing the property tax assessment date in the Town of East Lyme.
See Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-62a (1995).


Special Acts 1955, page 654
 
8-11-1955
 
An Act validating notice of sale by the Tax Collector of the Town of East
Lyme.


Special Acts 1957, page 23
 
4-3-1957
 
An Act concerning the filing of assessment abstracts in the Town of East Lyme.


Substitute for House Bill No. 1935
(619)
 
7-17-1957
 
An Act authorizing the Connecticut Spiritualist Camp-Meeting Association to
levy a tax.


Special Acts Vol. 34, page 176
 
5-22-1969
 
An Act including the Towns of Lyme, Old Lyme, East Lyme, Haddam and East
Haddam in the franchise area of the Southern Connecticut Gas Company.


Special Acts, Vol. 34, page 257
 
6-19-1969
 
An Act authorizing the Town of East Lyme to acquire a section of Colton Road
in the Town of Old Lyme.


Special Acts Vol. 34, page 329
 
7-2-1969
 
An Act concerning an appropriation to the Waterford-East Lyme Shellfish
Commission.


Special Act 293 (Section 29) of the 1969 Session of the General Assembly
Special Acts, Vol. 34, page 384
 
7-8-1969
 
Shore erosion control project at Giant’s Neck.


Public Act No. 33 of the 1971 Session of the General Assembly
Special Acts January Session, 1971 Vol. 1, page 53 (Vol. 35)
 
4-9-1971
 
An Act concerning the Waterford-East Lyme Shellfish Commission.


Special Act Vol. 35, page 26
January Session 1971, 1972
Vol. 36 (none)
 
5-5-1971
 
An Act concerning conveyance of land of the state to the Town of East Lyme
and grant of two easements to said town.


Special Act No. 73-138
Special Acts Vol. 37, page 231
 
6-21-1973
(vol 3 of set)
 
An Act granting easements to the town of East Lyme (re well sites and
easements).


Special Act No. 75-43
 
5-30-1975
 
An Act creating the Pine Grove, Niantic Association.


Special Act No. 77-68
Special Act Vol. 2, page 77, part 2, January Session 1977
 
6-20-1977
 
An Act concerning the conveyance of land to the Town of East Lyme.


Special Act No. 78-3
 
3-29-1978
 
An Act concerning the correction of errors in a property conveyance to the
Town of East Lyme; amending Special Act No. 77-68.


House Bill No. 5918
Special Act No. 84-31
 
5-29-1984
 
An Act concerning the transfer of Pine Grove Road to the Town of East Lyme.


Substitute House Bill No. 7535
Public Act No. 85-358
PA 87-512 - SB 395
 
 
 
An Act concerning authorization of state grant commitments for school
construction projects.


PA 87-520 - sSB 865
 
Effective 10-1-1987
 
An Act concerning establishment of a Niantic River Gateway Commission.


 
 
Effective 10-1-1987
 
An Act concerning the depositing of shellfish and shellfisheries in Branford
and increasing the penalty for a violation concerning the Waterford-East Lyme
Shellfish Commission and the taking of shellfish from the Niantic River.


PA 88-364
 
 
 
An Act concerning the revisor’s technical corrections to the General
Statutes and to certain Public and Special Acts.


Special Act No. 90-23
 
6-6-1990
 
An Act concerning authorization of state grant commitments for school
building projects.


Special Act No. 90-37
 
6-6-1990
 
An Act concerning the conveyance of certain parcels of state land in
Hartford, New Milford, Ansonia and East Lyme.


Special Act No. 93-34
Substitute House Bill No. 7207
 
6-6-1990
 
An Act concerning the conveyance of state land in East Lyme, Meriden and
South Windsor, an easement to the state at Central Connecticut State
University and the transfer of property of the Department of Transportation.


PA 92-108 - HB 5826
Judiciary Committee
 
10-1-1992
 
An Act concerning composition of the Department of Correction.


September 2009 Special Session
Special Act No. 13-23
 
 
 
An Act concerning the conveyance of certain parcels of state land, the
boundaries of Fenwick, the validation of certain town actions, the City Point
Yacht Club and Wheeler Library.


 
 
Effective 1-5-2011
 
Probate redistricting.


Special Act No. 15-22
 
7-10-2015
 
An Act concerning mutual consolidation of dispatch facilities in New London,
East Lyme and Waterford.


June Special Session, Special Act No. 15-1
 
 
 
An Act concerning the conveyance of certain parcels of state land and
amending the Charters of the Borough of Fenwick and the Giants Neck Beach
Association.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  ABANDONMENT AND DISCONTINUANCE
OF STREETS AND ROADS



 

Ord.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
- -
 
Abandonment of a portion of Gurley Road (TM Volume 11, pages 193, 214).


-
 
3-7-1974
 
Abandonment of portions of Ancient Highway (TM Volume 11, pages 362, 364).


-
 
11-18-1976
 
Abandonment of portions of South Ridge Road (TM Volume 12, page 282).


-
 
9-23-1979
 
Discontinuance of Pine Grove Road (TM Volume 13, page 296).


-
 
1-24-1981
 
Discontinuance of a portion of Cubles Drive while reserving an easement for
drainage (TM Volume 14, page 78).


-
 
12-1-1985
 
Discontinuance of a portion of Luce Avenue (TM Volume 15, page 230).


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord.
 
Date Effective
 
Description


-
 
1-1-1974
 
Changing the name of Lake Avenue (Crescent Beach) to Terrace Avenue and
Prospect Avenue (Niantic) to Haigh Avenue (TM Volume 11, pages 276, 281).


-
 
1-1-1974
 
Changing the names of the following Roads as indicated (TM Volume 11, pages
234, 236, 345):



 



 


Present Name

 

New Name





Beachwood Road (Giants Neck Heights)
 
South Beechwood Road


Beechwood Road (Gorton Lake)
 
North Beechwood Road


Bride Brook Road (Boston Post Road to Rt. 156)
 
North Bride Brook Road


Bride Brook Road (Giants Neck Beach)
 
South Bride Brook Road


Cobblers Court (Carriage Hill)
 
North Cobblers Court


Cobblers Court (Roxbury Park)
 
South Cobblers Court


Edgewood Road (Smith Cove)
 
North Edgewood Road


Edgewood Road (Giants Neck Heights)
 
South Edgewood Road


Ledge Rock Road (North Laurel Hill)
 
North Ledge Rock Road


Ledge Rock Road (South Laurel Hill)
 
South Ledge Rock Road


Lee Road (Giants Neck Heights)
 
North Lee Road


Lee Road (Giants Neck Beach)
 
South Lee Road


Main Street (Pine Grove)
 
North Main Street


Pattagansett Road (Giants Neck Beach)
 
West Pattagansett Road


Pattagansett Road (Niantic)
 
East Pattagansett Road


Pine Street (Saunders Point)
 
North Pine Street


Pine Street (Pine Grove)
 
South Pine Street


Society Road (NE of Dean Road)
 
East Society Road


Society Road (E of Ct. Tpke. and Bride Brk Road)
 
West Society Road


Washington Avenue (Niantic)
 
North Washington Ave (by correction)


Washington Avenue (Crescent Beach)
 
South Washington Avenue (by correction)




 



 

Ord.
 
Date Effective
 
Description


-
 
7-1-1975
 
Changing the name of Upper Four Mile River Road extending northerly from
Scott Road to Grassy Hill Road to Whistletown Road (TM Volume 12, page 73).


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE IV:  AGREEMENTS



 

Ord.
 
Date Effective
 
Description


-
 
4-18-1960; 3-15-1977
 
Providing for participation by the town in the Regional Planning Authority
(TM Volume 8, page 88; TM Volume 12, page 331 amended).


-
 
Passed 4-26-1987
 
Creating a trust for the benefit of the town pursuant to Public Act 86-1,
6-23- 1986 Session II of the Connecticut General Assembly (TM Volume 16, page
17).


-
 
10-20-1992
 
Creating a Regional Council of Governments (TM Volume 19, page 161).


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE V:  WATER



 

Ord.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
5-27-1970
 
Extension of town water system; the major portion of the system will serve
the developed area of the town south of the Connecticut Turnpike including
Giant’s Neck, Black Point, Crescent Beach, Niantic Village, Pine Grove and
Saunders Point and the fringe residential development along Route 156,
Roxbury Road and Flanders Road. North of the Connecticut Turnpike the system
will serve the Flanders area, the fringe residential development along
Beckwith Highway to a point approximately 1,200 feet north of Irvingdell
Place and westerly on the Boston Post Road to the residential development
surrounding the southern end of Pattagansett Lake including Upper
Pattagansett Road to Filosi Road (TM Volume 10, page 252, 277).


-
 
7-8-1972; 1-3-1977
 
Water assessments imposed upon property owners on Chesterfield Road (TM
Volume 11, page 110, 133; TM Volume 12, page 295 amended).


-
 
9-23-1973
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 2; extending Road  (TM Volume 11, page
269, 281)


-
 
9-23-1973
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 3; extending from a point on Chesterfield
Road (TM Volume 11, page 144, 149).


-
 
1-3-1977
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 3; extending in a westerly direction along
the Boston Post Road and extending in a southwesterly direction along Sunrise
Trail (TM Volume 12, page 293).


-
 
6-26-1977
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 4; extending in a northwesterly direction
along South Drive (TM Volume 12, page 362).


-
 
9-26-1977
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 5; extending in a general southerly
direction along Lovers Lane (TM Volume 13, page 12).


-
 
3-22-1979
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 6; extending in a general westerly
direction along Burnap Road (TM Volume 13, page 200).


-
 
7-20-1979
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 7; extending from a point at the
intersection of Mostowy Road and Chesterfield Road (TM Volume 13, page 246).


-
 
3-1-1983
 
Water assessments in Black Point Beach Club Association area (TM Volume 14,
page 334).


-
 
7-3-1985
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 8; extending from the termini of the
existing water system at the intersection of West End Avenue and Billow Road
and at the intersection of the Great Wight Way and West Lane to and including
the area in and near the Black Point Beach Club Association and West Lane,
and a portion of Terrace Avenue (TM Volume 15, page 188).


-
 
9-6-1986
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 9; extending in a westerly direction in
and along Hope Street (TM Volume 16, page 6).


-
 
3-26-1988
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 10; extending from the terminus of the
existing water system at or near the intersection of Lover’s Lane and
Marion Drive running in a southerly direction a distance of 500 feet, more or
less, to the intersection of Lover’s Lane and Jean Drive (TM Volume 16,
page 197).


-
 
12-5-1989
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 11; extending in a general westerly
direction in and along Boston Post Road (TM Volume 17, page 86).


-
 
9-7-1994
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 12; extending in a general northerly
direction in and along North Bride Brook Road (TM Volume 20, page 194).


-
 
3-7-1996
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 13; extending in a general westerly
direction in and along Barone Road for a distance of 390 feet, more or less,
from the intersection of Indian Rock Road and Barone Road (TM Volume 21, page
-).


-
 
3-7-1996
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 14; extending in a general southerly
direction from the present terminus of the town’s water system at the
intersection of Tanglewood Drive and Overbrook Road, in and along Frog Hollow
Road, and Red Fox Road and portions of Overbrook Road and Green Valley Lakes
Road. (TM Volume 21, page -).


-
 
11-4-1999
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 15; extending in a general westerly
direction in and along the Boston Post Road from the present terminus of
Waterford’s water main at the Waterford town line for a distance of
approximately 1,800 feet. (TM Volume 21, page 747).


-
 
eff. 1-19-2000
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 16; extending in a general easterly
direction in and along Woodrow Drive from the present municipal water main
located in the North Bride Brook Road for a distance of approximately 425
feet (TM Volume 21, page 750).


-
 
eff. 12-4-2000
 
Water main extension ordinance no. 17; extending in a general northwesterly
direction from the present terminus of the town’s water system at the
intersection of Liberty Way and West Main Street (Connecticut Route 156) in
and along West Main Street, Capital Drive and Colton Road. (TM Volume 22,
page 56).


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI:  SEWERS



Editor’s note:



   The complete text of all sewer benefit resolutions are available for
review at the offices of the East Lyme Water and Sewer Commission, located at
East Lyme Town Hall.



 

Ord.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




Res.
 
- -
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution for Industrial Park Road extension.


Res.
 
- -
 
Benefit assessment resolution; Clark’s Hollow Common Interest Community.


-
 
4-13-1991
 
Sewer assessments.


Res.
 
8-27-1991; 3-24- 1992
4-27-1993
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution;
Phase I through Phase IV. For a complete listing, see TM Volume 18, Pages
229-284.


Res.
 
2-27-1996
 
Sewers at Dodgetown Condominiums. (TM Volume 21, page 207.)


Res.
 
11-4-1999
 
Benefit assessment resolution; Chapman Woods Common Interest Community.


Res.
 
11-28-2000
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution for sewer main extension no. 1; covering
all properties on West Main Street (Connecticut Route 156) between the
intersection of Liberty Way and West Main Street and the westerly boundary
line of property now or formerly owned by Leisure Sports, Inc., and all
properties on Capitol Drive and Colton Road.


Res.
 
8-26-2003
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution for sewer main extension no. 2; beginning
at the intersection of Corey Lane and West Main Street (Connecticut Route
156) and runs in a general northerly direction in and along Corey Lane for a
distance of 330 feet, more or less, as more particularly shown on as-built
plans and specifications on file with the Town Water and Sewer Commission.


Res.
 
4-30-2004
 
Sewer benefit resolution; Spinnaker Homes, LLC.


Res.
 
3-20-2006
 
Benefit assessment resolution; Spinnaker Common Interest Community.


Res.
 
7-10-2006
 
Supplemental benefit assessment resolution; Stonington Estates.


Res.
 
10-24-2006
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution for sewer main extension no. 3; begins at
the intersection of Smith Avenue and Main Street (Connecticut Route 156) and
runs in a general northerly direction in and along Smith Avenue for a
distance of approximately 1,300 feet, more or less, to the intersection of
Smith Avenue and Smith Street; thence running in a generally westerly
direction in and along Smith Street to the Connecticut Military Department
Campground, presently known as “Camp Rell”, as more particularly shown on
as-built plans and specifications on file with the Commission.


Res.
 
4-23-2007
 
Benefit assessment resolution for Sea Spray Condominiums.


Res.
 
4-23-2007
 
Supplemental sewer assessment resolution, pursuant to the resolution adopted
on 8-27-1991.


Res.
 
10-24-2008
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution for sewer main extension no. 4; bounded
southerly by the State of Connecticut Military Reservation (presently known
as “Camp  Rell”), easterly by the Niantic River, northerly by Smith Cove
and westerly by Smith Cove and includes the land, streets, roads and
properties generally constituting the territorial limits of the Connecticut
Spiritualist Camp- Meeting Association, Inc., as more particularly shown on
as-built plans and specifications on file with the Commission.


Res.
 
6-17-2009
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution for sewer main extension no. 5; running
east to west along the Boston Post Road and from the present terminus of the
existing sewer main at or near the Flanders Baptist Church and running
westerly for a distance of 8,700 feet, more or less to a point easterly of
the intersection of Boston Post Road and Plum Hill Road, all as more
particularly shown on as-built plans and specifications on file with the
Commission.


Res.
 
- -2016
 
Supplemental sewer assessment resolution, pursuant to the resolution adopted
on 8-27-1991, as amended 3-24-1992.


Res.
 
- -2016
 
Supplemental sewer assessment resolution, pursuant to the resolution adopted
on 8-27-1991, as amended 3-24-1992.


Res.
 
- -2016
 
Sanitary sewer benefit assessment extension no. 8; Village Crossing and Park
Place Opt-In Properties.


Res.
 
- -2016
 
Sanitary sewer benefit resolution for sewer main extension no. 8; beginning
at the East Pattagansett/Flanders Interceptor north of Herster Drive and runs
generally westerly along the Park Place loop to the Village Crossing
development located on park Place for a distance approximately 1,200 feet.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Connecticut General Statutes





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES



 

Conn. Gen. Stat. Cites
 
Code Section




7-131a
 
31.01


7-147p—7-147y
 
154.05


7-147q
 
154.01


7-147r
 
154.02


7-148
 
90.01


7-148(c)(7)(H)(ii)
 
110.01


7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv)
 
150.030


7-148(c)(10)(A)
 
10.99


7-148H
 
150.036


7-148s
 
30.20


7-148aa
 
150.037


7-148gg
 
150.035, 150.036, 150.037


7-149a
 
97.03


7-152c
 
150.030, 150.036, 153.03


7-152c(e)
 
150.036


7-152c(g)
 
150.036


7-170—7-186
 
114.01


7-194
 
110.01


7-239
 
52.21


7-257 et seq.
 
53.022


7-258
 
53.002


7-276
 
32.15


7-405
 
Charter 7.3


8-1C
 
153.02, 155.01


8-2
 
150.002


8-8
 
97.03


9-167a
 
31.05


9-183a
 
32.01


9-204b
 
31.05


9-333b(b)(9)
 
35.17


9-333b(b)(11)
 
35.17


12-48
 
34.080


12-53a
 
34.004


12-62a
 
TSO I


12-81
 
34.035, 34.050


12-81(7)—(16)
 
34.021


12-81(19)
 
34.050


12-81(22)
 
34.050


12-81(58)
 
34.020


12-81c(3)
 
34.065


12-123
 
Charter 7.3


12-129
 
34.001


12-129n
 
34.080


12-170d(a)(3)
 
150.034


12-170aa(b)(2)
 
34.080


14-1
 
90.02


14-80a
 
90.07


14-80(e)
 
74.01


14-150(b) and (c)
 
71.02


14-283
 
90.02


14-300g
 
74.01


14-300g(a)
 
74.99


14-300g(b)
 
74.99


14-379
 
73.01


15-1—15-10
 
152.03


15-3a(b)
 
152.20


15-8
 
152.06


15-9
 
152.06


15-170—15-175
 
152.07


16-229
 
97.03


16-234
 
97.03


16-235
 
97.03


19a-200 et seq.
 
53.001


20-330 et seq.
 
53.044


20-341a et seq.
 
53.044


22a-27i
 
153.02, 155.01


22a-27j
 
153.02, 155.01


22a-42 et seq.
 
153.01


22a-42g
 
153.03


22a-44
 
153.03


22a-73(c)
 
90.01


22a-74a
 
90.05


22a-113k—22a-113s
 
152.01


22a-113k—22a-113t
 
152.03


22a-113m
 
152.21


22a-113m—22a-113o
 
152.21


22a-113p
 
152.03, 152.22


22a-113r
 
152.06


22a-113s
 
152.03


22a-250
 
152.07


22a-354a et seq.
 
31.40


25-54i
 
53.070


26-240 et seq.
 
152.04


26-287
 
152.02, 152.20


Chapter 28
 
31.09


29-406
 
150.005


Chapter 45, §§ 853—862
 
150.003


50-9—50-13
 
35.01


51-164m
 
90.99


51-164n
 
90.99


51-164p(a)
 
90.99


52-180
 
153.03


52-259
 
153.03


Chapter 103
 
50.17


Chapter 103, § 7-255
 
53.102


148-o(b)
 
150.030


152c(f)
 
150.036


Chapter 246, 14-1
 
90.07


Chapter 299a
 
113.01


Chapter 444a
 
152.20


Chapter 492
 
152.20


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
TSO VI


-
 
- -
 
34.005


-
 
9-26-1932
 
30.05


-
 
12-12-1938
 
111.01


-
 
10-6-1941
 
52.01


-
 
3-5-1945
 
52.02


-
 
3-3-1947
 
31.09


-
 
9-29-1947
 
150.004


-
 
6-7-1951
 
30.04


-
 
6-7-1951
 
150.003


-
 
8-27-1991
 
TSO VI


-
 
- -1992
 
TSO VI


-
 
3-24-1992
 
TSO VI


-
 
5-26-1992
 
53.100—53.107


-
 
4-27-1993
 
TSO VI


-
 
6-21-1995
 
30.01


-
 
2-27-1996
 
TSO VI


-
 
11-4-1999
 
TSO VI


-
 
11-28-2000
 
TSO VI


-
 
8-26-2003
 
TSO VI


-
 
4-30-2004
 
TSO VI


-
 
3-20-2006
 
TSO VI


-
 
7-10-2006
 
TSO VI


-
 
10-24-2006
 
TSO VI


-
 
4-23-2007
 
TSO VI


-
 
4-23-2007
 
TSO VI


-
 
10-24-2008
 
TSO VI


-
 
6-17-2009
 
TSO VI


-
 
- -2016
 
TSO VI


-
 
- -2016
 
TSO VI


-
 
- -2016
 
TSO VI


-
 
- -2016
 
TSO VI


-
 
11-28-2016
 
TSO VI


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
TSO V


-
 
- -
 
TSO II


-
 
- -
 
71.01—71.03


-
 
- -
 
73.01, 73.99


-
 
- -
 
90.01—90.09, 90.99


-
 
- -
 
114.01


-
 
- -
 
150.030—150.040, 150.999


-
 
8-4-1947
 
130.01, 130.99


-
 
eff. 4-18-1960
 
TSO IV


-
 
11-14-1962
 
52.20


-
 
1-28-1965
 
97.01, 97.99


-
 
6-2-1966
 
96.01


-
 
6-20-1966
 
153.01


-
 
2-7-1968
 
50.02


-
 
7-2-1968
 
31.04


-
 
2-2-1970
 
33.01


-
 
5-2-1970
 
97.02, 97.99


-
 
5-27-1970
 
TSO V


-
 
2-5-1971
 
70.01, 70.99


-
 
eff. 6-19-1971
 
96.15, 96.99


-
 
eff. 4-15-1972
 
150.001


-
 
7-8-1972
 
TSO V


-
 
8-18-1972
 
TSO V


-
 
9-23-1973
 
TSO V


-
 
9-23-1973
 
TSO V


-
 
eff. 1-1-1974
 
TSO III


-
 
eff. 1-1-1974
 
TSO III


-
 
3-7-1974
 
TSO II


-
 
11-7-1974
 
51.25—51.29, 51.99


-
 
2-6-1975
 
31.42


-
 
2-6-1975
 
52.20


-
 
4-24-1975
 
153.01


-
 
eff. 7-1-1975
 
TSO III


-
 
8-26-1975
 
93.01, 93.99


-
 
9-21-1975
 
51.25—51.29, 51.99


-
 
9-21-1975
 
150.070, 150.999


-
 
4-6-1976
 
34.095—34.099


-
 
4-6-1976
 
113.01—113.03, 113.99


-
 
6-24-1976
 
72.99


-
 
8-3-1976
 
35.01


-
 
9-1-1976
 
30.03


-
 
11-18-1976
 
TSO II


-
 
1-3-1977
 
TSO V


-
 
1-3-1977
 
TSO V


-
 
1-3-1977
 
70.01, 70.99


-
 
eff. 3-15-1977
 
TSO IV


-
 
6-26-1977
 
TSO V


-
 
7-1-1977
 
31.04


-
 
7-23-1977
 
50.15—50.19


-
 
9-26-1977
 
TSO V


-
 
12-5-1977
 
30.02


-
 
12-5-1977
 
34.021


-
 
3-28-1978
 
31.08


-
 
1-21-1979
 
50.15—50.19


-
 
3-22-1979
 
TSO V


-
 
3-22-1979
 
52.04


-
 
3-22-1979
 
52.05


-
 
3-22-1979
 
52.06


-
 
6-23-1979
 
52.21


-
 
7-20-1979
 
TSO V


-
 
8-15-1979
 
31.06


-
 
9-23-1979
 
TSO II


-
 
12-11-1979
 
153.01


-
 
11-23-1980
 
52.04


-
 
11-23-1980
 
52.05


-
 
11-23-1980
 
52.06


-
 
1-24-1981
 
TSO II


-
 
1-24-1981
 
50.15—50.19


-
 
6-22-1981
 
95.20—95.31, 95.99


-
 
6-22-1981
 
151.01—151.04, 151.15, 151.30—151.35, 151.50—151.53, 151.65—151.68


-
 
8-11-1981
 
34.035


-
 
8-11-1981
 
95.01—95.07, 95.99


-
 
9-3-1982
 
34.004


-
 
9-23-1982
 
92.01—92.09, 92.99


-
 
3-1-1983
 
TSO V


-
 
8-4-1983
 
34.002


-
 
8-4-1983
 
34.003


-
 
9-23-1983
 
112.01—112.07, 112.99


-
 
6-19-1984
 
151.31


-
 
4-30-1985
 
31.41


-
 
5-15-1985
 
31.07


-
 
7-3-1985
 
TSO V


-
 
12-1-1985
 
TSO II


-
 
5-25-1986
 
31.41


-
 
5-25-1986
 
31.42


-
 
8-11-1986
 
110.01—110.04, 110.99


-
 
9-6-1986
 
TSO V


-
 
9-24-1986
 
72.01, 72.99


-
 
11-7-1986
 
34.020


-
 
11-8-1986
 
52.03, 52.99


-
 
4-26-1987
 
TSO IV


-
 
10-21-1987
 
31.02


-
 
3-26-1988
 
TSO V


-
 
4-16-1988
 
150.055, 150.999


-
 
6-4-1988
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
7-25-1988
 
32.01


-
 
11-21-1988
 
51.55


-
 
11-21-1988
 
51.56


-
 
12-19-1988
 
31.06


-
 
12-19-1988
 
151.01—151.04, 151.15, 151.30—151.35, 151.50—151.53, 151.65—151.68


-
 
3-30-1989
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
12-5-1989
 
TSO V


-
 
11-26-1990
 
150.015


-
 
12-8-1990
 
51.40


-
 
3-17-1991
 
53.001—53.006, 53.020—53.023, 53.035—53.049, 53.060—53.070,
53.085—53.089, 53.999


-
 
4-13-1991
 
TSO VI


-
 
4-21-1991
 
150.002


-
 
8-25-1992
 
53.100—53.107


-
 
eff. 10-20-1992
 
TSO IV


-
 
5-4-1994
 
152.01—152.07, 152.20—152.22, 152.99


-
 
9-7-1994
 
TSO V


-
 
10-5-1994
 
51.55


-
 
11-16-1994
 
51.55


-
 
1-18-1995
 
33.15, 33.16


-
 
1-18-1995
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
3-30-1995
 
150.015


-
 
eff. 8-1-1995
 
31.05


-
 
eff. 8-15-1995
 
51.01—51.14, 51.99


-
 
eff. 10-5-1995
 
98.01, 98.99


-
 
10-6-1995
 
51.55


-
 
1-17-1996
 
51.55


-
 
2-22-1996
 
51.01—51.14, 51.99


-
 
3-7-1996
 
TSO V


-
 
3-7-1996
 
TSO V


-
 
4-2-1997
 
31.04


-
 
eff. 10-15-1997
 
51.01—51.14, 51.99


-
 
3-1-1998
 
51.01—51.14, 51.99


-
 
9-12-1998
 
53.001—53.006, 53.020—53.023, 53.035—53.049, 53.060—53.070,
53.085—53.089, 53.999


-
 
11-19-1998
 
93.01, 93.99


-
 
eff. 7-10-1999
 
94.01, 94.02


-
 
11-4-1999
 
TSO V


-
 
eff. 1-19-2000
 
TSO V


-
 
2-10-2000
 
31.26


-
 
2-10-2000
 
34.035


-
 
10-4-2000
 
31.03


-
 
eff. 12-4-2000
 
TSO V


-
 
1-22-2001
 
31.02


-
 
4-9-2001
 
51.55


-
 
6-15-2001
 
150.015


-
 
11-9-2001
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
11-27-2001
 
53.100—53.107


-
 
eff. 2-18-2003
 
91.01—91.08, 91.99


-
 
2-23-2003
 
51.55


-
 
2-23-2003
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
3-23-2003
 
51.55


-
 
6-18-2003
 
52.03, 52.99


-
 
2-10-2004
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
6-1-2004
 
52.06


-
 
6-29-2004
 
50.01


-
 
11-17-2004
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
12-2-2004
 
31.41


-
 
12-2-2004
 
31.42


-
 
eff. 11-20-2005
 
31.40


-
 
eff. 11-20-2005
 
34.065


-
 
eff. 11-20-2005
 
34.080


-
 
12-21-2005
 
96.15, 96.99


-
 
7-10-2006
 
31.10


-
 
eff. 10-1-2006
 
34.050


-
 
11-1-2006
 
53.120


-
 
5-16-2007
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
8-2-2007
 
35.15—35.18


-
 
5-15-2008
 
150.015


-
 
5-15-2008
 
153.01


-
 
5-27-2008
 
153.03


-
 
6-19-2008
 
34.035


-
 
6-19-2008
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
7-1-2008
 
30.20


-
 
7-1-2008
 
31.01


-
 
8-2-2008
 
34.001


-
 
- -2009
 
53.120


-
 
5-30-2009
 
97.03


-
 
eff. 7-1-2011
 
97.03


-
 
eff. 7-1-2011
 
153.02, 155.01


-
 
7-1-2011
 
112.01—112.07, 112.99


-
 
10-24-2012
 
53.120


-
 
eff. 2-19-2014
 
154.01—154.05


-
 
4-23-2014
 
74.01, 74.99


-
 
10-29-2014
 
53.120


-
 
5-18-2015
 
150.015


-
 
eff. 1-30-2016
 
150.015


-
 
10-25-2016
 
53.120


-
 
eff. 11-15-2016
 
32.15—32.21


-
 
4-20-2017
 
96.15, 96.99


-
 
6-21-2017
 
31.25


-
 
11-3-2017
 
53.120


-
 
2-21-2018
 
150.015


-
 
6-6-2018
 
150.005

 

 
 
                                                      
ZONING REGULATIONS 
Adopted May 4, 1954 – 
As amended through May 16, 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 
Zoning Regulations 
East Lyme, Connecticut 
 
PURPOSE: 
 These Regulations are adopted for the purposes set forth in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, namely; to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the Town of East Lyme, by: 
. Preventing the overcrowding of land and avoiding undue concentration of population; 

. Preventing or lessening congestion of the public highways; 

. Providing for the preservation of desirable open space, tree cover, historic sites, recreation areas, scenic vistas, stream valleys, wetlands and related water sources, and other environmentally important lands, soils and geologic phenomena; 

. Encouraging energy efficient development; 

. Providing adequate open spaces for light and air; 

. Securing safety from fire, panic, flood and other dangers; 

. Facilitating adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage disposal, schools, parks and other conveniences; 

. Stabilizing and conserving the value of land, homes and other buildings; 

. Encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town; and 

. Providing proper provision for soil erosion and sediment control. 


PLAN: 
 The Regulations are made in accordance with a comprehensive plan, with consideration being given to: (1) The recommendations of East Lyme Plan of Development; (2) The character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses; (3) Conserving the value of existing buildings; and (4) Encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town. 
 
AUTHORITY: 
 Pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 124, Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision, as amended, the Zoning Commission of the Town of East Lyme adopts the following regulations controlling the use and development of land. 
 
JURISDICTION: 
 Within the Town of East Lyme, no land, building or other structure shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with these regulations.  No lot or land shall be subdivided, conveyed or encumbered so as (1) To make said lot or land nonconforming or more nonconforming to these regulations, (2) To make any use, building or structure nonconforming or more nonconforming, (3) To reduce any setback, yard, open space, or off-street parking and loading or (4) To make a nonconforming setback, yard, open space or off-street parking and loading more nonconforming. 
 Any use, building or other structure or any lot which existed lawfully, by variance or otherwise, on the date these regulations or any amendment hereto became effective, and fails to conform to one or more of the provisions of these regulations or such amendment hereto may be continued subject to the provisions and limitations of Section 21. 
 
 
ADOPTED:  May 4, 1954 
 
AS AMENDED THROUGH: 
Effective Date:  May 24, 2019 
Printed: May 22, 2019 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Section 
 Purpose 
 Page 
 
1 
 DEFINITIONS 
 7 
 
2 
 DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS 
 17 
 
3 
 RU-120 RURAL DISTRICTS 
 19 
 
4 
 RU-80 RURAL DISTRICTS 
 20 
 
5 
 RU-40 RURAL DISTRICTS 
 22 
 
6 
 R-12 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
 24 
 
7 
 R-10 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
 25 
 
8 
 CA COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
 26 
 
9 
 CB COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
 29 
 
10 
 CM COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
 31 
 
11 
 LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
 34 
 
11A 
 GATEWAY PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
 36 
 
12 
 SU SPECIAL USE DISTRICTS 
 58 
 
12A 
 SU-E SPECIAL USE ELDERLY HOUSING DISTRICTS 
 61 
 
13 
 REMOVED 
 67 
 
14 
 COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT 
 68 
 
15 
 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
 70 
 
16 
 TIDAL MARSH DISTRICTS 
 90 
 
17 
 REMOVAL OF TOPSOIL, SAND AND GRAVEL 
 91 
 
18 
 SIGNS 
 94 
 
 
 SIGN TABLES 1.5A, 1.5B, 1.5C, 1.5D 
  
 
19 
 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 121 
 
20 
 GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 126 
 
21 
 NON-CONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS, AND LOTS 
 137 
 
22 
 OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
 141 
 
23 
 CONSERVATION DESIGN DEVELOPMENT 
 145 
 
24 
 SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS 
 150 
 
25 
 SPECIAL PERMITS 
 157 
 
25.5 
 TABLE OF MINIMUM CONTROLS FOR SPECIFIC SPECIAL PERMITS 
 160 
 
26 
 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 182 
 
27 
 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 183 
 
28 
 AMENDMENTS TO REGULATIONS 
 184 
 
29 
 VALIDITY 
 185 
 
30 
  (Removed 6/28/13) 
 186 
 
31 
 TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
 187 
 
32 
 AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 194 
 
33 
 INCENTIVE HOUSING ZONES 
 199 
 
Appendix B 
 Architectural Review Guidelines 
 208 
 
Map 
 ZONING MAP 
 222 
 
 
 REVISION RECORD 
 223 
 

 
SECTION 1 
 
DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary:  The present tense includes the future, the singular includes the plural.  The word "used" or "occupied" shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied", the word "structure" shall include the word "building", a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof, the word "person" includes corporation, partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club, as well as an individual. 
Where a question arises as to the precise meaning of a word, the Commission shall by resolution determine the meaning of the word, giving due consideration to the expressed purpose and intent of these regulations. 
1.1 ACCESSORY BUILDING - Subordinate building located on the same lot with the principal building and devoted to an accessory use, but not used for human habitation. 

1.2 ACCESSORY USE - A use subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principal use of land or buildings and located on the same lot.  

1.3 ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENTS shall be defined to include any or all of the following: 


A. ADULT ARCADE – An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion-picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital media, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 

B. ADULT BOOKSTORE (also ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE) – An establishment that has a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: 1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital media, slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 

2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 




C. ADULT CABARET – A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment that regularly or occasionally features live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. 

D. ADULT MOTEL – A motel, hotel, inn or similar commercial establishment which offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and also offers patrons closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital media, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this type of entertainment by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television. 

E. ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER – An establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital media, slides or other similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 

F. ESCORT OR MODELING AGENCY – A person or business association, who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts or models, as herein defined, as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration. 

G. MASSAGE PARLOR – Any establishment where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, the administering of massage, alcohol rub, administering of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body is performed by a person or persons who exposes specified anatomical areas. 

H. OTHER ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES – Any live exhibition, performance, display or dance of any type, including but not limited to talking, singing, reading, listening, posing, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food or beverages, products or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling, removal of clothing, or any service offered for amusement on any premises to which the public, patrons, or members are invited or admitted, including any private club or membership organization, and including but not limited to business establishments identified as an adult arcade, escort agency, juice bar, coffee shop, cigar shop, nude modeling studio, sexual encounter center, massage parlor, or similar or like establishments. 


1.3.1   ANCHOR STORE – GATEWAY DISTRICT: - A large retail store (including club type stores) of not less than 100,000 s.f. of net floor area containing a variety of retail categories and services, which may include, but are not limited to automotive parts, accessories; motor vehicle fuel sales; camping, outdoor and recreation goods; electric light fixtures and bulbs; pet supplies; floor and window coverings, furniture, bedding, furnishings, fabric and homewares; household appliances, household electrical goods and home entertainment goods; party supplies, office equipment and supplies; baby and children’s play equipment and accessories; hardware, landscape and gardening supplies; grocery and beverage items, including alcohol for off premises consumption; prepared foods; paper goods and items of a bulky nature that require a large for handling, display and storage.  A zoning permit for such store shall not require individual conformance of each category/service, nor compliance with any separation distances, as applicable to individual uses, pursuant to the Zoning Regulations; provided however, no such category/service shall violate Section 20.2 of the Regulations. 
1.4 ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: - A managed residential community contained in one primary building, consisting of private residential units and providing assistance with activities of daily life with at least full meal service, together with laundry and housekeeping service, social and recreational activities and personal services, in a group setting primarily limited to persons 62 years and older who require help or aid with activities of daily life, but do not require full time nursing care. 

1.5 BACK LOT – a lot that is located to the rear of another lot fronting on the same street meeting the requirements of Section 20.8.  

1.6 BAKERY (RETAIL) – Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of baked products such as breads, cakes, cookies, donuts, pastries, bagels, rolls, and similar products. Said products are made and baked on the premises. This process includes mixing the primary ingredients such as flour, butter, sugar, eggs and yeast on the premises. These products are then baked and sold mainly at retail on the premises for consumption off premises. The sale of any beverages shall be incidental to the primary business. The public floor area shall not be more than 20% of the total premises. It shall not include seating or a restaurant. The total premise shall not exceed 2000 square feet. 

1.7 BED AND BREAKFAST - A private house in which a portion of the building is maintained and held out to the public as transient overnight accommodations containing no more than the number of units allowed under Section 25.5 with a maximum of seven (7) units, which provide overnight accommodations to guests, and which provides meals only for registered overnight paying guests. 

1.8 BOAT HOUSE - A building for storing a boat or boats. 

1.9 BUFFER STRIP - A suitable landscaped open space unoccupied except by vegetative growth, cleaned of all rubbish and waste materials, and left in a natural state with the land surface protected with suitable ground cover. 

1.10 BUILDING - Any structure with walls and a roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure and which is designed for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, or chattels. 

1.11 BUILDING AREA - The ground area enclosed by the exterior walls of a building plus the area of all covered porches and other roofed portions. 

1.12 BUILDING HEIGHT - The vertical distance from the average finished grade within ten feet of the walls of the building to the highest point of flat or mansard roofs, including the top of a parapet, or to the mean level between the eaves and ridge for gambrel, hip or gable roofs. 

1.13 BUILDING LINE - The line parallel to a street which establishes the minimum depth of front yard for the particular district as measured from the street line. 

1.14 CEMETERIES - A burial ground or graveyard and accessory caretaker's buildings and above ground tombs operated by a religious or non-religious association or private enterprise, but not including burial services such as crematoriums or buildings commercially used for interments.  



1.15 CHILD CARE CENTER - means a program of supplementary care for more than twelve (12) related or non-related children outside their own homes on a regular basis or a part of the twenty - four (24) hours in one or more days in the week.  

1.16 CHILD CARE FACILITY - A use of land and buildings that provides care to preschool children away from their homes, and by persons other than family members, guardians, or custodians, and where a payment, fee, or grant is made for such care. 

1.17 COMMISSION - The Zoning Commission of the Town of East Lyme. 

1.18 CONVALESCENT HOME - An establishment which provides full convalescent or chronic care or both for three or more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.  A hospital or sanitarium shall not be construed to be included in this definition. 

1.19 COURT - An open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building, which space is bounded on three or more sides by the walls of such building. 

1.20 DWELLING, ONE FAMILY - A detached building designed for or occupied by one family. 

1.21 DWELLING, MULTIPLE - A detached building designed or occupied by 3 or more families living independently of each other. 

1.22 DWELLING MULTI-FAMILY, MULTI-STORY - A multi-family dwelling of two or more stories, but not exceeding the height limitation for the district in which the building is located. 

1.23 DWELLING, TWO FAMILY - A detached building designed for or occupied by two families living independently of each other. 

1.24 DWELLING UNIT - One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for only one (l) family and which have individual bathrooms and complete permanently installed kitchen facilities. 

1.25 ESCORT or MODEL – A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to privately perform stripteases which expose specified anatomical areas or offers or agrees to model lingerie or other types of clothing which expose specified anatomical areas. 

1.26 FAMILY - A family shall be: 



A. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit, who are all related by blood, marriage or adoption; or 
B. A group consisting of not more than five (5) persons, living together as a single housekeeping unit, who are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption, or 
C. A combination of A and B above, provided that such persons shall live together as a single housekeeping unit, and the number of unrelated individuals shall not exceed three (3). 
1.27 FARM - A tract of land used for the necessary farm buildings in connection with the raising and/or caring for agricultural, livestock, poultry, or dairy products, but excluding the raising of fur bearing animals and the maintaining of dog kennels. 



1.27.1 FARM EVENT - An accessory use on a parcel of land with an Agriculture or Farm principal use, which Farm Events may include the provision of meals and recreation for guests during the event duration. Such Farm Events shall include: Dinners at the Farm, farm education and health and wellness related events subject to the provisions set forth in Section 25.5. 
1.28 FLOOR AREA - 


A. Net Floor Area shall be actual occupied (filled, taken up) area above grade, not including accessory unoccupied areas, or thickness of walls. 

B. Gross Floor Area would include the total sum of all measurable floor area, where measurement is made from the outside dimensions of the structure at the applicable floor levels, above grade, exclusive of attic area. 1.29 GASOLINE, SERVICE STATION - Any area of land, including structures thereon, or any building that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel, and which can include the repair of motor vehicles, but which shall not include painting or body and fender repairs. 

1.30 HOME OCCUPATION, SERVICE OR PROFESSION - A use conducted by the resident occupant, entirely within the premises, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character thereof. 

1.31 HOUSEBOAT - A watercraft used or designed to be used as a permanent or seasonal residence and all watercraft not primarily used for recreational or commercial fishing purposes which will remain stationary for more than thirty days. 

1.32 HOTEL - A building or portion thereof, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public, containing thirteen (l3) or more units used for sleeping accommodations for guests, and providing lodging with or without meals, and other incidental services for the use of transient guests only.  Access by majority of guests shall be by way of a central point/lobby. 

1.33 HOUSEHOLD PET – Domesticated animals, including but not limited to dogs, cats or canaries which are customarily housed within the living quarters of a dwelling. 

1.34 IN-LAW ACCOMMODATIONS - A single efficiency dwelling unit within the principal building having one room exclusive of bathroom, kitchen/dining/living room area, and laundry, for use by a family or no more than one individual not a part of the immediate family but associated by kinship, marriage or dependency. 

1.35 INN - A building or portion thereof, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public, containing twelve (l2) or fewer units used for sleeping accommodations for guests, and providing lodging with or without meals, and other incidental services in which there are certain public rooms and service for the use of overnight guests. 

1.36 JUNK YARDS - An area of land, within or without a building, used for deposit, collection or storage of discarded materials, such as waste paper, rags or sheet metal, used building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, etc. A deposit or the storage on a lot of one (l) or more wrecked or broken down vehicles or boats or parts of one (l) or more such vehicles for one (l) month or more shall be deemed a junk yard. 

1.37 LIMITED REPAIRER - Includes any qualified person, having a suitable place of business and having adequate equipment, engaged in the business of minor repairs including repairs and replacement of cooling, electrical, fuel and exhaust systems, brake adjustments, relining and repairs, wheel alignment and balancing, and repair and replacement of shock absorbers. 

1.38 LIVESTOCK - Animals including but not limited to horses, cows, goats and sheep. 

1.39 LOT - A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one principal building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by these regulations. In the case of multiple dwellings, row dwellings, institutional or commercial buildings, a group of buildings under the same ownership may be considered as occupying the lot. 

1.40 LOT, CORNER - A lot at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than l35 degrees. 

1.41 LOT COVERAGE - The portion or percentage of the lot that is covered by the area of all buildings and structures. That portion of buildings or structures below the average finished grade shall not be included in lot coverage. 

1.42 LOT WIDTH AT BUILDING LINE - The distance between the side lot lines parallel to the street line and at a distance from the street line equal to, or greater than the required setbacks from the street line.  For corner lots the required width shall be applicable to that street on which the principal building faces. 

1.43 LOT OR STREET FRONTAGE - The linear distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured along the street line.  

1.44 LOT LINE - The outside dimension of a lot as defined in these regulations. 

1.45 LOT LINE, FRONT - The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way; shall be deemed to be the same as the street line.  In the case of a back lot, the front lot line shall be considered the line most nearly parallel to and closest to a street providing lot frontage. 

1.46 LOT LINE, REAR - The lot line between the side lot lines and generally opposite to and most distant from the front lot line. 

1.47 LOT LINE, SIDE - The lot line generally extending from the street or front lot line and connecting the front and rear lot lines. 

1.48 LOT SIZE – Lot size shall be as specified for each district.  In addition, all lots created after 8/11/1999 in the RU-40 and RU-80 Districts that are to be served by on-site septic systems shall meet minimum area of buildable land requirements.  The term “minimum area of buildable land” is hereby defined to mean a parcel of land which contains at least 20,000 square feet of contiguous land meeting all of the following criteria: 




A. Such minimum area of buildable land shall be capable of containing within its boundaries a parallelogram with side lengths of no less than 100 ft. on a side and no angles less than 75 degrees. 

B. Such minimum area of buildable land shall not include any land determined to be inland wetlands or tidal wetlands as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes. 


C. No more than 20% of such minimum area of buildable land shall be comprised of topography exceeding a 25% slope in grade as measured in 40-foot increments throughout the minimum area of buildable land. 

D. A total of no more than 25% of such minimum area of buildable land shall be encumbered by easements including, but not limited to, easements for vehicular access, drainage and utilities.  There are no limits for conservation easements.  

E. Such minimum area of buildable land may include land within required setback areas. 

F. A zoning compliance chart shall accompany each lot. 

G. Lots within a conservation by design subdivision are excluded from this section. 


1.48.1 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY – A place of business where marijuana may be dispensed or sold to qualifying patients and primary caregivers and for which the Department of Consumer Protection has issued a dispensary facility license to an applicant under Connecticut General Statute’s 21a-408-1 to 21a-408-70 inclusive and section 21a-408-140 the regulations of the Connecticut State Agencies. 
1.49 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT – A building or group of buildings each of which shall be devoted to a commercial use along the street line on the ground floor and at least one upper floor, or a portion thereof, shall be devoted to residential use.  For the purposes of this definition, parking shall not be considered a commercial use. 

1.50 MOBILE HOME - A one-family dwelling of vehicular, portable design built on a chassis and designed to be moved from one site to another and to be used without a permanent foundation. 



1.50-1 MOTEL: A building or portion thereof, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public, containing thirteen (13) or more units used for sleeping accomodations for guests, and providing lodging with or without meals, and other incidental services in which there are certain public rooms and service for the use of transient guests. 
1.51 MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIRER STATION - Includes any qualified person, having a suitable place of business and having adequate equipment, engaged in repairing, overhauling, adjusting, assembling or disassembling any motor vehicle, but shall exclude a person primarily engaged in making repairs to tires, upholstering, glazing, general blacksmithing, welding and machine work on motor vehicle parts when parts involving such work are disassembled or reassembled by a licensed repairer. 

1.52 NEW CAR DEALER - Includes any person engaged in the business of merchandising new vehicles under a manufacturer's or importer's contract for each such make of vehicle who may, incidental to such business, sell used motor vehicles and repair motor vehicles or cause them to be repaired by qualified persons in his employ. 

1.53 NON-CONFORMING LOT, BUILDING OR USE - One which existed lawfully on the date these regulations or any amendment hereto became effective, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present regulations. 

1.54 OPEN SPACE, USABLE -Space on a lot or parcel that is: 


A. Unoccupied by principal or accessory buildings above the finished grade; 

B. Unobstructed to the sky; 

C. Not devoted to service driveways, service areas, off-street parking at finished grade or loading areas;  

D. Devoted to landscaping, active or passive recreation and other like uses;  

E. Made available in the same proportion to all occupants of the building or buildings on the lot or parcel. 1.55 PARKING LOTS - An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be stored for the purpose of temporary, daily or overnight off street parking.  

1.56 PAVING - The term paving shall be construed to include only the following materials: Bituminous (asphalt), concrete, or bricks. Stone or three quarter processed acceptable on lots up to 30 parking spaces. 

1.57 PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT - An establishment where a service is rendered to the ultimate customer such as bank, barber, beauty parlor, etc., 

1.58 PERSONAL OFFICE - The office of an attorney, architect, physician, Realtor, engineer or similar practitioner. 

1.59 RECREATIONAL TRAILER - A vehicular type unit designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motor power or is mounted on or is drawn by another vehicle. Includes: travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and self-propelled motor home. 

1.60 RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN - Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, confections or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation includes a drive-up window so that foods or beverages are served directly to motorist customers or by means which eliminate the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle. 

1.61 RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD - Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared foods, confections or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is such that customers normally order the product at a central location separate from the tables or counters used for consumption. Cafeteria service establishments in which a customer serves himself while passing along a food-service line are also considered fast food restaurants.  See Section 20.25.  

1.62 RESTAURANT, STANDARD - Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, confections or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is such that an employee normally takes the seated customer's order and serves the seated customer's food or beverages at tables and/or counters located inside or outside the building.  A standard restaurant may have a take-out service, but not a drive-in facility, which is clearly incidental to the principal method of operation. See Section 20.25.  

1.63 RETAIL SALES STORE - An establishment where goods are sold at retail including an establishment where articles are made or repaired and sold at retail on the premises. 





1.64 SETBACK - The required horizontal distance from any lot line or street line to any building or structure, measured in a straight line from and perpendicular to such lot line or street line.  For corner lots, the front setback shall be required on both street frontages. 

1.65 SMALL ANIMAL VETERINARY CLINIC: A structure where household pets (as defined in Section l.32 of these Zoning Regulations) are given medical, surgical, or dental treatment.  Said facility shall be within a completely enclosed structure with no outside facilities or accessory structures for animals.  There shall be no boarding except as required for medical treatment.  Said boarding shall be accessory to the principal veterinary outpatient use and shall occupy no more than 20 percent of the total floor space.  No structure shall be considered a veterinary clinic if it has obtained a commercial kennel license from the Commissioner of Agriculture, in accordance with Public Act 829l, Section l4. 

1.66 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - Permitted uses which must meet specified conditions, subject to the standards set forth within the zoning regulations and which shall meet the approval of the Zoning Commission. 

1.67 SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS – Include any of the following: 


A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 

B. Human male or animal genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 1.68 SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES – Includes any of the following: 




A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 

B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 

C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; 

D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth as noted above; or 

E. Human or animal genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 1.69 SUBDIVISION OPEN SPACE - Land area within a subdivision deeded as a parcel or parcels separate from Building Lots and Streets and perpetually dedicated for Conservation and/or Recreational purposes.  The ownership and purpose of subdivision open space is specified by the Planning Commission in approving a Subdivision, and only recreational facilities, underground utility facility, or other improvements consistent with the approved purpose shall be permitted within subdivision open space. 

1.70 STREET - Any way which is an existing town or state highway or any way shown on a recorded subdivision map duly approved by the Planning Commission, or on any map duly recorded and approved prior to the adoption of Subdivision Regulations.  "Street" shall be deemed to include the entire width of the right-of-way. 

1.71 STREET LINE - The line separating the street from an adjacent lot. 

1.72 STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on, under or above the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 

1.73 USED CAR DEALER - Includes any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of merchandising motor vehicles other than new who may, incidental to such business, repair motor vehicles or cause them to be repaired by qualified persons in his employ. 

1.74 VARIANCE - A modification to the area requirements of these regulations which may be granted in an individual case by the Board of Appeals. 

1.75 WATER-DEPENDENT USES - Those uses and facilities which require direct access to, or location in, marine or tidal waters and which therefore cannot be located inland, including but not limited to: Marinas, recreational and commercial fishing and boating facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, water-based recreation uses, navigation aids, basins and channels, and uses which provide general public access to marine or tidal waters. 

1.76 TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY (IES)- Any structure that is used for or incidental to receiving or distributing signals of any kind used for communication purposes. (See Section 20 and Section 31) 

1.77 TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER – For the purposes of these Regulations, a structure that is significantly taller than it is wide and/or of sufficient height to stand apart and be noticeably different than its surroundings and which receives or transmits signals of any kind used for communication purposes. (See Section 20 and Section 31) 

1.78 YACHT CLUB - A club whose primary function is to further the enjoyment of yachting and which may consist of meeting facilities, storage facilities for boats and boating equipment belonging to members, dining facilities and docking facilities, anchorages or moorings. 

1.79 TAPROOM BREWERY- An establishment whose principal business is the manufacture and sale of malt beverages made from the fermentation of malt with or without cereal grains or other fermentable sugars or hops via retail sales through a taproom for on or off-site consumption. 

1.80 Left Blank 





1.90 Brew Pub – A manufacturing facility authorized pursuant to Section 30-16 of the Connecticut General Statutes which manufactures, stores, sells and may distribute beer.  Such facility may sell beer or wine to be consumed on the premises, with or without food, and may sell beer brewed on premises in sealed containers for consumption on or off premises. 
SECTION 2 
 
DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS 
 
2.l DIVISION OF DISTRICTS - For the purpose of these regulations the Town of East Lyme is divided into the following classes of districts: 
RURAL DISTRICTS 
RU - 120 DISTRICTS 
RU - 80 DISTRICTS 
RU - 40 DISTRICTS 
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
R - 12 DISTRICTS 
R - 10 DISTRICTS 
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
CA DISTRICTS 
CB DISTRICTS 
CM DISTRICT 
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
LI DISTRICTS 
SPECIAL USE DISTRICTS 
SU DISTRICTS 
SU-E DISTRICTS 
2.2 OVERLAY DISTRICTS - An overlay district is a mapped zone that imposes a set of requirements in addition to those of the underlying district. 
CAM Coastal Boundary 
Incentive Housing Zone 
TM Tidal Marsh District 
Parking Overlay CB Zones 
2.3 ZONING OF STREETS - When opposite sides of a street lie in different districts, the boundary shall be deemed to be the center of the right-of-way. 
2.4 BOUNDARIES - The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the centerlines of streets or railroad rights-of-way, or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto. 
2.5 INTERPRETATION OF MAP - Where a question arises as to exact boundaries of a district shown on the Zoning Map, the Zoning Commission shall by resolution determine the location of the boundary, giving due consideration to the indicated location on the Zoning Map, the scale of the Zoning Map, the location of property lines, the expressed purpose and intent of these regulations, and any pertinent factors. 
2.6 LAND UNDER WATER - Zoning Districts shall include land under any lake, pond or stream lying within the districts' boundaries.  The provisions of these regulations applicable to any district located adjacent to tidal waters shall apply to such tidal waters and to any island lying therein, as far as the jurisdiction of the Town of East Lyme extends. 
SECTION 3 
RU-120 RURAL DISTRICT 
Areas characterized by severe constraints on development due to natural factors such as steep slopes, shallow depth to bedrock and high erosion potential. 
3.1 PERMITTED USES – The following uses of buildings and /or land and no others are permitted: 
3.1.1 Single Family Detached Dwelling 
3.1.2 Agricultural or farm use, including raising of livestock or poultry providing they are kept not less than 100’ from any property line. 
3.1.3 Forestry 
3.1.4 Nursery or greenhouse provided that they are not less than 100’ from any lot line. 
3.1.5 Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including customary home occupations when located in the same building as the residence and which do not change the residential character of the property. 
3.2       SPECIAL PERMIT USES  Any of the following uses when granted as a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25. 
3.2.1   Stand for the display and sale of produce grown on the premises. 
3.2.2   Kennels, Veterinary Clinic, riding and boarding stables. 
3.2.3   Saw mill. 
3.2.4   Commercial greenhouse or nursery. 
3.2.5   Antique shop. 
3.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
3.3.1 LOT SIZE – Within the RU-120 District, no lot shall be less than 120,000 square feet in area. 
3.3.2 FRONTAGE – Each lot shall have not less than 250 feet of frontage. 
3.3.3 SETBACK – No building or structure shall be placed on a lot less than 50 feet from the street line or 30 feet from any other property line. 
3.3.4 COVERAGE – The total lot coverage of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 10 percent of the lot area. 
3.3.5 HEIGHT – No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height. 
 
*for residential subdivisions see Section 23 Conservation Design Development 
SECTION 4 
RU-80 RURAL DISTRICTS 
Outlying areas of town generally characterized by agricultural or open land, with sparse population and served by local roads.  It is the purpose of these regulations to preserve the rural character of RU-80 Districts. 
4.l PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted. 
4.l.l Single family detached dwelling 
4.l.2 Agricultural or farm use, including raising of livestock or poultry providing they are kept not less than l00' from any lot line. 
4.l.3 Forestry 
4.l.4 Nursery or greenhouse provided that they are not less than l00 feet from any lot line. 
4.l.5 Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 20.3. 
4.l.6 Professional offices located within owner's place of residence and dwelling. 
4.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25 and 25.5. 
4.2.l Bed & Breakfast 
4.2.2 Stand for the display and sale of produce grown on the premises. 
4.2.3 Kennels, Veterinary Clinic, riding or boarding stables. 
4.2.4 Commercial golf, tennis or similar club. 
4.2.5 Saw mill 
4.2.6 Commercial greenhouse or nursery 
4.2.7 Antique shop 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
 
4.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
4.3.1 LOT SIZE - Within the RU-80 District, no lot shall be less than 80,000 square feet in area. 
4.3.2 LOT FRONTAGE - Each lot shall have not less than 200 feet of frontage, unless the lot is located on the half-circle of a cul-de-sac where 75 ft. frontage will be allowed.  There may be a maximum of four lots with a 75 ft. frontage on the half-circle. 
4.3.3 SETBACKS - No building or structure shall be placed on a lot less than 50 feet from the street line or 30 feet from any other lot line. 
4.3.4 COVERAGE - The total lot coverage of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed l5 percent of the lot area. 
4.3.5 HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height. 
*for residential subdivisions see Section 23 Conservation Design DevelopmentSECTION 5 
RU-40 RURAL DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - Areas generally outside of the developed sections of the Town, but not so remote as the RU-80 Districts, and characterized by sparse settlement and lack of utilities.  It is the purpose of these Regulations to encourage low-density residential development for areas zoned RU-40. 
5.l PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted: 
5.l.l Single family detached dwelling 
5.l.2 Forestry 
5.l.3 Nursery or greenhouse provided they are not less than l00 feet from any lot line 
5.l.4 Agricultural or Farm Poultry – 6 or less (see Section 25.5) 
5.1.5 Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 20.3. 
5.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25 and 25.5. 
5.2.l Convalescent home. 
5.2.2 Bed & Breakfast 
5.2.3 Agricultural or farm use, including the raising of livestock or poultry (more than 6) 
5.2.4 Roadside stand for the display and sale of agricultural produce grown on the lot 
5.2.5 Kennels, Small Animal Veterinary Clinic, riding or boarding stables 
5.2.6 Commercial golf, tennis or similar club 
5.2.7 Commercial greenhouse or nursery 
5.2.8  Antique shop 
5.2.9 Farm Event accessory to an existing Agriculture or Farm use 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20  -  - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
5.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
5.3.l LOT SIZE- Within the RU-40 District, no lot shall be less than 40,000 square feet in area. 
5.3.2 FRONTAGE- Each lot shall have not less than l50 ft. of frontage unless the lot is located on the half circle of a cul-de-sac where a 75-foot frontage will be allowed.  There may be a maximum of four lots with a 75 ft. frontage on the half-circle. 
5.3.3 SETBACK - No building or structure shall be placed on a lot less than 50 feet from the street line or 30 feet from any other property line except that in the case of an individual lot which was set off under an officially approved subdivision in the former R-20 District, no building or structure shall be placed less than 40 feet from any street line or 20 feet from any other property line. Included within the scope of this exception is any lot of record which was legally established prior to November 1, 1973, and which falls within the boundaries of an area bearing the dual designation of "RU-40" and "R-20" on the official Zoning Map of East Lyme. 
5.3.4 COVERAGE - The total lot coverage of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed l5 percent of the lot area. Except in the case of special circumstances defined in Section 4.3.3, the allowable coverage is 20 percent for RU-40/ R-20 lots.   
5.3.5 HEIGHT - No Building or structure shall exceed 30   feet in height.  
*for residential subdivisions see Section 23 Conservation Design DevelopmentSECTION 6 
 
R-12 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - A highly developed residential district transitional between suburban and urban densities and uses.  The purpose of this zone is to provide for moderately high-density residential areas and where appropriate, special permit uses which allow for transitional commercial or agricultural uses. 
6.1 PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted. 
6.l.l Single family detached dwelling 
6.l.2 Two-family dwelling 
6.l.3 Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 20.3. 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
6.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission, subject to the Special Permit Requirements of Section 25 and 25.5. 
6.2.l Bed & Breakfast 
6.2.2 Agriculture or farm use, including the raising of livestock and poultry 
6.2.3 Commercial greenhouse or nursery 
6.2.4 Commercial golf, tennis or similar club 
6.2.5 Undertaking establishment 
6.2.6 Antique shop 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20  - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
6.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
6.3.l LOT SIZE - Within the R-l2 Residence District, no lot shall be less than l2,000 square feet in area.  For a two (2) family dwelling the lot shall not be less than l8,000 square feet. 
6.3.2 FRONTAGE - Each lot shall have not less than 80 feet of frontage. 
6.3.3 SETBACKS - No building or structure on a lot shall be placed less than 30 feet from any street line or l5 feet from any other property line. 
6.3.4 COVERAGE - The total area of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 25 percent of the lot area. 
6.3.5 HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height. 
SECTION 7 
R-10 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - A highly developed residential district with urban character, transitional between residential and commercial use.  The purpose of this zone is to provide for moderately high density residential uses mixed with limited commercial development. 
7.1 PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted. 
7.l.1 Single family detached dwelling 
7.1.2 Two-family dwelling 
7.l.3 Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 20.3. 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
7.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25 and 25.5. 
7.2.l Bed & Breakfast 
7.2.2 Commercial nursery or greenhouse 
7.2.3 Undertaking establishment 
7.2.4 Antique shop 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
7.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
7.3.l LOT SIZE - Within the R-l0 Residence District no lot shall be less than l0,000 square feet in area.  For a two-family dwelling no lot shall be less than l5,000 square feet in area. 
7.3.2 FRONTAGE - Each lot shall have not less than 80 feet of frontage. 
7.3.3 SETBACK - No building or structure on a lot shall be placed less than 30 feet from the street line or l2 feet from any other property line. 
7.3.4 COVERAGE - The total area of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 25 percent of the lot area. 
7.3.5 HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height. 
SECTION 8 
CA COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - A commercial district along arterial routes.  The purpose of this district is to provide for convenient neighborhood and community oriented commercial development. 
8.l PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with Section 24. 
8.l.l Single family detached dwelling 
8.l.2 Two family dwelling 
8.l.3 Business or professional offices 
8.l.4 Inn, Hotel, Motel, Bed and Breakfast. 
8.l.5 Hospital, or convalescent home 
8.l.6 Retail sales stores less than 20,000 square feet of gross area, retail bakery, gasoline service station, standard restaurant 
8.l.7 Personal service establishment 
8.l.8 Undertaking establishment 
8.1.9 Child Care Center 
8.1.10 Private Education Use under 4000 square feet in gross floor area 
8.1.11  Any related accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
8.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25 and 25.5. 
8.2.l Commercial facilities which provide indoor recreation, such as assembly halls, dance halls, bowling alleys, video arcades and similar places of public recreation operated as a business. 
8.2.2 Mixed Use Dwelling Units - Dwelling units, limited to mixed use situations in which dwelling units are contained within a building dedicated principally to a permitted commercial, non-residential use. A portion of the jointly used building committed to dwelling units shall not exceed 50 percent of the improved floor area.  Sub-grade floor area is not to be considered in this calculation. 
 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.3.6, parking shall be provided based upon the greater of the calculation for the commercial portion of the premises or the residential calculation as provided in Section 22.1.3, plus fifty (50%) percent of that for the use requiring the lesser calculation. 
8.2.3 Commercial golf, tennis or similar club 
8.2.4 Wholesale store 
8.2.5 Laundromat 
8.2.6 Auto sales agency 
8.2.7 Fast food restaurants 
8.2.8 Elderly housing, CA 
8.2.9 Small Animal Veterinary Clinic 
8.2.10  Car Wash 
8.2.11 Parking Lots 

8.2.12 Drive-thru facilities are permitted as an accessory use for Banks, Financial Institutions, Pharmacies, Bakeries and Restaurants. 

8.2.13 Private Educational uses over 4000 square feet in floor area 

8.2.14 Assisted Living Facility 

8.2.15 Retail sales store 20,000 square feet of gross building area and over. 

8.2.16 Medical Marijuana Dispensary with the exception of properties located on Black Point Road. 




(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
(See Section 25.5 Table of Minimum Controls for Special Permit) 
8.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
8.3.l LOT SIZE - All lots used for commercial purposes shall have a minimum of 7,500 square feet of lot area.  All lots used for mixed residential and commercial purposes shall have a minimum of 5,000 square feet per family in addition to the 7,500 square feet required for commercial use.  All lots used solely for residential use shall have a minimum of l0,000 square feet per family. (see Section 25.5 for Elderly Housing)  Notwithstanding the above, where municipal sewer is available, lots used for Mixed Use Dwelling Units, in accordance with Section 8.2.2 shall have a minimum of 7,500 square feet plus 1,200 square feet for each efficiency or one-bedroom living unit and 2,000 square feet for each two-bedroom unit. 
8.3.2 FRONTAGE - Each lot shall have frontage of not less than 80 feet. 
8.3.3 SETBACKS - No building or structure shall be placed less than 20 feet from the street line or l2 feet from other property lines, if not built on the property line in accordance with Section 20.l8. 
8.3.4 COVERAGE - The total area covered by all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area. 




8.3.5 HEIGHT No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height except that the Zoning Commission may, under the provisions of Section 25 (Special Permit) of these regulations, permit an increase in height to a maximum of 55 feet, upon finding that the following standards are met; 
A. Any building exceeding 30 feet in height shall be designed and used primarily for office and /or hotel use. 

B. The total lot coverage of all buildings exceeding 30 feet in height shall not exceed 10 percent of the lot area. 

C. The increase in height will not significantly impair views from, or the availability of light and air to, abutting or nearby properties. 

D. Where a CA zone abuts a Residential zone, a setback of 100 feet shall be maintained from structures over 30 feet in height;  


8.3.6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE - Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided for each commercial use in accordance with the provisions of Section 22 of these regulations. 
SECTION 9 
CB COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - To represent the central business district of the Town, characterized by intensive commercial and related development. The purpose of this district is to concentrate the main commercial enterprises of the town. 
9.l PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with Section 24. 
9.1.0 Single Family Dwelling 
9.l.l Two-family dwelling 
9.l.2 Retail sales stores less than 20,000 square feet gross area 
9.l.3 Business or professional offices 
9.l.4 Standard restaurant, bakery, confectionery store, cafeteria. 
9.l.5 Hotel 
9.l.6 Personal service shops 
9.l.7 Business service establishments 
9.l.8 Inn, Bed and Breakfast 
9.l.9 Wholesale commercial uses, cold storage lockers, in-building storage 
9.l.l0 Gasoline service station, public lot or garage, automobile sales agency 
9.l.ll Private educational uses under 2000 square feet in gross floor area 
9.l.l2 All related accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
9.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25 and 25.5. 
9.2.l Private club 
9.2.2 Commercial recreation, indoor theatre 
9.2.3 Mixed Use Development. 
9.2.4 Fast food restaurant  
9.2.5 Small Animal Veterinary Clinics 
9.2.6 Parking Lots   
9.2.7 Additions to Assisted Living Facilities existing as the effective date of this provision, subject to the following: 
A. No such addition shall increase gross floor area by more than twenty-five (25%) percent or extend to additional land not part of the facility as of the effective date of this provision. 

B. The facility after any such addition shall comply with the standards outlined in Section 25.5. 



9.2.8 Private Educational Uses 2000 square feet and over in gross floor area 
9.2.9 Retail 20,000 square feet and over gross square footage. 
9.2.10 Taproom Brewery. 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
9.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
9.3.l LOT SIZE - All lots used for commercial purposes shall have a minimum of l0,000 square feet of area. Lots used for mixed use shall have a minimum of 7,500 square feet plus 1,200 square feet for each efficiency or one bedroom living unit and 2,000 square feet for each two-bedroom living unit. Lots used for two-family dwellings shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet.  All lots used for residential purposes shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet of area. 
9.3.2 FRONTAGE - Each lot shall have frontage of not less than 80 feet. 
9.3.3 SETBACK – No building or structure shall be placed not less than six (6) feet or more than twenty (20) feet from the street line or less than ten (10) feet from other property lines if not built on the property line in accordance with Section 20.18.  The front setback area shall be used for landscape purposes. 




An increase in the twenty-foot (20’) front setback may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission if the following standards are met: 
A. The location of the building will not significantly impair views from, or the availability of light and air to, abutting properties. 

B. The location of the building shall not adversely affect surrounding properties. 

C. On site traffic patterns and parking design will not adversely affect other onsite issues. 9.3.4 COVERAGE - The total area covered by all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot area. 






9.3.5 HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed thirty feet (30’) in height. 
9.3.6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE - Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with the provision of Section 22 of these regulations. 
**See Architectural Review Guidelines Appendix B 
SECTION 10 
CM COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - Marine commercial district containing land with frontage on certain public waterways, and adjacent parcels. The purpose of this district is to encourage the development of new and the retention of existing water-dependent uses in those areas of the Town suitable for such development, consistent with the policies of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act.  
10.1 PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with Section 24. 
10.1.1 Facilities for the building, repair, servicing, storage, hauling and launching of boats, and for the building, repair and servicing of their component parts and accessories.   
10.1.2  Marinas; yacht clubs 
10.1.3 Sale of boats, marine engines, marine equipment and supplies 
10.1.4  Boat launching areas 
10.1.5  Boat rental; sailing school; boat licensing schools 
10.1.6  Bait and tackle shop 
10.1.7 Dockside facilities for dispensing fuel and lubricants for marine purposes only, but expressly excluding the bulk storage of fuel 
10.1.8 Berthing facilities for vessels for hire carrying passengers on excursions, pleasure or fishing trips, but expressly excluding ferry service or freight terminals  
10.1.9 Berthing facilities for vessels engaged in commercial fishery or shellfishery, but expressly excluding fish or shellfish processing plants 
10.1.10  Marine research facilities 
10.1.11 Public parks; public water-based recreational facilities 
10.1.12 All related accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. The following are specifically permitted as related accessory uses incidental to the uses listed in 10.1.1 through 10.1.11 for lots with water frontage, and are permitted as primary uses on lots which lack water frontage: sail and marine canvas lofts; restrooms, laundry facilities, and effluent pump-out stations to serve boating patrons; fast food service and/or convenience grocery (excludes gasoline pumps for cars) primarily to serve boating patrons; swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar facilities for outdoor recreation; marine-oriented office uses, including yacht brokerage, marine surveyor, and marine insurance and finance.   
  
10.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a special permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the special permit requirements of Section 25. 
10.2.1 Retail sales store or professional office other than those permitted by Section 10.1 
10.2.2 Marine wholesale distribution 
10.2.3  Standard restaurant 
10.2.4  Inn, Bed & Breakfast 
10.2.5 Dwelling units, limited to mixed use situations in which dwelling units are contained within a building dedicated principally to a permitted commercial, nonresidential use. The portion of the jointly used building committed to dwelling units shall be located on floors above the permitted commercial use and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the building area.  
The zoning commission shall grant a special permit for uses under this paragraph if it determines that the proposed special permit use will not have an adverse impact on future water-dependent development opportunities. The following standards shall be applied in assessing any special permit request: 
A. No special permit use shall be granted which will replace, in whole or in substantial part, an existing water-dependent use with a special permit use. 

B. Any special permit use on a waterfront lot shall be situated such that the water frontage is preserved for future structures and/or uses requiring direct water access. 

C. A special permit use on a waterfront lot shall be granted only if a permitted water-dependent use exists or will be developed concurrently on the same lot and if such permitted use is or will be the primary and dominant use of the lot. 

D. No special permit shall be granted which will substantially reduce or inhibit existing public access to marine or tidal waters. 


10.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
10.3.1  LOT SIZE - All lots shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet of lot area. All lots used for mixed commercial and residential purposes shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet of lot area for each dwelling unit, in addition to a minimum of 10,000 square feet of lot area required for the commercial use. 
10.3.2  FRONTAGE - Each lot shall have not less than 80 feet of road frontage. 
 
10.3.3  SETBACK - No building or structure shall be placed less than 20 feet from the street line or 10 feet from any other property line. Pursuant to Section 20.15, the Zoning Commission may permit a reduction of the waterfront setback to zero for buildings or structures necessary to the operation of a water dependent use. 
10.3.4  COVERAGE - The total area covered by all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area. 
10.3.5  HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height, except that the Zoning Commission may, under the provisions of Section 25 of these regulations, permit an increase in height to a maximum of 50 feet, upon a finding that the following standards are met: 
A. Any building exceeding 30 feet in height shall be designed and used primarily for boat manufacture, maintenance, repair, or storage (excluding rack storage). Any building exceeding 30 feet in height cannot be a mixed use. 
B. The total lot coverage of all buildings exceeding 30 feet in height shall not exceed 10 percent of the lot area. 
C. The increase in height will not significantly impair views from, or the availability of light and air to, abutting or nearby properties.  
10.3.6  No lot with water frontage shall be divided in such a way as to create a lot without water frontage. 
10.3.7 Off-Street Parking and Loading Space - Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 22 of these regulations. Because the land area suitable for inclusion in the CM District is limited and should be reserved to the maximum extent possible for water-dependent uses, the following exceptions to Section 22 shall apply: 
A.   Up to 80 percent of the off-street parking spaces required for marinas, boat yards, and yacht clubs may be utilized for the outside storage of boats during the off season. 
B. Required parking spaces for uses within the CM District may be provided on sites other than the site which they serve, provided that: 
1. Said spaces are located in a commercial district and are within 500 feet walking distance of the lot or use which they serve, and 

2. Said spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use which they serve and shall be subject to a deed restriction binding the owner and any future owners to maintain the required number of spaces until such use is terminated or until such spaces are provided elsewhere, or shall be leased subject to a lease restriction binding the tenant and any future tenant in like manner. 


SECTION 11 
 
LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - A district suitable for heavy commercial and light manufacturing, oriented essentially to major transportation facilities.  The purpose of this district is to provide areas for industrial and commercial uses in an open setting that will not have objectionable influences on adjacent residential and commercial districts. 
ll.l PERMITTED USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with Section 24. 
ll.l.l Light Industrial or manufacturing uses which are not dangerous by reason of fire or explosion, nor injurious or detrimental to the neighborhood by reason of dust, odor, fumes, wastes, smoke, glare, noise, vibration or other noxious or objectionable feature as measured at the nearest property line. 
ll.l.2 Trucking terminal 
ll.l.3 Printing or publishing 
ll.l.4 Warehouse and wholesale storage; self-storage warehouses 
ll.l.5 Commercial nurseries, greenhouses and garden centers 
ll.l.6 Office complex 
ll.l.7 All related accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
ll.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit Requirements of Section 25. 
ll.2.l Deli, coffee shop or cafeteria 
11.2.2 Private training facilities, trade and technical schools and facilities of higher learning, without a residential component 




ll.2.3 Research, design and development facilities 
ll.2.4 Health spas and gymnasiums, sports facilities and other commercial indoor recreations, without a residential component 
ll.2.5 Hotels 
11.2.6   Contractor or trade service facilities  
ll.2.7 (Removed 1/5/2017) 
11.2.8 Motor Vehicle and heavy equipment Repairers Station 
11.2.9 Office and retail sales of industrial services manufactured items and/or processed items that are produced/provided on site wherein such retail services are an accessory use and take place in the same structure. 
11.2.10 Adult Use Establishments subject to the following conditions: no building or premises shall be used, erected or altered, which is arranged, intended or designed to be used as an Adult Use Establishment if any part of such building or premises is situated on any part of a lot within a nine hundred feet radius in any direction of any lot zoned or used for, or upon which is located any building used for: 
A.   Any single family or multi-family residential use; 
B.   Any public or private school, or other educational facility attended by persons under the age of eighteen (18); 
C.   Any church or other religious facility or institutions; 
D.   Any hospital, library or licensed child care facility; 
E.   Any public park; or 
F.   Any other Adult Use Establishment. 
No adult use establishment shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observations from any public right-of-way of any material depicting, describing or relating to the adult use, except for signage per Section 18 of these regulations. 
11.2.11 Brew Pub 
11.2.12 Dog Daycare and Training Center 
(ALSO SEE SECTION 20 - - GENERAL REGULATIONS) 
ll.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
ll.3.l LOT SIZE - Within the LI Light Industrial District no lot shall be less than 40,000 square feet in area. 
ll.3.2 FRONTAGE - Each lot shall have not less than l50 feet frontage. 
ll.3.3 SETBACK - No building or structure shall be placed less than 25 feet from the street line or 20 feet from other lines.  The 25 feet to be used for lawn, trees and sidewalks only. 
ll.3.4 COVERAGE - The total area covered by all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot area. 
ll.3.5 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE - Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided as required in Section 22 of these regulations. 
ll.3.6 HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed 40 feet in height. 
ll.3.7 BUFFER STRIP - A suitable landscaped buffer strip not less than 50 feet wide shall be provided along the property line where any LI Industrial District abuts any non-industrial district within the Town or any adjoining town. 
 
SECTION 11A 
GPDD Gateway Planned Development District 
Purpose – Coordinate development of properties under separate ownership and provide safeguards that one or another early development does not jeopardize maximum build-out.  Promote high technology businesses and complimentary uses that will broaden the town’s tax base, provide employment for highly skilled workers and be in harmony with the underlying aquifer protection district. 
11A.1 PERMITTED USES – The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others are permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with Section 24. 
11A.1.1 Research, Design and Development Facilities 
11A.1.2 Trade and Technical Schools and Facilities of Higher Learning 
11A.1.3 Corporate Headquarters 
11A.1.4 Business, Professional Offices 
11A.1.5 Deli, Coffee Shop, Cafeteria, Standard Restaurant 
11A.1.6 Nursery School and Day Care Center serving more than six (6) children 
11A.1.7 Tourist Information Center 
11A.1.8 Business Service Establishments, Personal Service Establishments 
11A.1.9 Retail complex totaling under 20,000 Square Feet 
11A.1.10 Health Club 
11A.1.11 Studios for recording Television, Radio and Motion Pictures. 
11A.2. SPECIAL PERMIT USES – The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit Requirements of Section 25. 
11A.2.1 Light Manufacturing Facilities 
11A.2.2 Hotel with Conference Center  
11A.2.3 Parking Garage as accessory use 
11A.2.4 Retail complex 20,000 square feet and over. No one store over 20,000 square feet. 
11A.2.5 Residential as Mixed Use (restricted to one floor above office or business use.  Stand-alone residential units shall not be permitted.) 
11A.3 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
11A.3.1 Lot Size – Within the GPDD Gateway Planned Development District no lot shall be less than 40,000 square feet in area. 
11A.3.2 Frontage – Each lot shall have not less than 150 feet of frontage. 
11A.3.3 Setback – No building or structure shall be placed less than 25 feet nor more than 50 feet from the street line unless otherwise approved by the Commission.  No building or structure shall be placed less than 20 feet from other property lines. 
11A.3.4 Coverage – The total area covered by all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot area.  If required parking is contained within or on top of a structure, the total coverage, including the parking structure, may be increased to 80 percent subject to approval of a parking garage by Special Permit. 
11A.3.5 Off-Street Parking and loading space – Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required in Section 22 of these regulations. 
11A.3.6 Height - No building or structure shall exceed 40 feet in height except that the Zoning Commission may, under the provisions of Section 25 (Special Permit) of these regulations, permit an increase in height to a maximum of 55 feet, upon finding that the following standards are met; 
A. The increase in height will not significantly impair views from, or the availability of light and air to, abutting or nearby properties. 


11A.4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
11A.4.1 Site plans and subdivisions proposed for parcels over 5 acres shall be consistent with the basic infrastructure plan for the zoning district as shown in Fig. A. 
11A.4.2 Development of over 20 acres shall require a minimum of two access points to an approved Town or State road. 
11A.4.3 All access roads shall be a boulevard design consisting of two (2) 16’ wide lanes with an 8’ wide median.  Sidewalks shall be required along the outer lanes.  Street trees are required in accordance with Section 11A.7.3. 
11A.4.4 Any expansion or change in use of existing structures shall be subject to the requirements of this section. 
11A.4.5 No outdoor storage, including box trailers, shall be permitted. 
11A.4.6 All electric transmission lines, telephone lines and cable television lines shall be underground. 
11A.4.7 The cumulative area of uses permitted in Section 11A.1.5, 11A.1.8, 11A.1.9, 11A.2.4 and 11A.2.5 shall not exceed 30% of the entire acreage of the Gateway Planned Development District.  (Approximately 50 acres) Coffee shops and Cafeterias as accessory uses (not open to the general public) shall not be included in the above calculation.  In calculating the area devoted to any of the above specified uses, the area of the footprint of the building dedicated to such use and all associated parking area shall be measured.  Driveways between uses, sidewalks and landscaped buffer areas shall not be included. 
 
11A.5 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
11A.5.1 Only indirect discharge of storm water shall be permitted into the Pattagansett River. 
11A.5.2 All wastewater shall be discharged to a municipal sewer system. 
11A.5.3 All applications are subject to the controls outlined in the Aquifer Protection Agency Regulations for Aquifer Protection Districts. 
11A.5.4 Within the Storm water Management plan there will be no net increase in peak flow by proper drainage design. 
11A.6 ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS 
11A.6.1 The desired architectural style is upscale suburban.  Separate buildings shall be architecturally compatible. 
11A.6.2 Materials shall consist of brick or stone or other material offering high quality appearance unless otherwise approved by the Commission.  The use of strictly cinderblock, pre-form concrete or metal for the outside façade of a building is prohibited. 
11A.6.3 Views of unattractive feature such as heating and air conditioning units, loading and unloading areas, garbage collection areas, electrical transformers and utility service areas shall be screened from view of neighboring properties and street approaches to the site (including future access roads depicted on basic infrastructure plan).  Disguise should be the true objective.  Screening may necessitate the use of landscaped buffers.  See also Section 11A.7 Landscape Requirements.  Also see Appendix B Standard Landscape Details. 
11A.6.4 The density mix and arrangement of land uses shall encourage pedestrian movement within the district and to adjoining districts. 
11A.6.5 Sidewalks shall be required along all interior roadways and connected to existing or proposed sidewalks on Boston Post Road and Route 161. 
11A.6.6 Exterior parking lot lighting fixtures shall be consistent with the architectural style of the building and shown on a Lighting Plan.  Pedestrian walkways shall be well lit for safe passage during all hours. 
11A.6.7 All building and structure roofs shall be of gable, hip or gambrel design.  Flat roof and shed roof designs are prohibited. 
11A.7 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
11A.7.1 Buffers – Buffers shall consist of fences, landscaping, berms or mounds used to minimize any adverse impacts or nuisance on the site or from adjacent areas.  The following guidelines shall apply: 
A. Buffers shall be considered in or for the following areas and purposes: 

1. Along property lines between contrasting uses. 

2. To totally screen garbage collection areas, loading and unloading areas, electrical transformers, air conditioning units, utility service areas and similar features, which have not been architecturally disguised, from public view. 

3. To block prevailing wind patterns and to stop wind-borne debris from leaving the site. 

4. To screen parking areas from the public view. 

B. Natural features shall be maintained wherever possible to provide a buffer between proposed development and contrasting abutting uses including public roadways.  See Fig.1. in Appendix B for tree preservation detail.  Where natural features do not exist or are insufficient to provide a buffer, a landscaped buffer shall be required. 

C. Landscaped buffers shall be sufficient, in the opinion of the Commission, to accomplish the intended purpose within 5 years of planting. 

D. A buffer consisting of a public green space a minimum of 50’ wide and a landscaped area meeting the standards of a buffer between contrasting uses as shown in Fig.2 in Appendix B shall be required between the cemetery and any other use.  A 100-foot buffer shall be required between the GPDD and any abutting Residential Zone; building heights up to 40 feet shall have a 100-foot buffer; building heights between 40 feet and 55 feet shall have a buffer of 200 feet.  Where an Open Space in a Residential Zone abuts the GPDD, the open space may be counted toward the buffer requirement. 

E. Fencing and screening shall be so located within the property line to allow access for maintenance on both sides without intruding upon abutting properties. 

F. All buffer areas shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition by the owner. 


11A.7.2 Interior Parking Areas – In addition to buffers required to screen parking from public view, a minimum of three (3) canopy trees, two (2) under story trees, and six (6) shrubs shall be required within the parking area for each twenty-four parking spaces.  The minimum landscaped area within the parking lot shall be no less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved parking and vehicular circulation area.  The landscaping shall be arranged in a manner that does not obstruct visibility required for traffic safety.  See Fig.6 in Appendix B for sample parking lot landscaping.  Landscaping shall be protected from vehicular damage per details shown in Fig. 7 of Appendix B. 
11A.7.3 Street Trees – Street trees shall be required along all roads within the district unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Commission.  The trees shall be spaced 25’-35’ on center and placed 4’ from the curb line of the road.  Where a median is proposed, the median shall be a minimum of 8’ wide and planted with trees spaced 25’-35’ on center. 
11A.7.4 Additional Landscaping Requirements for Light Industrial Uses – See Fig. 8 in Appendix B. 
11A.7.5 Plant Maintenance Bond – Prior to issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall furnish to the Town of East Lyme a bond, letter of credit, or other form of security approved by the Zoning Commission, equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the value of all plantings as shown on the Landscape Plan submitted and approved as part of the Site Plan application.  The bond shall be binding for a minimum of three (3) years and shall be subject to the condition that required plantings be maintained in accordance with the terms of the site plan approval and in a good and healthy condition.  Notwithstanding the requirement of a bond from the applicant, the owner shall have a continuing obligation to maintain required plantings in accordance with the terms of the site plan approval and in a good and healthy condition. 
11A.8 ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS – In addition to the requirements of Section 24 and 25, the following shall be submitted for all applications in this district: 
11A.8.1 Storm water Management Plan prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer 
11A.8.2 Architectural Plan prepared by licensed Architect 
11A.8.3 Landscape Plan prepared by licensed Landscape Architect 
11A.8.4 Lighting Plan prepared by licensed Architect or Landscape Architect 
11A.8.5 Traffic Report prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer if more than 20 cars generated. 



 
STANDARD LANDSCAPING DETAILS – 
 
Fig 1 – Tree Preservation Detail 
Fig 2 - Buffering Between Contrasting Uses Without Fencing 
      With Fencing 
Fig 3 – Screening of Accessory Site Elements 
Fig 4 – Parking lot screening from Public view 
 Without Berm (section) 
 With Berm (section) 
 Screening from Street (plan) 
 Screening from Drive-thru (plan) 
Fig 5- Parking Lot Screening from Compatible Uses 
Fig 6- Interior Parking Lot Landscaping 
Fig 7- Protection of Parking Lot Landscaping 
Fig 8- Industrial Landscaping 

















11.A.9  MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN (MDP) 
As an alternative to the traditional parcel by parcel development of the GPDD Gateway Planned Development District under the preceding provisions, the Commission may, subject to a public hearing adopt a Master Development Plan (MDP) that modifies the zoning requirements of the District in accordance with the following standards.  
11.A.9.1 Purpose  
The purpose of the MDP process is to encourage the comprehensive planning and coordinated mixed-use development of multiple parcels within the District, promote creativity and superior design through flexible and context-sensitive development standards, support significant economic investment, reduce impacts associated with large-scale development, and provide protection to adjoining neighborhoods. 
11.A.9.2 Effect 
The adoption of an MDP shall modify the zoning requirements of the GPDD Gateway Planned Development District as specified by the MDP and except as provided in Section 11.A.9.2.1 and 11.A.9.2.2 shall allow for deviation from the typical requirements for use, bulk, and other development standards.  Any provision of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations applicable to the property and not specifically superseded by adoption of the MDP shall continue in full force and effect.        
11.A.9.2.1 Retail Use 
To the extent that a MDP shall contain retail uses, such uses shall not exceed 425,000 square feet of net floor area in total, and shall be subject to the following bulk limitations: 
A. Not less than twenty-five (25%) percent of all retail space in the MDP shall be contained in stores with less than 20,000 square feet of net floor area.  


 
B. Not more than one (1) anchor store, containing no more than 140,000 square feet of net floor area, shall be allowed. 


 
C. Not more than Five (5) junior anchor stores, typically ranging from 25,000 to 90,000 square feet shall be allowed, provided that no single store may exceed 90,000 square feet of net floor area, and not more than two (2) such stores may exceed 50,000 net floor area. 


 
D. Certificates of Occupancy for any retail use as provided in this Section 11A.9.2.1 shall not be issued until such time as the extension of East Society Road from its then easterly terminus connecting through to Flanders Road shall have been constructed in accordance with Town standards or bonded with the Town of East Lyme for any such portion not so constructed or completed.  


This provision shall not apply with respect to the anchor store as defined in Subsection B of the above section. 


 11.A.9.2.2 Residential Use 
To the extent that a MDP shall contain residential uses on the west side of the Pattagansett River, such uses shall be subject to the following: 
A. No single family detached unit shall be permitted. 

B. Such uses shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on surrounding areas by incorporating one or more of the following: 

1.  Buffers to adjoining residential uses. 

2. Locating the lower density uses in areas near existing residential uses. 

3. Providing open space and/or recreational areas.  

4. Providing architectural and lighting controls. 



  C. The total number of units shall not exceed 400, subject to the following: 
 Certificates of Occupancy for any units in excess of 280 shall not be issued until such time East Society Road, from its existing easterly terminus shall have been constricted in accordance with Town standards, through the easterly round-about as the same currently exist, or bonded with the Town of East Lyme for any portion not so completed. 
11.A.9.3 Eligibility 
A MDP application must include at least 75% of the land within the GPDD Gateway Planned Development District.  A MDP must provide for reasonable access and utility interconnections to any portion of the District not included within a proposed MDP.  The uses and bulk contained in the MDP shall not be considered with respect to site plans for portions of the District outside the MDP. 
11.A.9.4 Submission Requirements 
An application for MDP adoption shall require public hearing and in lieu of a site plan as described in Section 24, shall include the following components: 
A.  Existing Conditions Survey prepared by a licensed surveyor showing: 
1. Existing topography with 5-foot contours showing the general gradient of the site, existing structures, existing roads and rights-of-way, easements, major topographic features, inland wetlands, 

2. Watercourses and flood plains. 


3. Land uses, zoning and approximate location of buildings and driveways within 100 feet of the site. 

4. A-2 boundary survey. 

5. Location map. 


B.  Conceptualized Layout Plan prepared by a licensed engineer, architect and/or landscape architect showing: 
1. General location and nature of proposed land uses. 

2. Proposed public and private rights-of-way, parking areas, 

3. Easements, and public and private open space areas. 

4. Proposed building footprints, floor areas, and building heights. 

5. Proposed location of landscaping, buffering, and screening. 

6. Utility and highway improvements. 

7. Construction phasing plan. 





C. Development Standards for the proposed development shall be provided in a narrative form including, but not limited to: 
1. Permitted uses subject to Site Plan approval in accordance with Section 24. 

2. Bulk and dimensional requirements. 

3. Parking and loading. 

4. Streets and sidewalks. 

5. Landscaping and screening. 

6. Lighting. 

7. Signage. 

8. Open space and conservation areas. 

9. Any other standards the Commission may reasonably require. 






D.  Architectural Standards for the proposed development provided in both narrative form and visual representations prepared by a licensed architect showing: 
1. Architectural styles. 

2. Massing and scale. 

3. Materials and colors. 

4. Roof lines and profiles. 

5. Typical building facades and elevations. 





6. Provisions which require large format stores to contain features calculated to minimize the appearance of bulk.  





E. Traffic Analysis prepared by a professional traffic engineer including: 
1. A comprehensive traffic study detailing the impact of the proposed development. 

2. Improvement plan and the measures necessary to mitigate those impacts. 


11.A.9.5 Approval Criteria 
The adoption of a MDP shall require a public hearing with notice of the hearing made by publication.  The Commission shall consider the following criteria in determining whether to adopt a proposed MDP: 
 
1. Consistency with the Plan of Conservation and Development. 

2. Consistency with the goal of the GPDD Gateway Planned Development District to broaden the Town’s tax base while providing a coordinated development, in harmony with the underlying aquifer protection district, calculated to maximize the potential of the district. 

3. Consistency with the purpose of the alternative MDP process. 

4. Consistency with the orderly development of the district with provisions for necessary utility and traffic infrastructure and in harmony with the surrounding land uses.    


The Commission shall reserve the right and discretion to deny the adoption of any MDP that, in the opinion of the Commission, fails to meet one or more of the above-mentioned criteria. 
11.A.9.6 Implementation 
The implementation of the MDP shall be subject to Site Plan approval by the Commission pursuant to Section 24 of these Regulations. The Site Plan submission shall also contain the information required pursuant to Sections 11.A.8.1-11.A.8.4 and shall comply with the standards outlined in Section 11A.5 (Environmental Requirements).  All applications for Site Plan approval under an adopted MDP shall conform to the modified Development and Architectural Standards of the MDP and substantially conform to the size and location of buildings and uses as shown on the Conceptualized Layout Plan.  All applications for Site Plan approval shall illustrate the adherence the adopted MDP through plans, renderings, architectural elevations, and other 
materials.  Any Site Plan Application that substantially conforms to an adopted MDP shall be approved by the Commission. 
11.A.9.7 Phasing and Public Improvements 
Implementation of an adopted MDP may be phased on the condition that all public infrastructure associated with each phase of the MDP shall be constructed prior to the issuance of Certificates of Occupancy for such phase or shall be bonded to the satisfaction of the Commission. 
 
SECTION 12 
SU SPECIAL USE DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - A district designed to accommodate highly specialized uses on large tracts of land in appropriate locations to be determined by the Commission. 
l2.l SPECIAL PERMIT USES - Any one of the following uses of buildings and/or land may be permitted when approved for a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25.  Any change from one use to another shall require a separate application for Special Permit. 
l2.l.l Any scientific, research or testing laboratory which is not dangerous by reason of fire or explosion nor injurious or detrimental to the neighborhood by reason of dust, odor, fumes, wastes, smoke, glare, noise, vibration or other noxious or objectionable feature as measured at the nearest property line. 
l2.l.lA Commercial recreation complex, or resort area, including restaurants, dance halls, bowling alleys, theatres, billiard and pool parlors, picnic area, swimming pools, motels, hotels, tourist cabin establishments, and similar places of public recreation and accommodation operated as a business. 
l2.l.2 Executive or administrative office buildings. 
l2.l.3 Multi-family dwellings, including: 
Individual dwelling units under a single common land ownership. 
Apartments with dwelling units combined in a single structure or structures under single common ownership. 
Condominiums consisting of apartments with dwelling units combined in a single structure or structures. 
Parking, recreation and accessory structures limited to the use of the residents of the units permitted above. 
l2.l.4 Accessory residential use for regulation eighteen (18) hole golf course of not less than five thousand (5000) yards in length, subject to the standards of Section 25.5. 
12.1.5 Multi-Family, Multi-Story Dwellings to accommodate Supportive Housing for the Elderly as Administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development under Section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 and sponsored by a HUD recognized non-profit organization. 



A. Any Accessory use customarily incidental to the above use. 


l2.2 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
l2.2.l LOT SIZE - Within the SU Special Use District no lot shall be less than 20 acres in area, except that a lot used for non-profit elderly housing may be less than 20 acres but not less than 10 acres in area. 
l2.2.2 FRONTAGE - Each lot and/or land area shall have not less than 500 feet frontage. 
l2.2.3 SETBACKS - No new building or structure shall be placed less than l50 feet from the street line or l00 feet from any other property line.  The Zoning Commission may waive the 100 feet from the property line and/or the 150 feet from the street line.  A 50-foot buffer is required along all SU district zone lines. 
l2.2.4 COVERAGE - The total area of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed ten percent of the lot area. 
l2.2.5 HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height except that the Zoning Commission may, under the provisions of Section 25 (Special Permit) of these regulations, permit an increase in height to a maximum of 40 feet. 
l2.2.6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE - Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 22 of these regulations. 
l2.2.7 BUFFER STRIP - A suitably landscaped buffer strip not less than 50 feet wide, shall be provided along the property line where any SU Special Use District abuts any Rural or Residence District within the Town or any adjoining town. 
l2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
l2.3.l The Zoning Commission shall consider for designation as a Special Use District, only parcels of 20 acres or larger, except that when an application for designation of a parcel as SU is accompanied by an application for a Special Permit to construct non-profit elderly housing, the Commission may consider parcels consisting of less than 20 acres but not less than 10 acres. 
l2.3.2 An application for rezoning shall be accompanied by an application for a Special Permit in accordance with the requirements of Section 25.  These shall be referred to the Planning Commission for consistency with the Town Plan of Development.  The Planning Commission shall have 35 days to report its recommendations to the Zoning Commission. 
For Multi-family development, the following plans and information shall be included in addition to the information required to be submitted under Section 25: 
A. All principal structures and streets within 50 feet of the boundaries of the proposed development;  

B. Rendering to show the appearance of representative structures within the development, the number and size of units and the number and size of rooms per unit, and the specific exterior materials to be used. 

C. Copies of covenants and restrictions to be recorded in the land records of the Town before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued to assure the development and maintenance of the property in accordance with the complete development plan. 


D. Such other information as the Commission may reasonably request to carry out the high standards of development contemplated by this section. 


12.3.3 All applications for development in the Special Use District shall include a traffic study, which provides: 
A. A description of the traffic circulation network within one mile of the site; existing and proposed intersections; proposed site access; roadway widths and rights-of-way; traffic signals and other control devices; existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities. 

B. A description of existing traffic conditions based on three twenty-four hour weekday counts taken during the period from July l to September l on all roadways providing access to the site.  Average daily traffic and average peak hour volumes shall be based on these counts. 

C. Traffic projections for the proposed development prepared according to the data and procedures contained in the Institute of Traffic Engineers "Trip Generation Manual", indicating total average weekday and peak hour trips allocated to proposed phases and uses. 

D. Analysis of projected traffic impacts from the development together with projected impacts of other developments approved for construction and utilizing the same elements of the traffic circulation network.  

E. Recommended traffic circulation network improvements and traffic control devices required to maintain traffic operation at the level of service existing prior to the development. 


l2.3.4 Any separate lot, hereinafter created from any part of a Special Use District, shall conform in all aspects to requirements of this section. 
l2.3.5 The Commission may approve a development plan to be completed in stages.  The minimum amount of land to be included within any single stage of development shall be five acres.  The Commission may grant a Special Permit limited to each such stage of development.  Each stage shall be capable of independent existence without the completion of succeeding stages.  Buffer requirements shall not apply to the common line between stages of development. 
12.3.6 The Commission shall hold a Public Hearing on an application for a rezoning as a Special Use District and Special Permit Approval. 
SECTION 12A 
 
SU-E SPECIAL USE DISTRICTS 
GENERAL DESCRIPTOIN AND PURPOSE - A district designed to accommodate elderly housing uses on large tracts of land in appropriate locations to be determined by the Commission. 
l2A.l SPECIAL PERMIT USES - The following uses of buildings and/or land may be permitted when approved for a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25.  
12A.l.1 Elderly Housing - Single Family detached dwelling units operated by residents under a common interest ownership for senior citizens age 55 or over subject to appropriate controls as outlined in Section 25. 
12A.1.2 Any accessory use customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
12A.2 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
l2A.2.l LOT SIZE - Within the SU-E Special Use District no lot shall be less than 10 acres in area.  
l2A.2.2 FRONTAGE - Each lot and/or land area shall have not less than 50 feet frontage. 
l2A.2.3 SETBACKS - No new building or structure shall be placed less than l50 feet from the street line or l00 feet from any other property line. The Zoning Commission may waive the 100 feet from the property line and/or the 150 feet from the street line.  A 50-foot buffer is required along all SU-E district zone lines. 
l2A.2.4 COVERAGE - The total area of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed ten percent of the lot area. 
l2A.2.5 HEIGHT - No building or structure shall exceed 30 feet in height. 
l2A.2.6 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE - Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 22 of these regulations. 
l2A.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
l2A.3.l The Zoning Commission shall consider for designation as a Special Use Elderly District, only parcels of 10 acres or larger. 
l2A.3.2 An application for rezoning shall be accompanied by an application for a Special Permit in accordance with the requirements of Section 25.  For Elderly housing developments, the following plans and information shall be included in addition to the information required to be submitted under Section 25: 
A. All principal structures and streets within 50 feet of the boundaries of the proposed development; 


B. Floor plan and rendering to show the appearance of representative structures within the development, the number and size of units and the number and size of rooms per unit, and the specific exterior materials to be used. 

C. Copies of covenants, condominium association documents and other deed restriction shall accompany the Special Permit application and shall be recorded in the land records of the Town before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued to assure the development and maintenance of the property in accordance with the complete development plan. 

D. Such other information as the Commission may reasonably request to carry out the high standards of development contemplated by this section. 


12A.3.3 All applications for development in this zone district shall include a traffic study which provides: 
A. A description of the traffic circulation network within one mile of the site; existing and proposed intersections; proposed site access; roadway widths and rights-of-way; traffic signals and other control devices; existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities. 

B. A description of existing traffic conditions based on three twenty-four hour weekday counts taken within a twelve (12) month period of the application submission on all roadways providing access to the site.  Average daily traffic and average peak hour volumes shall be based on these counts. 

C. Traffic projections for the proposed development prepared according to the data and procedures contained in the Institute of Traffic Engineers "Trip Generation Manual", indicating total average weekday and peak hour trips allocated to proposed phases and uses. 

D. Analysis of projected traffic impacts from the development together with projected impacts of other developments approved for construction and utilizing the same elements of the traffic circulation network.  

E. Recommended traffic circulation network improvements and traffic control devices required to maintain traffic operation at the level of service existing prior to the development. 



l2A.3.4  Any separate lot, hereinafter created from any part of a zone district, shall conform in all aspects to requirements of this section. 
12A.3.5 The Commission may approve a development plan to be completed in stages.  The minimum amount of land to be included within any single stage of development shall be five acres.  The Commission may grant a Special Permit limited to each such stage of development.  Each stage shall be capable of independent existence 
without the completion of succeeding stages.  Buffer requirements shall not apply to the common line between stages of development. 
l2A.3.6 The Commission shall hold a Public Hearing on an application for a rezoning as a Special Use Elderly District and Special Permit Approval. 
12A.4 PARCELS OF 300 ACRES OR LARGER 
12A.4.1 Elderly housing owned by residents under a common interest ownership for senior citizens, age 55 or older, when approved for a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to Special Permit requirements of Section 25, and consisting of the following uses: 
A. Single Family Detached Dwellings; 

B. Townhouse Dwellings, consisting of attached single family units, not to exceed six (6) units per building, and not to exceed 30% of the total number of residential units for said parcel; 

C. Multi-family Dwellings not to exceed 24 units per building and not to exceed 40% of the total number of residential units for said parcel; 

D. Any accessory use customarily incidental to permitted uses including but not limited to the uses referred in Section 12A.4.3.C. 


12A.4.2 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
The dimensional requirements contained in Section 12A.2 above shall apply except that the following height requirements shall apply provided the setbacks of the buildings from the property lines are increased by five (5’) feet for each foot of height above thirty (30’) feet, not to exceed the following limitations: 
A. Single Family Detached Dwellings    35’ 

B. Townhouse Dwellings     40’ 

C. Multi-family Dwellings serviced by an Elevator  50’ 

D. The Commission may further increase setbacks and/or reduce the maximum height as provided above if it finds that such a proposed structure will impair views, light or air or interfere with the use of neighboring properties. 






12A.4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
A.  The general provisions contained in Section 12A.3 above shall apply. 

B. COMMUNITY AREA FOR RECREATION:  The developer shall provide an area for passive and/or active 


recreation for the residents of the Active Adult Community Development.  Such areas shall include but are not limited to the following: 

1. Sitting areas (covered or uncovered) 

2. Walking paths and trails 

3. Other dedicated public lawns and green space 

4. Tennis Courts 

5. Exercise room and equipment 

6. Swimming pool 


Such areas may include the following: 
i. Croquet Lawn 

ii. Billiards Room 

iii. Bicycle Racks 

iv. Volleyball Court 

C. VILLAGE GREEN:  The following Accessory Uses are permitted within the development, which will create a Village Green to compliment active adult residential uses, and will exist primarily for the benefit of the residents of said community. 


These uses may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1. Postal area (post office), 

2. Coffee Shop/Restaurant 

3. Meeting hall/clubhouse 

4. Non-denominational chapel 

5. Library, 

6. Barbershop/hairdresser 

7. Canning and potting sheds 

8. General Store 

9. Amphitheater 

10. Arts and crafts gallery 

11. Common green area. 


The accessory uses in total shall not exceed a building coverage of 22,000-sq. ft.; the meeting hall/clubhouse shall not exceed 12,000-sq. ft.; and all other accessory uses in total will not exceed approximately 10,000-sq. ft. 
D. UTILITIES:  


1. The water supply shall be approved by the Town Director of health and State Department of Health. 

2. All utilities shall be underground. 

E. SEWAGE DISPOSAL:  The development shall be served by a sewage disposal system(s) meeting Town Health Department and State Health Department Services regulations and as applicable, regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection. 


12A.4.4 PROCEDURES – PRELIMINARY SPECIAL PERMIT 
A. PRELIMINARY SPECIAL PERMIT 


 Prior to filing an application for Special Permit, an application for a “Preliminary Special Permit” (PSP) shall be submitted, which application shall include the following: 
1. An A-2 Survey; 

2. Topographical plan with 10’ intervals; 

3. A wetland map; 

4. A map showing slopes above 25% 

5. Traffic Study; 

6. Open Space Plan; 

7. Recreational Facilities Plan; 

8. Preliminary plan showing designs of buildings; 

9. Conceptual plan showing designs of buildings; 

10. Table showing number of units and number of bedrooms for each unit. 

11. Zoning Compliance Block 

B. A public hearing will be held on said application for said PSP following which the Commission shall either approve, approve with modifications, or deny said PSP. 

C. If said PSP is approved, or approved with modifications, the applicant shall file a “Final Special Permit” (FSP) which shall include all information required under these Regulations for both a Site Plan and Special Permit application, along with such other information as the Commission may reasonably request to carry out the high standards of development contemplated by this Section. 

D. If the FSP conforms to the PSP as approved, the Commission shall approve the FSP. 


12A.5 SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS SECTION 25 
12A.5.1 For Applications under 12A.4, all Special Permit requirements under Section 25 and 25.5 shall apply except for the following under 25.5 (Elderly Housing SU-E). 
A. Single-family detached residential units shall not be restricted to clusters of no more than eight (8) units. 

B. Basements or attics shall not be required for multi-family units. 

C. Notwithstanding the density allowed in Section A above, the maximum number of dwelling units per acre shall not exceed 2.5. 

D. In lieu of the requirements of Section10, open space shall be provided as follows: a. Not less than 50% of the parcel shall be set aside as open space.  At least one-half of such open space area shall be in parcels of 20 acres or more.  Such open space may be used for recreational activities 







E. The following additional restriction shall be applicable: 


No such development may be constructed on a parcel if any portion of it lies within a coastal boundary as defined by Section 22a-94 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and as delineated in the coastal boundary map for the Town of East Lyme. 
F. The setback and separation requirements of number 2 shall apply to single-family dwelling units only.  With respect to all other structures a minimum setback of six feet (6’) from internal roadways shall apply. 


SECTION 13 
 
AqP AQUIFER AND PRIMARY RECHARGE DISTRICT AND 
AqS SECONDARY RECHARGE DISTRICT 
 
This section removed effective June 28, 2013. 
 
SECTION 14 
COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT 
l4.1 COASTAL SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED - All buildings, uses and structures fully or partially within the coastal boundary as defined by Section 22a-94 of the Connecticut General Statutes and as delineated on the Coastal Boundary Map for the Town of East Lyme shall be subject to the coastal site plan review requirements and procedures in Section 22a-l05 through 22a-l09 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
l4.2 COASTAL SITE PLAN REVIEW EXEMPTIONS 
14.2.l Pursuant to Section 22a-l09 (b) of the Connecticut General Statutes the following activities are exempt from coastal site plan review requirements: 
A. Gardening, grazing and the harvesting of crops; 
B. Minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings or detached accessory buildings, such as garages and utility sheds; 
C. Construction of new or modification of existing structures incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property including, but not limited to walks, terraces, driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts, docks and detached accessory buildings; 
D. Construction of the following new or modification of the following existing on-premise non-residential structures: fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs, and such other minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources as defined by Section 22a-93(7) of the Connecticut General Statutes or restrict access along the public beach; 
E. Construction of an individual single family residential structure except in or within one hundred feet (l00) of the following coastal resource areas as defined by Section 22s-93(7) of the Connecticut General Statutes: tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments, beaches and dunes; 
F. Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife and other coastal land and water resources; 

G. Interior modification to buildings; 

H. Minor changes in use of a building, structure, or property except those changes occurring on property adjacent to or abutting coastal waters. 


 
 l4.2.2 The foregoing exemptions from Coastal Site Plan Review requirements shall apply to the following site plans, plans and applications: 
  A. Site plans submitted to the Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 22-l09 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
  B. Applications for a Special Permit submitted to the Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 8-2 of the Connecticut General Statutes and Section 25 of these Regulations; 
  C. Applications for a variance submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes and these regulations; 
  D. A referral of a proposed municipal project to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 8-24 of the Connecticut General Statutes.  
SECTION 15 
 
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
 
15.l DEFINITIONS 
 Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance it’s most reasonable application. 
 
 APPEAL means a request for a review of the interpretation of the Zoning Official of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance. 
 AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING means a designated AO or VO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. 
 AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD means land in the flood  
 plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
 BASE FLOOD” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) means the elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.   
 BASEMENT means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
 BREAKAWAY WALLS mean any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which are not part of the structural support of the building and which are so designed as to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. 
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA means the area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity waters, including but not limited to, hurricane wave wash or tsunamis.  The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone VE.  
COST means, as related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate.  The estimate shall include, but not be limited to:  the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total.  Items to be excluded include:  cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
DEVELOPMENT means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities within the area of special flood hazard. 
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 15, 1981, the effective date of the floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community. 
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) means the federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
FINISHED LIVING SPACE means, as related to fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE), a space that is, but is not limited to, heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace.     
FLOOD" OR "FLOODING, means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
 1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or 
 2. The usual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
 
 FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY means the official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
 FLOODWAY means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than l.0 feet. 
 FLOODWAY FRINGE means area between the "floodway" and the boundary of the l00 year flood area. 
 FLOOR means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction.  The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.  The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long term storage, seafood processing facilities, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
 HISTORIC STRUCTURE means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:  (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.  Recreational vehicles and similar transportable structure are not considered manufactured homes unless placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer. 
 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
MARKET VALUE means, as related to substantial improvement and substantial damage, the value of the structure shall be determined by an independent appraisal by a professional appraiser of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
MEAN SEA LEVEL means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after June 15, 1981, the effective date of this ordinance and includes and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 15, 1981, the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community. 
 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis, (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be a self-propelled or permanently towable by light -duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonable use. Recreational vehicles and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer shall be considered manufactured homes for the purpose of these regulations. 
SAND DUNES mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
 START OF CONSTRUCTION includes substantial improvement, and means the date that the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within l80 days of the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grade and filing; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.   
 
 STRUCTURE means a walled and roofed building manufactured home, or including a gas or liquid storage tank or mobile home that is principally above ground. 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE means damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.  “Substantial damage” also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
 SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, taking place over a ten year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
1. Before the start of construction of the improvement or repair, or 

2. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored to its condition before the damage occurred. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed.  For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 


The term does not, however, include either: 
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or  

2. Any alteration of a “historic structure” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “Historic Structure”. 


 VARIANCE means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance. 
VIOLATION means a failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management ordinance.  A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
l5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 l5.2.l LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES - This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of East Lyme, Connecticut. 
 l5.2.2 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD - The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New London County, Connecticut, dated August 5, 2013, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated August 5, 2013, (Panels 09011C0459J, 09011C0467J, 09011C0477J, 09011C0478J, 09011C0479J, 09011C0481J, 09011C0483J, 09011C0486J, 09011C0487J) and July 18, 2011 (Panels 09011C0309G, 09011C0316G, 09011C0317G, 09011C0318G, 09011C0319G, 09011C0328G, 09011C0336G, 09011C0337G, 09011C0338G, 09011C0339G, 09011C0457G, 09011C0476G) and other supporting data applicable to the Town of East Lyme, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this regulation.  Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.  The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AE, and VE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM.  Zone VE is also identified as a Coastal High Hazard Area.  Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community.  BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location.  The FIRM and FIS are on file in the Town Hall, East Lyme, Connecticut. 
 l5.2.3 COMPLIANCE - No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
 l5.2.4 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS - This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where these regulations and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
 l5.2.5 INTERPRETATION - In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be: 
A. Considered as minimum requirements; 

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and, 

C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 


 
 l5.2.6 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY -The degree of flood protection required by these regulations are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and are based on scientific and engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of East Lyme, Connecticut, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
l5.3 ADMINISTRATION 
l5.3.l ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT - A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section l5.2.2. 
 Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Building Official and Zoning Official and may include, but not be limited to: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage or materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.  Specifically, the following information is required: 
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 

B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed; 

C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice and the flood proofing criteria in Section l5.5.2.B; 

D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 

E. Plans for any walls to be used to enclose   space below the base flood level. 


 l5.3.2 DESIGNATION OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL AND ZONING OFFICIAL - The Building Official and Zoning Official are hereby appointed to administer and implement this ordinance by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
 
 l5.3.3 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL AND ZONING OFFICIAL - Duties of the Building Official and Zoning Official shall include, but not be limited to: 
  A. PERMIT REVIEW 
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied and whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 

2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 

3. Review all development permits in the area of special flood hazard except in the coastal high hazard area to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard.  For the purposes of this ordinance, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 

4. Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area or the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed development alters mangrove stands or sand dunes so as to increase potential flood damage. 

5. Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood level in accordance with Section l5.5.3.B.4. 





    B. USE OF OTHER BASE FLOOD DATA 
   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section l5.2.2, the Building Official and Zoning Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer these regulations. 
  C. INFORMATION TO BE OBTAINED AND MAINTAINED 
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures. 

2. For all new and substantially improved flood proofed structures: i. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level), and 








ii. Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in Section 15.3.1 (C). 






3.   In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect that the structure is designed to be securely anchored to adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash. 
4.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance. 
  D. ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSES 
1. Notify adjacent communities, the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (Inland Wetland Resources Division) and the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 

2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 





  E. INTERPRETATION OF FIRM BOUNDARIES - Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.  The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. 
l5.4 VARIANCE AND APPEALS PROCEDURE 
 l5.4.l APPEAL BOARD 
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of flood hazard areas regulations. 

B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Official and Building Official in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 

C. Anyone aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes. 

D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 

1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;     






2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 

3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage on the individual owner; 

4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 

5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 

6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 

7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 

8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program of that area; 

9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 

10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and, 

11. The costs of providing governmental services during the after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 






E.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (i-ix) in Section 15.4.1 D have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the other variance criteria are met and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section l5.4.l (D) and the purposes of these regulations, the Board of Selectmen may attach such conditions to the granting of variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations. 
H.  The Zoning Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its biennial report. 
 l5.4.2 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
A. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 

B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 

C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard to afford relief. 

D. Variances shall only be issued upon: 1. A showing of good and sufficient cause; 

2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and, 

3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 




E. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage. 





l5.5 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 l5.5.l GENERAL STANDARDS - In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
  A. ANCHORING 
   1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
   2. All manufactured homes to be placed, or substantially improved, shall be elevated so that the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. This includes manufactured homes located outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or 
subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park in which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.    Specific requirements shall be that: 
    i. Over-the-top ties be provided at each  of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
    ii. Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; and 
     (iii)All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
    3. All manufactured homes, as specified in part (2) above, shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures.  Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
         B. CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS 
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 

2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 

3. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 


  C. UTILITIES 
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 

2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 



3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 



  D. SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS 
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 

2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewers, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 

3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood; and 

4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less). 


E.  STANDARDS FOR STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS, FLOODWAYS AND/OR FLOOD MAPPING   
1. The Building Official and Zoning Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, including data developed pursuant to 15.3.3. (b) or 15.5.1. (d)  (4) of these regulations or section 6-6-1 (7) of the Town's Subdivision Regulations, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in A, or AE Zones on the Community's FIRM meet the standards in Section 15.5.2.  
2. In AE Zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 
3. The Building Official and Zoning Official may request or accept floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA- published floodways. When such data is provided by an applicant or from any other source, the Town shall adopt a regulatory floodway.  The floodway shall be based on only the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse. 
4. Where no base flood elevation (BFE) or     floodway data is available, the Building Official and Zoning Enforcement Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base 
flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in any area of potential, demonstrable or historical flooding within the community meet the standards in Section 15.5.2.   
l5.5.2 SPECIFIC STANDARDS - In all areas of special flood hazards zones A and AE, the following standards are required; 
  A. RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION - New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one (1) foot above base flood elevation. 
  B. NON-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION - New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the one (1) foot above level of the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
1. Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 

2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 

3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice.  Such certifications shall be provided to the Zoning Official. 





C. FULLY ENCLOSED AREAS BELOW THE BASE FLOOD ELEVATION OF ELEVATED BUILDINGS – New construction, substantial improvements, whether residential or non-residential, that include fully enclosed areas formed by a foundation and other exterior walls shall have the lowest floor elevated to one (1.0) foot above the base flood elevation (BFE).  The elevated building shall be designed to preclude finished living space below the lowest floor and be designed to allow for the entry and exit of flood waters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls (wet flood-proofing).  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as meeting the requirements of ASCE 24 Section 2.6.2.2, or meet the following minimum criteria listed in sections (a)-(h) below: 
(a) Provide a minimum of two (2) openings (hydraulic flood vents) having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.  The enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls.  These hydraulic openings must be located on at least two different exterior walls of each enclosed area.  If the structure has more than one enclosed area, openings must be installed in the exterior walls of each enclosed area so that flood waters can enter directly from the outside; 


(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1.0) foot above the higher of either the final interior grade or floor elevation, or the finished exterior grade adjacent to the outside of the foundation wall.  At least one entire side of the structure’s fully enclosed area must be at or above grade.  Fill placed around the foundation walls must be graded so that the elevation inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent outside elevation on at least one side of the building.  The finished floor of the enclosed area shall be no lower than the bottom of the foundation openings.  The foundation slab of a residential structure, including the slab of a crawlspace, must be set equal to the outside finished grade on at least one side of the building;  

(c) The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters in both directions without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means.  These coverings must not block or impede the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area.  Other coverings may be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or approved by the Zoning Official; 

(d) Openings shall not be less than three (3) inches in any direction in the plane of the wall; 

(e) The area cannot be used as finished living space.  Use of the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary and shall only be used for the parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).  The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; 

(f) All interior walls, floor, and ceiling materials located below one (1.0) foot above the BFE shall be unfinished and flood damage-resistant in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Requirements. 

(g) Electrical, plumbing, HVAC duct work, machinery or other utility equipment and connections that service the structure (including, but not limited to, furnaces, oil or propane tanks, air conditioners, heat pumps, hot water heaters, ventilation, washer and dryer hook-ups, electrical junction boxes, circuit breaker boxes and food freezers) are prohibited in the fully enclosed area below the BFE plus one (1.0) foot.  Utilities or service equipment located in this enclosed area, even if elevated to one (1.0) foot above the BFE in the space, may subject the structure to increased flood insurance rates.   

(h) A residential building with a structurally attached garage having the floor slab below the BFE is considered an enclosed area below the BFE and must meet the standards of Sections 15.5.2.C (a)-(g).  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in both directions.  Flood openings or vents are required in the exterior walls of the garage or in the garage doors.  Garage doors that must be manually opened do not meet the flood vent opening requirements in Section 15.5.2 C 


(a)-(c).  In addition to the automatic entry of floodwaters, the areas of the garage below BFE plus one (1.0) foot must be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials per the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2.  Garages attached to non-residential structures must also meet the aforementioned requirements or be dry floodproofed as per the requirements of Section 15.5.2.B.  


 
D.  MANUFACTURED HOMES  
1. Shall be elevated so that the lowest floor is above the base floor elevation; 





    All new manufactured homes must comply with the following: 
i. Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill  or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at or above the base flood level; 

ii. Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and 

iii. In the instance of elevation on pilings, that: 

• Lots are large enough to permit steps, 

• Piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and 

• Reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 



2. Shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties.  
3. No manufactured home shall be placed in a floodway.  
  E. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A, AE and VE shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,  
1. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.), or  

2. Meet all the general standards of Section 15.5.1 and    the elevation and anchoring requirements of Section  15.5.2. (C).  Additionally, all recreational vehicles in Zone VE shall meet the construction requirements for coastal high hazard areas provided in Section 15.5.3.   





 
 l5.5.3 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA - Coastal high hazard areas (V Zones) are located within the areas of Special Flood Hazard.  These Areas have special flood Hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply; 
  A. LOCATION OF STRUCTURES 
1. All buildings or structures shall be located landward of reach of the mean high tide. 

2. The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park must meet the construction requirements for coastal high hazard areas provided in section 15.5.3.  All manufactured homes within VE zones shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.  All manufactured homes within VE zones shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.  Adequate access and drainage should be provided.   





B. CONSTRUCTION METHODS 
1. ELEVATION All buildings or structures shall be elevated on pilings and columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede that flow of water. 

2. STRUCTURAL SUPPORT Pilings or columns used as structural support and the structure attached thereto shall be designed and anchored so as to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. 

a. There shall be no fill used for structural support. 





3. CERTIFICATION A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Sections l5.5.3 (b)(l) and l5.5.3 (b)(2). 

4. SPACE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR 

i. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure started after the enactment of these regulations shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway walls open wood 


lattice work, or insect screening are used as provided for in these regulations. 

ii. Non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice work, or insert screening shall be allowed below the lowest floor provided they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 


 For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than l0 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.  Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
a.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.   The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-structural).  Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in the determination shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceed in any given year (l00 year mean recurrence interval). 
iii. If Breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation but solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. 

iv. Prior to construction, plans for any structure that will have breakaway walls must be submitted to the Zoning Official for approval. 


  C. SAND DUNES - There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which could increase potential flood damage. 
 
l5.5.4 FLOODWAY - located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways.  Since the flood way is in an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless certification, with supporting technical data, by a Connecticut registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge published by FEMA.  Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design. 15.5.5 EQUAL CONVEYANCE - Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation).  Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. 

15.5.6 COMPENSATORY STORAGE - The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced.  Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project.  Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.  Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.  






15.5.7 ABOVE GROUND STORAGE TANKS - Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water. 

15.5.8 PORTION OF STRUCTURE IN FLOOD ZONE - If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA.  The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone.  The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.  Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 

15.5.9 STRUCTURES IN TWO FLOOD ZONES - If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE).  The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.  (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.) 

15.5.10NO STRUCTURES ENTIRELY OR PARTIALLY OVER WATER - New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility. 




 
SECTION l6 
 
TM TIDAL MARSH DISTRICTS 
 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE - Coastal areas and islands characterized by tidal wetlands as defined by Section 22-29 of the Connecticut General Statutes.  These areas are of high value as wildlife conservation areas and flood retention areas and generally unsuited to any form of building development.  The purpose of this district is to preserve Tidal Wetlands. 
 
l6.l PERMITTED USES; - The following uses of land and no others are permitted: 
 l6.l.l Agricultural or farm use, but excluding construction of buildings. 
 l6.l.2 Recreation or open space use, but excluding construction of buildings or shelters other than boat houses, docks or similar structures not designed for human occupancy. 
 l6.l.3 The following uses may be permitted when granted a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25. 
   A.  Boat Houses 
   B.  Docks 
l6.2 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
 l6.2.l LOT SIZE - Within the TM Districts no lot shall be less than 40,000 square feet in area. 
SECTION 17 
 
REMOVAL OF TOPSOIL, SAND AND GRAVEL 
l7.l Unless otherwise provided in this section, a Special Permit is required for the excavation and removal from the premises, or grading or dumping of earth, sand, clay, gravel or quarry stone. 
l7.2 EXEMPTIONS - The provisions of this section and the requirements to obtain a permit shall not apply to the excavation and removal, or grading or dumping of less than l00 cubic yards or affecting an area of not more than l000 square feet of material on any lot in any calendar year. 
 The following are also exempted provided that it involves only the quantity of material necessary to make the lot more suitable for the proposed use: 
 l7.2.l Necessary excavation and removal, or grading or dumping of earth in direct connection with the lawful construction on the lot of buildings, foundations, roads, driveways, parking areas, storm drainage, utility services, fences, walls, swimming pools or other bona fide construction projects, for which any required zoning approval has been obtained. 
 l7.2.2 Necessary excavation and removal, or grading or dumping of earth in connection with improvements on the lot solely for farming or landscaping purposes, such as the construction of ponds, improvement of water courses, burying of stones or refuse, re-grading of difficult contours and the excavation of earth for use on the lot and not for sale. 
l7.3 APPLICATION - The applicant shall submit an application for a Special Permit in accordance with Section 25 which specifically includes the following information: 
 l7.3.l An estimate of the number of cubic yards to be excavated, removed, graded or dumped; 
 l7.3.2 The hours and days of the week that the operation is to be conducted; 
 l7.3.3 The number and kinds of trucks and other equipment to be used; 
 l7.3.4 A plan shall be submitted as required in Section 24 and which includes the following: 
  A. The location and exterior limits of the area to be excavated graded or filled; 
  B. Existing contour lines on the lot, drawn to scale of not less than l00 feet to the inch and with a contour interval not exceeding five (5) feet; 
   C. Proposed contour lines within the area to be excavated, graded or filled, drawn to a scale of not less than l00 feet to the inch and with a contour interval not exceeding five (5) feet; 
   D. Proposed vehicular access to the lot and any proposed work roadways; 
 
l7.4 STANDARDS 
 l7.4.l The plan shall provide for adequate fencing or screening between the operation and adjacent residential properties. 
 l7.4.2 At all stages of the work proper drainage shall be provided to avoid stagnant water, soil erosion problems, excessive run-off, silting of streams and damage to public property, streets or drainage facilities. 
 l7.4.3 Truck access to the lot and the work area shall be so arranged as to minimize traffic hazards on streets and to avoid nuisance to residents of the neighborhood; 
 l7.4.4 No excavation and removal, or grading, which is below the elevation of any abutting street or property line shall occur within l00 feet of such line, except that excavation and removal or grading within such distance and below the elevation of an abutting property line may be permitted if written approval from adjoining owners is received by the Commission. 
 l7.4.5 In other than the Light Industrial District, use of a stone crusher or other machinery not required for actual removal of material shall be allowed only by written approval of the Zoning Official and only for a maximum period of three (3) months. 
 l7.4.6 No building or other structure shall be erected on the lot except as may be otherwise permitted in the district or, as approved by the Commission, as a temporary shelter for equipment and field office; 
 l7.4.7 The work shall be limited to such hours as are determined reasonable by the Commission and to such days as specified by the Commission; 
 l7.4.8 Proper measures shall be taken to minimize nuisance from noise, dust, vibration and flying debris; trucks shall be covered; suitable fences or other barricades shall be provided around the excavation. 
 l7.4.9 To protect pedestrians and vehicles, roads which have been damaged as a result of the applicant's operations shall be repaired by the applicant. 
 l7.4.l0 Upon completion of the authorized work, the area of excavated or otherwise disturbed ground shall be prepared or restored as follows: 
A. Adequate drain ways of gradual slope shall be provided to assure drainage; 
B. There shall be no excavation, grading or removal below an elevation of six (6) feet above any ledge. 
C. All debris and all loose boulders shall be buried or removed from the lot; and 
D. The top layer of any arable soil, to a depth of not less than six (6) inches, shall be retained in the lot and spread over the entire disturbed area with any large stones removed, and the area shall then be seeded with a perennial cover crop and maintained until the ground shall be completely stabilized with a dense cover of grass and there exists no danger of erosion, but this provision shall not apply to 
the area of ponds nor to exposed areas of ledge existing prior to the work. 
l7.5 Before a permit is granted under this section, the owner shall post a bond with the treasurer of the Town of East Lyme in an amount approved by the Zoning Commission as sufficient to guarantee conformity with the provisions of the permit issued there under. 
l7.6 In approving such applications, the Zoning Commission shall consider the effect of such removal on surrounding property and the future usefulness of the premises when the operation is completed. 
l7.7 Such permits shall be issued for a period not exceeding two years. 
 
SECTION 18 
Sign Regulations  
CONTENTS 
 
18.1.1 Purposes 
18.1.2 Applicability - Effect 
18.1.3 Definitions and Interpretation 
18.1.4 Computations 
18.1.5 Signs Allowed on Private Property With and Without Permits 
18.1.5A Permitted Signs by Type and Zoning District 
18.l.5B Maximum Total Sign Area 
18.l.1.5C Number, Dimensions, and Location 
18.1.1.5D Permitted Sign Characteristics 
18.1.6 Permits Required 
18.1.7 Design, Construction and Maintenance 
18.1.8 Master or Common Signage Plan 
18.1.9 Signs in the Public right-of-way 
18.1.10 Signs Exempt from Regulation Under This Ordinance 
18.1.11 Temporary Signs 
18.1.12 Signs Prohibited Under This Ordinance 
18.1.13 General Permit Procedures 
18.1.14 Permits to Construct or Modify Signs 
18.1.15 Sign Permits - Continuing 
18.1.16 Time of Compliance:  Nonconforming Signs and Signs Without Permits 
18.1.17 Violations 
18.1.18 Enforcement and Remedies 
 
18.1.1 PURPOSES 
The purposes of these sign regulations are:  to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communications in East Lyme; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and East Lyme's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions.  This sign regulation is adopted under the zoning authority of East Lyme in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the zoning regulation. 
18.1.2 APPLICABILITY - EFFECT 
A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained in East Lyme only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this regulation. 
The effect of this regulation as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones, and a limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards and permit procedures of this regulation; 
To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this regulation, but without a requirement for permits; 
To allow certain temporary signs in limited circumstances without a requirement for permits; 
To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this regulation; and To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this regulation. 
18.1.3 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION 
Words and phrases used in this regulation shall have the meanings set forth in this section.  Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in Section 1 of the zoning regulations of East Lyme shall be given the meanings set forth in such section.  Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in Section 18.1.4.  All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
BANNER:  Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
BILLBOARD SIGN:  Any sign which advertises a business, service, product, commodity, entertainment or similar object or activity which is conducted sold or offered on a lot other than the lot on which the sign is erected. 
BUILDING MARKER:  Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. 
CANOPY SIGN:  Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.  A marquee is not a canopy. 
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN MANUAL:  A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changes or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.  A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this regulation.  A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this regulation.  Any sign whereon provision is made for letters or characters to be placed in or upon the surface area of the sign manually to provide a message or picture without altering the surface of the sign. 
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC: Any sign or portion thereof that is capable of displaying words, symbols or alphanumeric characters which are defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED’s), liquid crystal displays (LCD’s), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices that can be electronically or automatically programmed and may be changed by remote or automatic means. 
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE:  Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government. 
FREESTANDING SIGN:  Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground that are independent from any building or other structure. 
HIGHWAY SIGN DISTRICT:  A land area in the vicinity of Interstate Route I-95 which is subject to special sign regulations intended to allow visibility of business signs within the district from that highway.  The highway sign district consists of all parcels of land, existing on the effective date of these regulations, which have lot frontage on, or right-of-way access to, Connecticut Route 161, provided that any portion of such frontage or right-of-way lies between 1000 feet to the south and 350 feet to the north of Interstate I-95, such distances to be measured from the centerline of I-95 along the centerline of Route 161. 
INCIDENTAL SIGN:  A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking", "entrance", 
"loading only", "telephone", and other similar directives.  No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental. 
MARQUEE:  Any permanent roof like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
MARQUEE SIGN:  Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
NEON SIGN:  Any sign which features exposed glass tubing filled with fluorescent gas. 
NON-CONFORMING SIGN:  Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this regulation. 
OFF PREMISE SIGN:  A sign which directs attention to a business, product, activity or service which is generally conducted sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located. 
PENNANT:  Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
PORTABLE SIGN:  Any sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used  as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
PRINCIPAL BUILDING:  The building in which is conducted the principal use of the zone lot on which it is located.  Zone lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
PROJECTING SIGN:  Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than twelve inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
RESIDENTIAL SIGN:  Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirement of the zoning regulation. 
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL:  Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
ROOF SIGN:  Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
SIGN:  Any letters, figures, design, symbol, trademark or illuminating device intended to attract attention to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public 
performance, article, machine or merchandise whatsoever and printed or constructed and displayed in any manner whatsoever out of doors for advertising purposes.  However, this shall not include any governmental, court or public notices nor the flag, emblem or insignia of a government, school or religious group when displayed for official purposes. 
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED:  Any sign incorporating an electrical light source which illuminates the sign face from within. 
SUSPENDED SIGN:  A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
WALL SIGN:  Any sign attached parallel to, but within twelve inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
WINDOW SIGN:  Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
ZONING OFFICIAL:  The Zoning Official of East Lyme or his or her designee. 
 
18.1.4 COMPUTATIONS 
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height. 
18.1.4.1 Computation of Area of Individual Signs. 
The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning regulation and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
18.1.4.2 Computation of Area of Multifaceted Signs 
Any sign may be double facing and all faces shall be counted in determining conformity to sign area limitations. 
18.1.4.3 Computation of Height 
The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.  Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, 
berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.  In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower. 
18.1.4.4 Computation of Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area for a Zone Lot 
The total sign area on a lot shall be computed as the sum of the areas of the individual un-illuminated and externally illuminated signs on the lot PLUS twice the sum of the areas of the individual internally illuminated signs on the lot (No more than one internally lit sign shall be permitted for each zone lot).  The total sign area so computed shall not exceed the maximum total permitted sign area determined by applying the formula contained in Table 1.5B, Maximum Total Sign Area, to the lot frontage or building frontage of the principal building(s), as appropriate, for the zoning district in which the lot is located.  Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage.  However, the total sign area that is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building, or wall area frontage on that street. 
18.1.5 SIGNS ALLOWED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITH AND WITHOUT PERMITS 
Signs shall be allowed on private property in East Lyme in accordance with, and only in accordance with, Table 1.5A.  If the letter "P" appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed without prior permit approval in the zoning districts represented by that column.  If the letter "S" appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed only with prior permit approval in the zoning districts represented by that column.  Special conditions may apply in some cases.  If the letter "N" appears for a sign type in a column, such a sign is not allowed in the zoning districts represented by that column under any circumstances. 
Although permitted under the previous paragraph, a sign designated by an "S" or "P" in Table 1.5A shall be allowed only if: 
 The sum of the area of all building and freestanding signs on the zone lot conforms with the maximum permitted sign area as determined by the formula for the zoning district in which the lot is located as specified in Table 1.5B; 
The size, location, and number of signs on the lot conform with the requirements of Tables 1.5C, which establish permitted sign dimensions by sign type, and with any additional limitations listed in Table 1.5A; 
  The characteristics of the sign conform with the limitations of Table 1.5D, Permitted Sign Characteristics, and with any additional limitations on characteristics listed in Table 1.5A.  In all instances, no internally lit sign shall be illuminated when the business it represents is closed. 
 18.1.5.1 Notwithstanding any provision in Section 18 to the contrary, because of their unique requirements, theaters located in a CB Zone may have 
a marquee sign, including lights which may give the appearance of movement by serially controlling the illumination of each bulb.  Such lights may not blink in total or in large groups.  The first 80 square feet of signage on a marquee shall be excluded from the area calculations as provided in Section 18 of the Regulations.  Such sign and lighting shall be subject to the following standards: 
A. Individual bulbs may not exceed 15 watts, and shall be white. 

B. The marquee signage may only identify the name of the theater. 

C. Lights on the marquee shall only be illuminated during times of theater operation. 


 18.1.5.2 Notwithstanding any provision in Section 18 to the contrary, because of their unique characteristics, any legal pre-existing nonconforming free standing sign which is in excess of 50 feet in height and within 50 feet on Connecticut Interstate 95 may be used as a billboard sign as defined in these regulations provided the sign conforms to all other applicable regulations of Section 18. 
18.1.6 PERMITS REQUIRED 
If a sign requiring a permit under the provision of the regulation is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.1.13. 
Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain in force, at all times, a sign permit for such sign in accordance with Section 18.1.14. 
No signs shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in accordance with Section 18.1.9. 
No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this regulation (including those protecting existing signs) in every respect and with the Master Signage Plan or Common Signage Plan in effect for the property. 
18.1.7 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE 
18.1.7.1 Design:  The Zoning Commission shall establish a Sign Design Review Committee, consisting of three members.  They shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Commission and each shall serve for two years. Their appointments may be renewed by the Zoning Commission Chairman serving at the time the appointments expire, or one, two, or three new Committee members may be appointed to replace those leaving the Committee.  In the event a place becomes vacant for any reason before expiration of a term, the Chairman of the Commission may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term.  At least one member of the Committee shall be a member or alternate member of the Zoning Commission, and at least one other member shall be selected from the East Lyme business community.  The other members of the Committee shall be residents of the Town of East Lyme who have demonstrated interest in the Town relative to 
landscaping, architecture, and/or esthetics.  The Committee shall establish such by-laws and procedures for its operation as it deems appropriate. 
Said Committee shall be empowered to render advisory opinions to the Zoning Commission or its agent with respect to sign permit applications for which its opinion is requested by the Zoning Commission or its agent.  Such opinion shall be rendered in sufficient time for the Commission or its agent to act upon the application within the time limits set by statute or by regulation.  Such opinion shall be based upon application of the design standards contained in this subsection.  The committee may include in its opinion such recommendations for modification as it deems appropriate, but such recommendations shall not be binding upon either the applicant, or the Commission or its agent. 
The committee shall consider the following standards in rendering its advice to the zoning commission, or its agent:  
A. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates. 

B. Signs should display simple and clear messages and symbols which should be legible by pedestrians and slow moving vehicles within a reasonable distance.  Except as otherwise provided hereunder, a sign shall be limited to not more than the display of the name of the business establishment, one symbol, logo or drawing, and one feature product or service provided by the business. 

C. 0To maintain simplicity and clarity of signs no sign shall feature more than 3 different colors including trim, framing, supports and braces.  Sign colors should harmonize with the exterior colors, including trim, of the building to which the sign is attached.  In the case of a freestanding sign, the colors on such sign should be compatible with the colors of the building to which the sign principally relates.  The letter faces of an individual letter sign shall be kept in one single color. 

D. Lettering on a sign shall be limited to a maximum of two different type styles.  The lettering and the design of a sign should complement the architecture of the building to which the sign is attached.  In the case of a freestanding sign its design should be compatible to the building to which the sign principally relates. 


18.1.7.2 Construction:  All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code and the electrical code of East Lyme at all times. 
Except for street banners, temporary signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this regulation, 
all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. 
18.1.7.3 Maintenance:  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, in a neat, clean, and attractive condition, and in conformance with this code, at all times. 
18.1.8 MASTER OR COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN 
No permit shall be issued for a permanent individual sign requiring a permit on a lot in a commercial, industrial, or highway, district unless and until a Master Signage Plan or a Common Signage Plan for the zone lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the Zoning Official and approved by the Zoning Official as conforming with this section. 
18.1.8.1 Master Signage Plan.  For any zone lot on which the owner proposes to erect one or more signs requiring a permit, unless such zone lot is included in a Common Signage Plan, the owner shall submit to the Zoning Official a Master Signage Plan containing the following: 
An accurate plot plan of the zone lot, at such scale as the Zoning Official may reasonable require; 
Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such zone lot; 
Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, and the height of signs specifically allowed on the zone lot (i.e. window) and need not specify the exact dimension or nature of every window sign. 
18.1.8.2 Common Signage Plan  
If the owners of two or more contiguous (disregarding intervening streets and alleys) zone lots or the owner of a single lot with more than one building (not including any accessory building) file with the Zoning Official for such zone lots a Common Signage Plan conforming with the provisions of this section, a 25 percent increase in the maximum total sign area shall be allowed for each included zone lot.  This bonus shall be allocated within each zone lot as the owner(s) elects.  
18.1.8.3 Provisions of Common Signage Plan 
 The Common Signage Plan shall contain all of the information required for a Master Signage Plan and shall also specify standards for consistency among all signs on the zone lots affected by the plan with regard to: 
  Color scheme; 
  Lettering or graphic style; 
  Lighting; 
  Location of each sign on the buildings; 
  Material; and 
  Sign proportions. 
 
18.1.8.4 Showing Window Signs on Common or Master Signage Plan 
A Common Signage Plan or Master Signage Plan including permanent window signs may simply indicate the areas of the windows to be covered by window signs and the general type of the window signs "(e.g. painted, etched on glass, or some other material hung inside the window) and need not specify the exact dimension or nature of every window sign. 
18.1.8.5 Limit on Number and Height of Freestanding Signs  
The Common Signage Plan or Master Signage Plan, for all zone lots shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one.  In the commercial and highway districts, one additional freestanding sign may be permitted provided that: 
A. The business seeking such a second freestanding sign must be shown to suffer a hardship in the absence of that second freestanding sign, 
B. The second sign must be reviewed by the sign design review committee, 
C. The applicant must receive a special permit from the Zoning Commission 
D. The freestanding sign(s) in the highway district may stand not more than thirty feet high, and a special permit must be granted by the commission. 
18.1.8.6 Other Provisions of Master or Common Signage Plans 
The Master or Common Signage Plan may contain such other restrictions as the owners of the zone lots may reasonably determine. 
18.1.8.7 Consent 
The Master or Common Signage Plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the Zoning Official shall require. 
18.1.8.8 Procedures 
A Master or Common Signage Plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other official plan required by the town for the proposed development and shall be processed simultaneously with such other plan. 
18.1.8.9 Amendment 
A Master or Common Signage Plan may be amended by filing a new Master or Common Signage Plan that conforms with all requirements of the regulation then in effect. 
18.1.8.10 Existing Signs Not Conforming to Common Signage Plan 
If any new or amended Common Signage plan is filed for a property on which existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance, within three years, all signs not conforming to the proposed amended plan or to the requirements of this regulation in effect on the date of submission. 
18.1.8.11 Binding Effect 
After approval of a Master or Common Signage Plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this regulation.  In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any other provision of this regulation, the regulation shall control. 
18.1.9 SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following, which shall not require a sign permit: 
18.1.9.1   Permanent Signs, including: 
Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company; and 
Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities. 
18.1.9.2 Temporary Signs, including: 
Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way. 
Street Banners: Banners advertising a public entertainment or event, if specifically approved under conditions set forth by the Board of Selectmen.  Such banners may be displayed in locations designated by the Board of Selectmen for a period beginning 14 days before and ending 7 days after the event. 
18.1.10 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION UNDER THIS ORDINANCE 
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this regulation: 
Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance; 
Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located; 
Works of art that do not include a commercial message; 
Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, but only between November 15 and January 15; and 
Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield, and similar signs, the face of which meet Department of Transportation standards and which contain no commercial message of any sort. 
 Open Flags of uniform design and fabric construction in red, white and blue shall be permitted.  These signs will be limited to one per business, and be no larger than 3' x 5'; and although visible attached to the building, they shall not obstruct or interfere with the sight lines of pedestrians or vehicular traffic.   
 Community Bulletin Boards - The Town of East Lyme may have three (3) community bulletin boards for the purpose of advertising community events, which are sponsored by any civic or registered non-profit organization recognized as having its permanent address within the Town of East Lyme, and events are open to the general public, and take place within the Town of East Lyme.  These signs may be erected on public or private land and be externally lit, but such lighting must be shielded from all adjacent properties  
The bulletin board signs shall not exceed a total area of 80 square feet.  Individual advertising signs placed on the board shall not exceed 6 square feet. 
The final design of the Community Bulletin Boards shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Commission. 
Restaurant Menu Outdoor Signs – a standard or fast food restaurant may display one menu advertising sign, said sign shall be single sided and shall be no greater than 11” x 17”.  The sign may be wall mounted, or mounted on the exterior of a door or the interior of a window.  The sign shall not be internally illuminated.  Outdoor enclosed menu display cases designed for such purposes may be illuminated. 
Internally Illuminated “Open” Signs - One internally illuminated “open” advertising sign shall be permitted per business.  Such sign shall not exceed 12” x 24”, be single faced and be turned off at the close of business each day.  The sign shall not be animated or blinking and shall only be displayed within the window of a business.  Such signs shall not be permitted in any zone other than CA Commercial. 
Farm Stand Signs – An approved farm stand or farm store may have one non-illuminated off premises directional business identity sign provided that the sign is placed at the nearest state road intersection.  The sign area shall be no greater than 24” x 36” per side and may be double faced.  Height shall be no greater than 6’.  The location of the sign shall not create a site line hazard.  If located on town property, permission must be approved by the Board of Selectman. 
 
18.1.11 TEMPORARY SIGNS 
18.1.11.1 The following temporary signs are allowed on private property without a sign permit. Section 18.1.11.2 “Temporary Business/Identity Signs” and Section 18.1.11.3 “Temporary Chalk Board Signs” shall require a registration with the Zoning Office. 
18.1.11.1.1 Construction Signs: Signs which identify the architects, engineers, contractors and other individuals of firms involved with the construction and/or the purpose for which the building is intended.  One temporary construction sign shall be allowed per lot, and such sign shall not exceed a maximum area of 32 square feet.  The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction and shall be removed within 14 days of completion of the project. 
18.1.11.1.2 Political Signs: 
Signs associated with political campaigns within a time period of 90 days before and 14 days after an election.  The total area of all temporary political signs on a lot shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
18.1.11.1.3 Real Estate Signs: Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed, up to a total area of 8 square feet in residential and 32 square feet in commercial and light industrial zones.  Such signs shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, rental or lease. 
No off premises signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of property are permitted in any zone.  Directional signs for an open house occurring for a limited period of time are permitted off premises provided that maximum  sign area shall not exceed 8 square feet.  Signs may not be erected more than 7 days prior to the open house and must be removed within two days after following the event. 
18.1.11.1.4 Show Window Signs (commercial districts only):  Signs temporarily attached to the inside surface of a window, or temporarily painted on a window, announcing a sale or special feature are permitted provided they do not exceed 25 percent of the area of said window.  Temporary show window signs shall be removed immediately after the termination of such sale or special feature and in no case shall be displayed for a period longer than 30 days. 
18.1.11.1.5 Business Opening Signs (commercial districts only):  Signs, which may include fabric banners, temporarily attached to the front wall or windows of a building, announcing the opening of the business operating within.  Business opening signs may be of any size that does not extend beyond the horizontal or vertical limits of the front wall of the building or, in the case of buildings housing more than one business, of that portion of the building occupied by the new business.  Business open signs shall not be displayed for a period longer than 14 days. 
 
18.1.11.2 Temporary Business/Identity Signs 





These signs shall be authorized on individual private commercial properties in CA, CB and CM Zones, when, in the judgment of the Zoning Official, operations of existing businesses on such properties are temporarily disadvantaged during road construction of sewer and water main installation and public maintenance projects.  A business is considered to be temporarily disadvantaged when such construction is taking place at the time of application within 1000 feet of the lot upon which the business is located. 
However, no such sign shall be erected until a permit specifying the period of authorization has been obtained from the Zoning Official.  In no case shall a temporary sign exceed a width of three feet and a vertical height above ground level of four feet, except for shopping centers.  With reference to businesses located within shopping centers, consisting of eight or more businesses, signs directing entrance into the shopping center will be allowed, but individual signs for each business within the center will not be allowed.  Temporary signs for shopping centers can be 4 feet by 8 feet.  Up to two signs for a shopping center will be allowed. 
A sign may be of the double-faced linear or V-shaped configuration.  No permit shall be issued for a period in excess of 60 days, provided that the Zoning Official may grant one or more extensions of up to 60 days when his inspection of the premises reveals that such extension is warranted.  NO TEMPORARY SIGNS, AS ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION, SHALL BE ELECTRIFIED. 
All permits shall be securely fastened to the authorized sign(s).  Upon expiration of a permit, the authorized sign shall be removed within 24 hours after expiration. 
18.1.11.3 Temporary Chalk Board A Frame Signs CA, CB, CM zones 
One chalkboard A frame sign shall be permitted per business and shall be located on the lot on which the business is conducted/registered.  Such signs shall be no larger than 18” in width x 42” in height, double faced and shall not be illuminated.  The sign shall be displayed no more than five feet (5’) from the entrance into the building in which the business is conducted.  The sign shall advertise only the products and activities of the business located on the lot and shall not impede pedestrian traffic if placed on a side walk.  Any sign displayed under this regulation shall be removed at the close of business each day. 
All Temporary chalk board A frame signs are required to register with the Zoning Official.  Such registration shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) year.  Failure to adhere to any of the above requirements shall be cause for termination of the Registration. 
18.1.12 COMMUNITY BULLETIN BOARDS 
The Town of East Lyme may have a total of two (2) Community Bulletin Boards for the purpose of advertising community events which are sponsored by any non-political, civic or registered non-profit organization.  Such organizations shall be recognized as having a permanent address within the Town of East Lyme that are open to the general public and take place within the Town of East Lyme. The Community Bulletin Boards may be located only on the Town’s high school property, and at one other location on Town property.  
 
The Community Bulletin Boards may be any of the following types of signs as defined in Section 18.1.3 of these Regulations: (a) Changeable Copy Sign, Manual, (b) Changeable Copy Sign, Electronic.  
 
The final design of the Community Bulletin Boards shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Commission.  
 
If a Community Bulletin Board is a Changeable Copy Sign, Electronic, it shall be subject to the Special Permit requirements of Section 25 of these Regulations and shall also be subject to the following conditions: 
 
The changeable copy shall have a minimum duration of ten seconds and must be a static display. No portion of the message may flash, scroll, twirl, change color, fade in or out, or in any manner imitate movement 
 
The background portion of the bulletin board’s display shall not contain any illumination that moves or changes in intensity 
 
The bulletin board shall display only written text 
 
Illumination from the bulletin board shall not be directed at or intrude upon a residential neighborhood or residential district. Any external lighting must be shielded from all adjacent properties.  
 
The brightness level of the illumination shall be in harmony with the location of the sign 
 
The height of the bulletin board shall not exceed eight (8) feet 
 
The bulletin board shall not exceed four (4) feet by eight (8) feet in size and may be double faced. The total area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet for a single faced bulletin board, or sixty-four (64) square feet for a double faced bulletin board 
 
The bulletin board must be a Freestanding Sign as defined in Section 18.1.3 
 
There shall be no more than one bulletin board per Lot.  
The bulletin board shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from a signaled traffic intersection 
 
18.1.13 SIGNS PROHIBITED UNDER THIS ORDINANCE 
All signs not expressly permitted under this regulation or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in East Lyme.  Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
Animated signs 
Banners, except temporary business opening banners (Sec. 18.1.11) 
Beacons 
Marquees 
Portable signs, except temporary business/identity signs (Sec. 18.1.11.2) 
Projecting signs 
Roof signs 
Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt under the previous section; and 
Inflatable signs and tethered balloons. 
18.1.13.1 No light, sign or other advertising structure or device shall be erected or maintained in such a manner or location as to be confused by reason of position, shape, color or wording with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
18.1.13.2  No green or red illuminated signs shall be located within 200 feet of a traffic signal light. 
18.1.13.3  Neon signs may be permitted in a business only in the commercial district, and only if said signs are (1) reviewed by the sign design review committee, and (2) issued a special permit from the Zoning Commission.  
18.1.13.4  No sign other than a canopy sign or street banner shall project over or hang over any sidewalk, driveway, walkway, roadway, or access way, except that signs attached to the wall of a building may thus project not more than 12 inches there from, provided that such projection does not occur within 10 feet vertical clearance of the ground.  Canopy signs may project over a private sidewalk or building entrance provided such projection does not occur within 10 feet vertical clearance of the ground. 
18.1.13.5 No sign may contain or consist of flags, banners, pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners or other similar moving devices.  These devices when not part of any sign are similarly prohibited unless they are permitted specifically by other legislation. 
18.1.13.6 No animated, flashing, rotating, noise making, reflecting, mirrored or intermittently illuminated signs shall be permitted to be erected.  Illuminated signs which indicate the time, temperature, date or similar public service information shall not be considered flashing or intermittently illuminated signs for purposes of this prohibition 
provided only white intermittent lighting is employed and provided further that the longest dimension of such indicating device on the sign does not exceed five feet. 
18.1.13.7 Illuminated signs shall be so designed and arranged that any external illumination is so effectively shielded that no direct rays of light are cast into residential areas or public streets.  No exposed reflective type bulb or incandescent lamp which exceeds 15 watts shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign so as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or adjacent property. 
18.1.13.8 Billboards or other off premises business, identity, or outdoor advertising signs shall not be permitted except for those businesses located on lots having no frontage on a public highway or approved town road provided the following conditions are all met: 
18.1.13.8.1 The business is of such a nature as to require location and identification by the public, as well as the town. 
18.1.13.8.2 The property on which the business activities are situated is clearly disadvantaged by its lack of exposure to the normal flow of traffic. 
18.1.13.8.3 The proposed location of the sign and supporting structure is the minimum feasible distance from the disadvantaged property required for practical location and identification of the business activities thereon. 
18.1.13.8.4 Where a multiplicity of businesses are established on a lot having no frontage on a public highway or approved town road, all location and identification signs shall be incorporated into a single supporting structure. 
18.1.13.8.5 Only one double-faced sign shall be allowed for each business, the exposed surface of the sign shall not exceed five square feet per side, and no sign structure shall exceed an overall height of fifteen feet above ground.  When necessary, the sign may be arranged in two or more tiers within the supporting structure. 
18.1.13.8.6 The installation of the sign and supporting structure shall not present an obstacle to the visibility and safe passage of traffic moving in all relevant directions. 
18.1.13.8.7 Applicants for special permits under the above provisions shall present the Commission with conclusive evidence of their right to erect the off premises sign in the proposed location. 
18.1.14 GENERAL PERMIT PROCEDURES 
The Zoning Official shall have the exclusive authority to issue or reject sign permits under these regulations, except in the case of signs requiring a Special Permit.  Applications for signs requiring a Special Permit shall be acted upon by the Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 25 of these regulations. 
The following procedures shall govern the application for, and issuance of, all sign permits under this regulation, and the submission and review of Common Signage Plans and Master Signage Plans. 
18.1.14.1 Applications 
All applications for sign permits of any kind and for approval of a Master or Common Signage Plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Official on an application form or in accordance with application specifications published by the Zoning Official. 
18.1.14.2 Fees 
 Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a Master or Common Signage Plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fees, which shall be established by the Zoning Commission of East Lyme from time to time by resolution. 
18.1.14.3 Completeness 
 Within 30 days of receiving an application for a sign permit or for a Common or Master Signage Plan, the Zoning Official shall review it for completeness.  If the Zoning Official finds that it is complete, the application shall then be processed.  If the Zoning Official finds that it is incomplete, the Zoning Official shall, within such 30-day period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this regulation. 
 If, in the view of the Zoning Official, the application requires review by the Sign Design Review Committee, he shall submit said application for such review as set forth in Section 1.7 of these regulations. 
18.1.14.4 Action 
 Within 30 days of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit, the Zoning Official shall either: 
 Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the requirements of this regulation and of the applicable Master or Common Signage Plan; or 
 Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this regulation and of the applicable Master or Common Signage Plan.  In case of a rejection, the Zoning Official shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the regulation or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is inconsistent. 
18.1.14.5 Action on Plan 
 On any application for approval of a Master Signage Plan or Common Signage Plan, the Zoning Official shall take action on the applicable one of the following dates: 
 Fourteen days after the submission of a complete application if the application is for signs for existing buildings; or 
 On the date of final action on any related application for building permit, sit plan, or development plan for signs involving new construction. 
 On or before such applicable date, the Zoning Official shall either: 
 Approve the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan and the plan itself conforms in every respect with the requirements of this regulation; or 
 Reject the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan or the plan itself fails in any way to conform with the requirements of this regulation.  In case of a rejection, the Zoning Official shall specify in the rejection the section or sections of the regulation with which the plan is inconsistent. 
18.1.15 PERMITS TO CONSTRUCT OR MODIFY SIGNS 
Signs identified as "P" or "S" on Table 1.5A shall be erected, installed, or created only in accordance with a duly issued and valid sign construction permit from the Zoning Official.  Such permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and procedures. 
18.1.15.1 Permit for New Sign or for Sign Modification 
 An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a Master Signage Plan or Common Signage Plan then in effect for the zone lot.  One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same zone lot. 
18.1.15.2 Inspection 
 The Zoning Official shall cause an inspection of the zone lot for which permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign is issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such permit or at such earlier date as the owner may request.  If the construction is substantially complete but not in full compliance with this regulation and applicable codes, the Zoning Official shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected.  If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. 
18.1.16 SIGN PERMITS - CONTINUING 
No sign shall be erected, structurally altered, enlarged, extended, or relocated without a sign permit issued by the Zoning Official except as otherwise provided herein. 
18.1.16.1 Lapse of Sign Permit 
 Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, product sold or activity or campaign being conducted shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or lot upon which such sign may be found.  Removal shall occur within 30 days of such cessation.  When failure to comply with the foregoing provision occurs, the Zoning Official shall order removal of such sign, within 30 days of written notification, and expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building, structure or lot to which such sign is attached. 
18.1.16.2 Assignment of Sign Permits 
 A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such application as the Zoning Official may require and paying any applicable fee.  The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval. 
18.1.17 TIME OF COMPLIANCE: NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND SIGNS WITHOUT PERMITS 
The owner of any zone lot on which exists a sign for which there is no current and valid sign permit shall be obligated to remove such sign. 
18.1.17.1 Signs Existing on Effective Date 
 Nonconforming signs - Conforming signs which are rendered nonconforming by the adoption or amendment of these regulations shall have the status of legal nonconforming signs.  No nonconforming sign shall be altered by increasing its overall dimensions, nor shall it be moved from its established position and erected or reconstructed in any other location on the premises.  If destroyed, or damaged by any means to the extent of one-half (50%) of its replacement cost, no nonconforming signs shall be reconstructed or restored, provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent customary maintenance, repainting or posting of such signs or structures. 
18.1.18 VIOLATIONS 
Any of the following shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this ordinance, by the zoning regulation, and by state law: 
To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the sign is located; 
To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit; 
To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which sign is located; 
To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, or for which the sign permit has lapsed; or 
To continue any such violation.  Each such day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this ordinance. 
Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of this ordinance. 
18.1.19    ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES 
Any violation or attempted violation of this ordinance or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law.  A violation of this ordinance shall be considered a violation of the zoning ordinance of the town.  The remedies of the town shall include the following: 
Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any signs on the same zone lot; 
Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity; 
Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the town under the zoning ordinance; 
Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties than can be imposed by such court under the zoning ordinance; and 
In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the town under the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and building code for such circumstances. 
The town shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of the zoning regulation. 
All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative.  To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
FEE SCHEDULE 
The fees for sign permits and plans for the period beginning November 1 shall be: 
Master Signage Plan, Application Fee $ 50 
Common Signage Plan, Application Fee $ 50 
Sign Permit, Initial, including inspection, 
 per zone lot $ $ 20 
 
TABLE 1.5A PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT 
 
Type of Sign 
 Zoning District 
 
Residential Use 
 Non-Residential Use 
 Commercial 
 Industrial 
 Highway*  
 
Freestanding 
 
Residential 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 
Other 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 
Incidental 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Building 
 
Banner 
 N 
 N 
 N** 
 N 
 N 
 
Building Marker 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Canopy 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 
Identification 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 P 
 
Incidental 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Industrial Park ID 
 N 
 N 
 S¹ 
 S¹ 
 N 
 
Marquee 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Projecting 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Residential 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 N 
 S 
 
Roof, Integral 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Suspended 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Temporary 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Wall 
 N 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 
Window 
 N 
 S 
 S**** 
 S 
 **** 
 
Miscellaneous 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Banner (street)***** 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 P 
 
Portable 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 

P = Allowed without a sign permit S = Allowed only with sign permit N = Not Allowed 
* This column does not represent a zoning district.  “Highway” refers to commercial and industrial areas in the vicinity of certain major highways to which special sign regulations apply. 
** Temporary wall banners announcing business openings are allowed without a permit. 
*** Temporary signs not requiring a permit include construction, political, real estate and show window signs.  A permit is required for temporary business/identity signs. 
**** Temporary show window signs are allowed without a sign permit. 
***** Street Banners do not require a sign permit but must be approved by the Board of Selectman 
S¹ Industrial Park Identification Signs- Industrial Park Identification Signs – One park identification sign may be erected per industrial park for the purpose of identifying the park and businesses within.  Individual business signs shall be limited to one per business and shall advertise only the name of the subject business, and shall be constructed of similar material.  The park identification sign shall not exceed six feet (6’) in width and fifteen feet (15’) in height and 90 square feet of area.  The sign may be double faced.  The signs may be erected in public or private land and may be externally illuminated provided that such lighting must be shielded from all adjacent properties.  Such signs shall be by special permit. 
 
TABLE 1.5B MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA PER LOT BY ZONING DISTRICT 
The maximum total area of all signs on a zone lot except incidental, building marker identification, and temporary signs shall not exceed the greater of the following: 
 
 
 Zoning District 
 
Residential Use 
 Non-Residential Use 
 Commercial 
 Industrial 
 Highway* (Commercial and Industrial) 
 
Maximum number of total square feet 
 4** 
 24 
 *** 
  
  
 
Square feet of signage per linear foot of building frontage 
  
  
 2.0 
 3.0 
 2.0 
 
Square feet of signage per linear foot of street frontage 
  
  
 1.0 
 1.5 
 1.0P 
 

* This column does not represent a Zoning District.  “Highway” refers to commercial and industrial areas in the vicinity of certain major highways to which special sign regulations apply. 
** 6 square feet total per multi-family development. 
***  Building frontage in this section may include linear store frontage that faces perpendicular to the street.  This shall apply to buildings that have multiple tenant units only. 
 
TABLE 1.5C NUMBER, DIMENSIONS AND LOCATION OF INDIVIDUAL SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT 
Individual signs shall not exceed the applicable maximum number dimensions or setbacks shown on this table and on Table 1.5B 
 
Type of Sign 
 Zoning District 
 
Residential Use 
 Non-Residential Use 
 Commercial 
 Industrial 
 Highway* (Commercial and Industrial) 
 
Freestanding Suspended Sign (Permanent) 
 
Area (Sq. Ft.) 
  
 See Table 1.5B 
  
  
  
 
Height (feet)***** 
 15 
 15 
 5 
 15 
 15 
 
Minimum Setback from property line (feet) 
 0 
 0 
  
 0 
 0 
 
Number Permitted: 
 
Per Zone Lot 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 
Building (Permanent) 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Area (sq. Ft.) 
  
 See Table 1.5B 
  
  
  
 
Temporary*** 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Business/Identity**** 
  
  
 12 
  
  
 
Construction; area in sq. ft. 
 32 
 32 
 32 
 32 
 32 
 
Political, area in sq. ft. 
 32 
 32 
 32 
 32 
 32 
 
Real Estate, area in sq. ft. 
 8 
 8 
 32 
 32 
 32 
 
 
Show window, % of total area of window 
  
  
 25 
  
  
 

* This column does not represent a Zoning District.  “Highway” refers to commercial and industrial areas in the vicinity of certain major highways to which special sign regulations apply. 
** Freestanding signs in the highway district may exceed 15 feet in height by special permit issued by the Zoning Commission 
*** See Section 1.11 for number of temporary sign permitted per zone lot. 
**** 2 temporary business/identity signs, each with maximum area of 32 square feet, are permitted for each shopping center. 
***** The minimum height from the ground to the bottom of the suspended sign shall be Ten feet. 
TABLE 1.5D PERMITTED SIGN CHARACTERISTICS BY ZONING DISTRICT 
Type of Sign 
 Zoning District 
 
Residential Use 
 Non-Residential Use 
 Commercial 
 Industrial 
 Highway* (Commercial and Industrial) 
 
Animated 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Changeable Copy 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 
Illumination, Internal* 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 
Illumination, External 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 S 
 
Illumination, Exposed bulbs or neon 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 N 
 

P= Allowed without sign permit 
S= Allowed only with sign permit 
N= Not Allowed 
* No more than one internally lit sign shall be permitted for each zone lot. Suspended signs shall not be internally illuminated 
** Neon signs are permitted by special permit 
 
SECTION 19 
 
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
These regulations shall apply to all Zoning Districts. 
 
l9.l DEFINITIONS 
 CERTIFICATION means a signed, written approval by the Zoning Commission or its agent that a soil erosion and sediment control plan complies with the applicable requirements of these regulations. 
 COMMISSION means the Zoning Commission of the Town of East Lyme. 
 COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT means the New London County Soil and Water Conservation District established under subsection (a) of Section 22a-3l5 of the General Statutes. 
 DEVELOPMENT means any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real estate. 
 DISTURBED AREA means an area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
 EROSION means the detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
 GRADING means the excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
 INSPECTION means the periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures shown on the certified plan. 
 SEDIMENT means solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
 SOIL means by unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin. 
 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN means a scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative. 
 SPECIAL EROSION CONTROL AREA means that portion of a lot which lies within 50 feet of one or more of the following natural resources: 
 A. Tidal wetlands, as defined by Section 22a-29 of the General Statutes and as delineated on the Tidal Wetlands maps for the Town of East Lyme prepared by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 
 B. Watercourses, as defined by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of East Lyme and as delineated on the inland wetlands and watercourses map of the Town, including: rivers, streams, brooks, lakes, ponds, freshwater marshes, swamps and bogs. 
 C. Beaches, dunes and naturally eroding coastal bluffs, as defined by Section 22a-93 of the General Statutes and delineated as to their approximate location on the coastal resource maps for the Town of East Lyme prepared by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. 
l9.2 ACTIVITIES REQUIRING A CERTIFIED EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 
 l9.2.l A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted for any development of land when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre. 
 l9.2.2 Unless an exemption is granted in the individual case under the provisions of Section 19.8.1 of these regulations, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted for any development of land when: (a) the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively less than one-half acre; and (b) the disturbed area lies wholly or partially within a special erosion control area. 
 l9.2.3 Construction of a single-family dwelling shall be exempt from these regulations.  Any development of land which is subject to the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission shall be exempt from these regulations. 
l9.3 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 
 l9.3.l To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control, accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology.  Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (l985), as amended. Alternative, equivalent principles, methods and practices may be used with the prior approval of the Commission. 
 l9.3.2 Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to: 
 A.  A narrative, which shall be on the site plan, describing 
   1. The development; 
   2. The scheduling for grading and construction activities including: 
    i. Start and completion dates; 
    ii. Sequence of grading and construction activities; 
    iii. Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; 
    iv. Sequence for final stabilization of the project site. 
   3. The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
   4, The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
   5. The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
   6. The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
   7. Identification of a designated on-site individual responsible for installation, monitoring and correction of sediment control plan requirements and authorized to take corrective action as required to ensure compliance with certified plans. 
  B. A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show: 
   1. The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties; 
   2, The existing and proposed topography including soils types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies, beaches, dunes and bluffs; 
   3. The existing structures on the project site, if any; 
   4. The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines; 
   5. The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 
   6. The sequence of grading and construction activities; 
   7. The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. 
   8. The sequence for final stabilization of the development site; 
   9. Before and after contours at not less than 2 foot intervals; 
   10. Certification block entitled "Erosion and sediment control plan certified by the East Lyme Zoning Commission on (Date)" and a space for the signature of the Chairman or agent of the Commission. 
  C. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its agent. 
l9.4 MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE STANDARDS 
 l9.4.l Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 or the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and sedimentation. 
 l9.4.2 The standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended.  The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant as long as the proposed activity will not result in consequences inconsistent with the purpose of these regulations and those standards. 
 l9.4.3 The appropriate method from the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative equivalent method is approved by the Commission. 
l9.5 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF CERTIFICATION 
 l9.5.l The Zoning Commission or its agent shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of these regulations or deny certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations. 
 l9.5.2 Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters l24 or l24a of the General Statutes. 
 l9.5.3 Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the Commission or its agent may be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty days of the receipt of such plan. 
 l9.5.4 The Commission may forward a copy of the development proposal to the Conservation Commission or other review agency or consultant for review and comment. 
l9.6 CONDITIONS RELATING TO SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 l9.6.l The estimated costs of measures required to control erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, shall be covered in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission, if the Commission or its agent determines that such bond or other assurance is necessary to guarantee conformity with the provision of the certified plan.  
 l9.6.2 Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. 
 l9.6.3 Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan. 
 l9.6.4 All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the certified plan. 
l9.7 INSPECTIONS shall be made by the Commission or its agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained.  The Commission or its agent may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained. 
l9.8 SPECIAL EROSION CONTROL AREAS: EXEMPTIONS: 
 l9.8.l The Commission or its agent may grant exemptions to the requirements of Section l9.2.2 of these regulations concerning special erosion control areas upon a determination in the individual case that the development, if carried out without any erosion and sediment control measures or facilities, will have no effect on the adjacent natural resource, either during construction or after completion.  A request for exemption under this section shall contain a site plan map showing items l through 4 of Section l9.3.2.B and a narrative describing the development and a schedule for grading and construction activities. 
 l9.8.2 The location and boundaries of tidal wetlands, watercourses, beaches, dunes and coastal bluffs are shown on their respective maps at such a scale that some margin of error is possible.  If an applicant disputes the designation of any part of his land as special erosion control area, the applicant may be required to produce such information, including documentation by a soils scientist, as the Commission or its agent deem necessary to permit an informed decision.  
SECTION 20 
 
GENERAL REGULATIONS 
No building, structure or lot shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered, except in conformity with these regulations. 
20.l USES PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT - The following uses are permitted in any Zoning District subject to these regulations: 
20.l.l Streets, Public and Subdivision Open Space, parks and playgrounds. 
20.l.2 The following uses are permitted in any Zoning District when granted as a Special Permit by the Zoning Commission subject to appropriate controls as set forth in Section 25.5 of these regulations. 
A. Churches and religious institutions, and human Cemeteries (with or without religious affiliations). 
B. Railroad and public utilities. 
C. Private, non-profit club or lodge 
D. Private, non-profit schools 
E. Telephone exchange stations and electric transformer substations are permitted uses in any district subject to the following: 
1. The minimum lot area shall be as required by the applicable district or 20,000 square feet, whichever is less. 

2. No building shall be located within 50 feet of any property line. 

3. The station or substation shall be suitably screened by a fence and/or landscaping. 



F. Town Buildings and Uses 
Note: Public Schools, Fire Departments, and libraries are considered Town Buildings and uses. 
20.1.3 Any event or assembly which will continue for not more than seven consecutive days and is sponsored by a Town agency, or is authorized by a Town agency under existing ordinance or regulations. 
20.2 PROHIBITED USES - Within the Town of East Lyme, no building or structure shall be erected or used and no lot shall be used or occupied for any of the following purposes: 
20.2.l Any use, trade, business or process which is noxious or offensive by reason of gas, odor, dust, smoke, vibration, illumination or noise, or which constitutes a public hazard whether by fire, explosion or otherwise. 
20.2.2 Commercial slaughterhouse. 
20.2.3 Dumping or incineration of refuse or garbage except where authorized by the town.  Sites for septic disposal or for dumping, incineration, reclamation or 
transfer of solid wastes including refuse or garbage except where authorized by the town. 
20.3 HOME OCCUPATION, SERVICE OR PROFESSION includes, but is not limited to, the office, studio or workshop of an architect, artist, dentist, dressmaker, economist, engineer, insurance agent, lawyer, milliner, musician, photographer, physician, psychologist, real estate broker, serviceman or a dwelling used for laundering, preserving and cooking.  Such uses as restaurants, tearooms, funeral homes, barbershops, beauty parlors, tourist homes and animal hospitals shall not be deemed to be a home occupation, service or profession. 
20.3.l REQUIREMENTS 
A. The total area devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed one half of the livable floor area of the single-family residence. 
B. No more than one person not a resident of the single-family dwelling shall be employed in the home occupation. 
C. There shall be no display or advertising of the home occupation of the lot except for a sign as permitted in Section l8. 
D. There shall be no outside storage associated with the home occupation. 
E. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust odors, heat or glare shall be produced; no health or safety hazard shall be created; no interference with radio or television reception in the neighborhood shall be produced. 
20.4 LOT LYING IN MORE THAN ONE DISTRICT - In the case of a lot lying in more than one district, the provisions of the less restrictive district may be applied for a distance of not over 30 feet into a more restrictive district, provided that such lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district. 
20.5 LOTS ON NARROW STREETS - In the case of lots fronting on streets less than 50 feet in width, the required setback from the street shall be increased by one-half the difference between 50 feet and the actual width of the street. 
20.6 ESTABLISHED BUILDING LINE - When three (3) or more lots within a distance of seven hundred fifty feet (750) feet along a common street line have been improved with buildings, the minimum required front yard setback for the construction of any new buildings or additions to existing buildings within said distance shall be the average of any three existing buildings. 
20.7 MINIMUM FRONTAGE - No building or structure shall be erected for residential purpose on any lot unless such lot has a frontage on a street, or an unobstructed right-of-way not less than 25 feet wide leading to a street. (Except as provided for in Section 23) 
20.8 BACK LOTS – Notwithstanding the minimum frontage requirements for each district back lots are permitted in any zone. Lots created after August 9, 2002 shall have a minimum of 25’ frontage on an accepted or approved street and be accessible by a 25’ wide permanent, unobstructed access-way of the same ownership. The ownership requirement may be waived by the Zoning Commission by a two-thirds vote of all members upon demonstration by the 
applicant that the physical features of the property preclude strict compliance with the requirement and that the granting of the waiver will not have a significantly adverse impact upon adjacent property, the environment, or the public health and safety.  The following additional requirements shall be met for the creation of back lots: 
A. The minimum lot width at the building line shall be equal to the frontage requirement specified for the district. 

B. The area of the access-way shall not be included in the minimum required area of the lot. 

C. The maximum length of the access way measured from the street line to the front building line of the back lot shall not exceed 1000 feet. 

D. No back lots shall be created on the following streets (Rte. 1, Rte. 156, & Rte. 161) unless access is combined with a driveway serving a lot which fronts on the street. 

E. Lots created using a cluster/open space design which have less than the required average frontage shall not be considered back lots as long as the average frontage requirement for the entire subdivision is met.  


20.9 GARAGE OR ACCESSORY BUILDING - No garage or accessory building shall be built in a required side or rear yard except that: l) a home care equipment and tool storage building not exceeding 8 feet by l0 feet and l0 feet high may be constructed not less than 5 feet from any side or rear lot line and not less than 75 feet from any street line; and 2) except that an in ground private swimming pool may be constructed and extend into a required side or rear yard by 50 percent of such required yard as set forth in the district in which the premises is located. 
20.l0 REDUCTION OF LOT - No lot shall be reduced so that its area or dimensions shall be smaller than herein prescribed for the district in which it is located, except as approved for cluster zoning in the specific district. 
20.ll REQUIRED FLOOR AREA - No single or two family dwelling shall be erected, or moved unless the living space per family unit is not less than 800 square feet.  Only interior living space with minimum head room of seven feet, and if located above the first floor, is accessible by a permanent inside stairway shall be included as living space.  Porches, basements and other attached accessory structures shall not be included as living space. 
20.12 HEIGHT LIMITATION - The building height limit shall be as required in each district's regulation.  Spires, cupolas, towers, chimneys, flagpoles, solar panels, ventilators, tanks and similar features occupying in the aggregate not more than l0 percent of the building area and not used for human occupancy may be erected to a reasonable and necessary height as determined by the Zoning Commission. 
20.l3 SETBACKS REQUIRED FOR EACH BUILDING - Except as specifically provided herein, no part of any yard or other space required about any building may be included as part of a yard or other open space required for any other building,. 
20.l4 PROJECTION INTO SETBACKS - Nothing in these regulations shall prohibit the projection, of up to one foot of pilasters, columns, belt courses, sills, cornices, or other similar architectural features, nor planting or landscaping in the required yards. 
20.l5 SETBACK FROM WETLAND OR WATER BODY - No building or structure shall be erected or placed within 25 feet of a tidal wetland or of a watercourse or other body of water except for boating facilities or other water dependent use if it is determined that no adverse impacts to the wetland or water body would result. 
20.l6 VISION OBSTRUCTION - No wall or other structure shall be erected, and no hedge, tree or other obstruction shall be maintained on a lot which may cause danger to traffic on a public street by obscuring the view.  Notwithstanding minimum yard dimensions as set forth in these regulations, fences, seawalls and retaining walls may be erected in any district along the lot line provided that there be compliance with all other regulations and Building Code and that such structure shall be located within the limits of a lot or lots owned by the applicant. 
20.l7 RECREATIONAL TRAILERS - MOBILE HOMES - Such units, occupied as a residence, will not be permitted on any lot in any district except for recreation purposes and in an approved camping site.  Occupancy of the trailer shall be limited to seven months per year.  One unoccupied mobile home or recreational trailer may be stored on a lot except that it shall not be located in front of the front line of the building or within any of the required side or rear yards.  Recreational trailers or mobile homes can be set up temporarily as an emergency type shelter by approval of the Zoning Official.  This approval must be renewed every ninety days. 
20.17.1  AGRICULTURAL TRAILER - MOBILE HOMES: A maximum of two (2) mobile homes shall be permitted on farms located in any zone as a temporary residence for seasonal agricultural workers, subject, however, to the following conditions: 
A. To qualify as a farm, agricultural production shall be the principal business and means of livelihood from the operation as determined by the appropriate filing and recording in the Tax Assessor's Office of State Tax Commissioners' forms M-28 and M-29. 

B. No mobile home shall be located within one hundred feet of property lines. Adequate screening and shielding, e.g. shrubs, bushes, trees, etc., from the road and/or adjacent property owners shall be maintained. 

C. The mobile home shall comply with all federal, state and local health, sanitary, building and fire code requirements. 

D. Prior to occupancy of the mobile home, written application of a temporary occupancy permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer at the Zoning Office. No permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer until after an on-site inspection has been made by the Officer in order to ensure compliance with this section. 

E. Although the mobile home shall be permitted to remain in place on the farm during the year, temporary occupancy of the mobile home shall not exceed nine months per calendar year. 

F. The mobile home shall provide a minimum living area as specified by current Department of Labor regulations. The 


mobile home shall only house the seasonal agricultural workers and may not be used to house family, guests, etc. of the worker. 


20.17.2  AGRICULTURE FARM STORE (Accessory Use) 
An accessory retail farm store shall be permitted by Special Permit on farms in any zone where agricultural or farm use is permitted subject to the following conditions: 
A. To qualify as a farm, agricultural production shall be the principal business and means of livelihood from the operations as determined by the appropriate filing and records in the Assessor’s Office of State Tax Commissioner’s forms M-28 and M-29. 

B. The farm store must be located on an active farm site.  Said farm shall consist of a minimum of ten acres. 

C. All such stores shall be no more than 1000’ square feet in area. 

D. Parking shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 22 plus employee parking spaces. 

E. The products sold in the store shall be those that are produced on the farm except that up to 40% of the store area may be used for the sale of related complementary products that are not produced on the premises.  Items such as agricultural fertilizers, bark mulch, topsoil, peat moss, plant pots, statuary items, and prepackaged convenience food items shall not be permitted for sale. 

F. Such stores shall meet the setbacks for the underlying zone including parking areas.  Adequate screening and shielding, e.g., shrubs, bushes, landscaping from the road and/or adjacent properties shall be maintained. 

G. The Zoning Commission may limit the size and scope of the farm store in relation to the size of the farm based on acreage and production. 

H. The farm store must have a primary means of access and egress from a through street capable of safely accommodating anticipated volumes of traffic.  Preference shall be given to arterial roadways. 

I. The farm store will cease operation and the Special Permit shall terminate should the farm cease to operate 


20.l8  In CM, CA and CB Districts, by agreement of the owners of the two adjacent lots, duly recorded in the land records of the Town of East Lyme, one side of each lot may be omitted and buildings built on the common line, provided that the party or other walls separating them are masonry construction. Except in case of a building on a lot line, no side yard may be less in width than as prescribed in this section. 
20.18.1 In CM, CA, and CB districts, by agreement of the owners of the two adjacent lots, duly recorded on the records of the Town of East Lyme, either party may reduce or eliminate the side yard requirements with respect to the construction of unenclosed decks not exceeding Six (6) feet in height measured to the upper surface of the deck to be built along or near the common line.  Any such agreement shall be deemed to eliminate the buffer requirements in the area affected by any such deck, together with such area, which shall be needed for access to it. 
20.l9  GASOLINE OR DIESEL FILLING STATIONS, REPAIRER'S OR LIMITED REPAIRER'S STATION, OR NEW AND/OR USED CAR DEALER'S BUSINESS 
20.l9.l Except as hereinafter specified, no gasoline or diesel filling station, repairer's or limited repairer's station, or new and/or used car dealer's business shall be installed within a building or erected or established upon a lot or premises within a radius of l500 feet of any part of any other building, lot or premises used for such purpose. Existing premises which have been designed or used for the above stated purposes, although now inoperative, shall not become a nonconforming use upon adoption of these regulations, unless such premises have been converted to use for another purpose. 
20.19.1.1 It is hereby expressly provided that a Motor Vehicle Repairers Station in a Light Industrial (LI) Zone shall be exempt from spatial separation distances found in Section 20.19.1 above. 
20.l9.2 Used car dealer and repairer businesses shall be exempt from the above spacing requirements, subject to the following conditions: 
A. The business is operated as a subordinate part of a gasoline service station which existed at the time this regulation was adopted. 

B. Operation of the used car dealer and/or repairer business shall cease in the event that the gasoline service station no longer functions as such. 

C. Implementation of the used car dealer and/or repairer business does not involve structural alterations to the existing gasoline service station building, nor enlargement of the lot on which the building is situated. 


20.l9.3  An exemption granted to a gasoline service station shall in no way relieve all other applicants from meeting the requirements of this section. 
 
20.20  ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OUTLETS - In commercial and industrial Districts, no building or premises shall be used erected or altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used: 
20.20.l For the sale of alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises if any part of said building or premise is situated on any part of a lot within l500 feet radius in any direction of any lot upon which is located a building or premises used for the purposes of selling alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises. 
20.20.2 As any store selling alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages if situated on a lot within l500 feet radius in any direction of any lot upon which is located a building or premises used for the purposes of selling alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises. 
20.20.3 For the sale of alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises if such building or premises is situated on a lot within 500 feet radius of a lot used or reserved to be used for the purpose of a public school or library, a duly organized school other than a public school, a hospital or charitable institution whether supported by public or private funds, a public park or playground, or if such building or premises is situated on a lot which is within 200 feet along the street frontage from any lot located in a residential or rural district or across any public street and within 200 feet from any lot or plot having street frontage in a residential or rural district.  The measurements of said 200 feet distance shall be from the nearest point of intersection of the street line with the lot line on which such building or premises is located to the intersection of the nearest line of said lot in a residential or rural district with a street line as measured along such street line. 
20.20.4 The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed retroactive except where an existing building or premises serving or selling alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages shall discontinue use for a period of ninety (90) days; such use shall not be resumed except in conformity with the foregoing provisions. 
20.20.5 LIQUOR FOR MOTELS/HOTELS - Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, it is hereby expressly provided that any hotel of 85 or more guest rooms may be permitted to sell alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises provided that said hotel is located in a commercial or light industrial district 
20.20.6 LIQUOR FOR RESTAURANT, STANDARD: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, it is hereby expressly provided that any standard restaurant, as that term is defined in Section 1.62 of these regulations, may apply for and operate under a restaurant permit for the sale of Alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage.  The sale of such Alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage shall be incidental to the 
principal business of selling food.  Such alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage must be sold for consumption on the premises and such standard restaurant must be located in a commercial or light industrial district. 
20.20.7 GROCERY BEER PERMIT:  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a grocery store having a gross floor area of not less than 20,000 square feet may apply for and operate under a grocery beer –permit as set forth in Section 30-20(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
20.20.8 Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, it is hereby expressly provided that any taproom brewery as defined in section 1.79 of these regulations may apply for and operate under a manufacturer permit for the production of alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage. 
20.2l  No multiple housing project shall be subdivided and no part of any such project shall be sold or otherwise conveyed unless each part so subdivided shall comply with all the requirements of these regulations and unless the site plan for each part so subdivided shall have been approved by the Planning Commission as herein provided. 
20.22  No Multi-family housing project shall be physically altered externally or enlarged unless the site plan for such alteration or enlargement has been approved as provided for a new project. 
20.23  PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS - Private driveways designed for vehicular traffic for more than two residences, or for commercial purposes, shall have the following minimum widths: 
    Two-way traffic: 24 feet wide 
    One-way traffic: l6 feet wide 
The widths do not include space for parking vehicles.  All private driveways are to be cleared to a height of l4 feet in order to ensure passage of fire and emergency vehicles. 
20.24  HOUSEBOATS - No houseboat as defined in these regulations may be docked or tied up at any location within the Town of East Lyme except those areas in which a legally established marina or boat yard exists.  The permitted existence of a houseboat shall be allowed only as an accessory use to said marina or boat yard, and all houseboats shall be located strictly within the confines of said marina or boat yard. 
20.25  Restaurant Outdoor Dining in CA and CB Zones 



The purpose of this section is to promote and regulate Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining shall be permitted outright subject to compliance with Section 20.25 and approval by the Zoning Official.  Such dining shall be subject to a Special Permit for establishments that serve alcoholic beverages (see section 25 “Special Permits”). 
A standard or fast food restaurant, may, as an accessory use, provide outdoor dining subject to the following standard: 
A. Applicant shall submit a site plan to the Zoning Official for administrative review and the Zoning Commission for Special Permit Applications.  

B.  

1. The area subject to such dining may shall not exceed one thousand square feet (1000sqft.).  It shall be located on a deck, patio, or a grass area immediately adjacent to the restaurant.  Existing outdoor dining areas shall be included in the total outdoor dining square footage calculation. 

2. Notwithstanding the 1000’ square foot limitation above, a standard or fast food restaurant may have, subject to these regulations (Section 20.25) up to an additional 450 square feet of outdoor dining area provided the additional square footage is adjacent to the subject restaurant and fronts on a public sidewalk and is a separate space from any other outdoor dining area.  The separation shall be at a minimum 25 feet from any other on premises outdoor dining area.  Existing outdoor dining areas shall be included in the total outdoor dining square footage calculation. 

C. Outdoor dining shall be used in conjunction with, and shall be under the same management and exclusive control of the restaurant located on the same property.   

D. Outdoor dining shall be designed as an integral element of the restaurant. The outdoor dining area shall be architecturally separated from public spaces by a wall, fence, or plantings of significant size where alcoholic beverages are permitted. 

E. The restaurant operator shall provide adequate facilities for refuse disposal. 

F. Alcoholic beverages may be served in approved outdoor dining areas provided that they are served as part of the dining experience.  Such beverages may not be served to patrons who are not seated.  Restaurant patrons may not bring alcoholic beverages out of the restaurant onto the outdoor dining area unless being seated for food services. 

G. The Zoning Commission may designate closing times for outdoor dining areas.  The commission may permit entertainment and shall limit such entertainment including hours and operation.  Outdoor public address system and outdoor speakers may be permitted during designated hours as approved by the Zoning Commission. 

H. Any outdoor lighting shall be of low intensity. 

I. The area devoted to outdoor dining shall not be included in the calculation for parking pursuant to Section 22, nor included in the calculation for lot coverage pursuant to Section 9.3.4.  The Zoning Board/Zoning Official shall consider the availability of shared and public parking when deciding on an application. 

J. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.4 the Zoning Commission may waive the setback requirements for outdoor dining areas. (See Section 20.25 L 1). A waiver of setbacks for establishments where alcohol is not served may be 


granted as an administrative action and shall not require a special permit or public hearing. (See Section 20.25 L 2) 

K. Advertising or promotional signage shall not be permitted in outdoor dining areas, including advertisements on umbrellas. 

L. Outdoor dining areas shall not be enclosed either by permanent or temporary structures, tents or buildings.  It may be established under a covered porch area which is an integral part of the building in which a restaurant operates. 


Permitting Process 
1. The special permit for establishments which serve alcoholic beverages under this section shall be valid for one year from the date of approval and may be renewed for a period not to exceed one (1) year subject to an approval of a special permit. 

2. Permits for establishments which do not serve alcoholic beverages, shall be valid for three years from the date of approval and may be renewed subject to an approval of a permit by the Zoning Official. 

M. Restaurants with outdoor dining that pre-date May 18, 2006, this Section 20.25 shall not be subject to these regulations.  Restaurants which fall under this category shall be required to conform to the special permit requirements when proposing an expansion of outdoor dining facilities. 

N. Notwithstanding the above Section, restaurants as that term is defined in Section 1.61 Restaurant, Standard, Section 1.60 Fast Food Restaurants, Section 1.6 Bakeries, which do not serve alcoholic beverages, may have up to two tables with four chairs each in an area immediately adjacent to the establishment without a permit provided that they comply with standards 20.25 B through 20.25 L in Section 20.25 above.  Such tables shall be used for dining and shall not be served by wait staff. 


20.26 DRIVE THRU FACILITIES: 
Drive-thru Facilities are permitted for Banks, Financial Institutions, Pharmacies, Bakeries and Fast Food Restaurants only in CA Zones and are subject to the following requirements: 
A. The drive-thru facilities shall clearly be accessory and subordinate to the primary use; 

B. Drive-thru facilities, including required stacking lanes, shall be located in the rear or side yards only; 

C. Drive-thru facilities shall not generate the need for additional driveway curb cuts; 

D. A minimum of five vehicle-stacking spaces shall be provided on site for each drive-thru station, including the vehicle being serviced.  Where a restaurant order board and service window are proposed each service aisle shall provide a minimum of ten (10) stacking spaces with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces before the order board. Each service aisle shall not have more than two service windows; 


E. Stacking lanes shall be separate from internal traffic aisles to allow traffic to circulate through the site without entering the drive-thru facilities; 

F. Stacking lanes shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’) wide and each vehicle stacking space shall be twenty feet (20’) in length; 

G. Stacking lanes shall be designed to minimize traffic congestion and to promote pedestrian safety; 

H. Drive-thru facilities shall be screened from view from public streets with substantial landscaping using a variety of evergreen and deciduous species; 

I. Outdoor speakers shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any residentially zoned property and shall not be audible from other property; 

J. Drive-thru facilities should be designed as a compatible architectural element of the primary building; 

K. No Restaurant or food service establishment with a drive through facility shall be built or established upon a lot or premises within a radius of 1000 feet of any part of any other building, lot or premises used for such purpose. 


L. No restaurant or food service establishment with a drive through facility shall be built or established upon a lot or premises within a radius of 1000 feet of any part of any other building, lot or premises used for such purpose. Existing premises used for such a purpose prior to this regulation shall not be deemed non-conforming.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions it is hereby expressly provided that a retail bakery as that term is defined in Section 1.6 of these regulations may be permitted a drive-thru facility subject to Section 8.2.12 Drive-thru facilities. 
NOTE: All Fast Food Restaurants are by Special Permit. See Section 8.2.7. 
20.27  CLUSTER SUBDIVISION SETBACKS: 
For any lot which was set off under a former officially approved cluster subdivision, no building or structure shall be placed less than 20’ from any street line or less than 15’ from any side yard or less than 30’ from any rear line.  Lot coverage shall be as prescribed in the underlying zone. 
SECTION 21 
 
NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND LOTS 
 
2l.l NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS - Any lawful use of a building or land existing at the effective date of these regulations, or any amendment thereto may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
 2l.l.l A non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or extended.  Excluded from this prohibition is: (l) The extended (including year-round) occupancy of a nonconforming seasonal dwelling whose only deficiencies relate to the "open space" requirements specified for the district in which it is situated; and (2) The winterization, refurbishment, and/or remodeling of such dwelling within its existing perimeter.  The exclusion does not apply to: (l) The physical extension or enlargement of a nonconforming dwelling; nor (2) The prolongation of the period of occupancy of any building for a purpose not specified under the "permitted uses" of the relevant district. 
 2l.l.2 A nonconforming use which ceases for any reason for a continuous period of more than one year, or is changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter resume. 
 2l.l.3 If any nonconforming building or building non-conforming in use shall be destroyed by any means the building or use may be restored provided that such restoration is started within a period of one year from the date of such construction and is diligently pursued. 
 2l.l.4 NONCONFORMING LOTS - Nothing in the East Lyme Zoning Regulations shall prevent the construction of a permitted building or a permitted use of a lot which prior to the adoption of the regulations or any additions or changes thereto, and continuously thereafter, was established as a separate lot by deed or approved subdivision plan recorded in the land records of the Town. 
 21.1.5 No nonconforming dwelling shall be enlarged or extended unless the enlargement or extension conforms to the requirements of the district in which it is situated. 
  EXCLUDED FROM THIS PROHIBITION ARE: 
A. Additions of a second story to one-story single family dwellings. 

B. Conversions of single-family one-and-one-half story dwellings to two-story dwellings, either by means of dormers or upward extensions of existing sidewalls. 

C. Conversions to two stories of one-story appendages to two-story single-family dwellings. 


 
 
NONE OF THE FOREGOING ADDITIONS, EXTENSIONS, OR CONVERSIONS SHALL: 
D. Extend beyond the perimeters of the existing buildings. 

E. Exceed the vertical projection limits specified elsewhere in these regulations. 

F. Alter the single-family status of the dwellings, and 

G. Result in a separation of less than 15 feet from the sidewalls of any other dwelling. 


21.1.6 Not withstanding the other provisions of Section 2l, nothing shall prevent the construction of additions to single family detached residential dwellings which have been reduced to the status of a "non-conforming use" in consequence of a zone change from "Residential" to "CB Commercial," provided that the following conditions are met: 
A. No lot within the scope of these provisions may contain more than one dwelling. 

B. The dwellings are used solely as private residences, except as provided in Section 20.3, "Home Occupations, Services, and Professions," and the proposed additions shall likewise be designed for such use. (For purposes of this regulation, single-story, accessory attached and detached garages shall be considered residential additions.) 

C. The gross increase in living area to be provided by any additions shall not exceed twenty-five percent of that now contained in the dwelling or 300 square feet, whichever is greater. 

D. Single-car accessory garages shall be limited to an inside floor area of 300 square feet; two-car garages shall be limited to an inside floor area of 500 square feet. 

E. All additions shall be subject to the following special requirements: 


 Lot Coverage - No dwelling, including all additions, shall occupy an overall area which is greater than 40 percent of that contained in the building lot. 
 Setbacks -Except as provided in Section 20.6 ("Established Building Line"), all additions shall be at least 20 feet back from the street line and l0 feet back from all side and rear yard property lines. 
F. Accessory garages constructed under the provisions of this section shall be used only for the sheltering of automobiles, lawn and garden tools, recreational equipment, and such other items as are customarily stored therein. 


 2l.l.7 PRE-EXISTING NON-CONFORMING GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS - Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of Section 2l, 
preexisting nonconforming gasoline stations may be modernized, structurally altered, enlarged, rearranged, relocated or reconstructed when authorized by special permit issued by the Zoning Commission in accordance with the requirements of Section 25; provided that the following conditions are met: 
A. The station is situated in a Commercial District, irrespective of any collateral zonal designation. 

B. There is no increase in the total capacity of the gasoline storage tanks previously authorized. 

C. Implementation of the special permit will be accomplished within the boundaries of the lot now occupied by the station and no use or acquisition of additional land is involved. 

D. Implementation of the special permit will be accomplished in such a manner as to conform to all "dimension requirements" of the applicable commercial zone. as specified in the East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 

E. In the judgement of the Zoning Commission, implementation of the requested special permit will not impair the visibility of motorists entering or leaving the station, nor that of motorists approaching or passing by the station on any adjacent roads or highways; nor will it imperil the public safety in any other unseemly manner. 


F.  Application for special permit includes certification by the installing contractor that: 
1. All of the filling station's underground tanks for the storage of petroleum liquids conform to the requirements of Section 22A-449(d)-l, paragraph (e)(l)(A)(i) and (ii) of the State of Connecticut's regulations for the "Control of the Non-residential Underground Storage and handling of Oil and Petroleum Liquids." 

2. All other underground facility components used for the storage, transmission and dispensing of petroleum liquids are (A) protected against corrosion by use of non-corrosive materials or steel components with factory applied corrosion-resistant coating and cathodic protection and permanent cathodic protection monitoring devices; (B) designed, constructed and installed so as to allow failure determination of all underground piping without the need for substantial excavation; and (C) chemically compatible with the contained oil or petroleum liquid as determined by the manufacturer’s warranty. 

3. The installation of all underground facility components meet the provisions of NFPA 30 and the manufacturer's specifications and recommendations, whichever provides the most stringent and protective provisions. 



4. The facility incorporates spill prevention equipment that will prevent release of petroleum to the environment during transfer of petroleum liquid from delivery tank trucks into underground storage tanks. 

5. The facility incorporates an alarm system capable of alerting operating personnel to any leakage in underground tanks and associated piping. 



 21.1.8 CHANGE IN USE The Zoning Official may allow a change from one non-conforming use to another non-conforming use if the proposed use is similar to the existing use, and will have less of an impact upon the surrounding area than the existing use, and will have no greater demand for parking or related facilities. 
 21.1.9 RECONSTRUCTION OF EXISTING RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES 
  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 21.1.3 of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations, a residential building and its attendant foundation may be removed and/or demolished in conjunction with an approved reconstruction of the building subject to the following conditions and procedures: 
A. Prior to any demolition or removal, an Application for a Building Permit for the reconstruction of the building shall be filed and approved by the required officials of the Town of East Lyme, including but not limited to the zoning and the building official. 

B. The Applicant shall submit to the zoning official, a class A-2 survey showing the location of the existing structures and their proximity to any boundary lines, with a zoning compliance box showing all non-conforming setbacks and the proposed construction, which plan shall show no increase in any preexisting non-conformities except as may be allowable pursuant to Section 21 of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 

C. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Applicant shall submit to the Zoning Official an A-2 Survey, showing the actual location of the reconstructed building which survey shall show it to be in conformity with Subsection B above. 


SECTION 22 
 
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
22.1 Off-street parking and circulation area shall consist of not less than 300 square feet per space, which area shall be suitably surfaced.  Each vehicle-parking stall shall contain a rectangular area not less than 9 feet by 18 feet.  For commercial, industrial, and multi-family development, parking areas shall be paved and screened by landscaping or other approved method from adjacent residential areas.  Off-street parking space shall be provided for the following uses as follows: 
 22.1.1 DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY OR TWO FAMILY - Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
 22.1.2 DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY - One-and-one-half spaces for each efficiency or one bedroom unit. Two spaces for each two bedroom or larger unit. One additional guest space for every 3 units. 
 22.1.3 DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY, MULTI-STORY (CB District) and RESIDENTIAL UNITS IN COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES (CA, CB, AND CM Districts) - One and one half space for each bedroom. 
 22.1.4 ELDERLY HOUSING - One space for each dwelling unit plus one space for each employee. 
 22.1.5 DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY, MULTI-STORY SECTION 202 HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY – Three spaces for every four units plus one space for each employee. 
 22.1.6 HOTEL, MOTEL, AND OTHER TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS -One space for each sleeping room plus spaces as required for restaurant, lounge, or other related use. 
 22.1.7 STANDARD RESTAURANT, CAFE, TAVERN, BREW PUB - One space for each 50 square feet of public floor area. 
 22.1.8 FAST FOOD OR DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT - One space for each 25 square feet of public floor area. 
 22.1.9 THEATRE, AUDITORIUM, CHURCH OR PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY - One space for every five seats. 
 22.1.10 RETAIL STORE (INCLUDING PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT, BANK, AND MEDICAL OR DENTAL OFFICE) - One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
 22.1.11 FURNITURE, ANTIQUE SHOP, APPLIANCE, BUILDING MATERIALS, GARDEN SUPPLIES, AUTO, BOAT AND MACHINERY SALES - One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area plus one space for each 800 square feet of outdoor sales area. 
 22.1.12 OFFICE - One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
 22.1.13 INDUSTRIAL BUILDING, WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT - One space for each two employees on largest shift plus one space for each company-owned vehicle. 
 22.1.14 MARINA, BOAT YARD OR YACHT CLUB - One space for every one and one-half slips, moorings, or storage rack spaces. 
 22.1.15 HOSPITAL - One space for each bed plus one space for each two employees on largest shift. 
 22.1.16 CONVALESCENT HOME - One space for each three beds plus one space for each two employees on largest shift. 
 22.1.17  SPECIAL USE DISTRICT - One space for each employee or as otherwise specified in this regulation. 
 22.1.18 USES NOT SPECIFIED - Parking requirements for any use not specified in this section may be set by the Zoning Commission in the particular instance, taking account of similarity of the use to other uses for which requirements are specified herein.   
22.2 OFF-STREET LOADING - Every commercial, industrial, wholesale or hospital use, or addition thereto, must maintain at least one paved off-street loading space of not less than 10 feet in width, 30 feet in length and l4 feet vertical clearance.  For wholesale and industrial buildings, there shall be one such off-street loading space for every 40,000 square feet of floor area or portion thereof, excluding basements. 
22.3  DRIVE-UP WINDOWS - The access way to a drive-up window must not impede the free flow of traffic on the approaching street or in the designated parking area. 
22.4  PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - No commercially operated or licensed vehicle having a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds shall be parked or stored on public or private property in an RU-120, RU-80, RU-40, R-12 or R-10 District except as follows: 
A. When actively engaged in providing a service directly related to the property where it is parked. 

B. In connection with any legally existing non-conforming, non-residential use, located in a residential zone; as long as said vehicle is not parked in the area construed to be the front setback and as long as said vehicle is parked outside of the applicable side yard and rear setbacks. 

C. On an occasional basis, not exceeding an average of once a month, when said use is in conjunction with the need for emergency repair such as by a utility service man or mechanical systems repair man or other similar incidental use. 


22.5 SHARED PARKING IN CA AND CB DISTRICTS the purpose of this section is to specify criteria under which existing uses may share off street parking facilities with other properties by demonstrating a parking disadvantage.  The term, disadvantage, within this section, shall be construed to mean those existing properties which can demonstrate an onsite parking deficiency for existing buildings and uses. 
22.5.1 
A. The shared arrangement will permit demonstrably more efficient utilization of parking spaces between property owners. 

B. There shall be no "reserved parking" other than that allocated for handicapped use. 

C. Shared Parking areas shall be within 500 feet of the activities applying for the permit.     

D. Any permit granted under this section shall apply only to the specific activities in force at the time it was granted and shall not include any property devoted exclusively to residential use. 

E. Shared parking may be utilized between the property of the involved business/businesses and only one other site.     

F. Location of off-site parking is to be indicated by a sign (in accordance with section 18) at the participating businesses.  

G. Any agreement developed in accordance with this section shall bear the signatures of the tenant and owners of the relevant properties.  The terms of such agreement shall be set forth in sufficient detail to permit the Zoning Officer to judge their effectiveness.  The Zoning Officer may require an A-2 survey for any shared parking proposal in order to determine the adequacy of existing parking spaces. 

H. Any permit granted under this section shall be recorded in the Town's land records and shall be valid for a minimum period of five years.  Application for renewal of such permit shall be made in accordance with the above provision. 

I. The permit shall be revoked if one of the involved activities ceases to operate or the use changes. 


22.6 AREAS OF EXEMPTION FROM PARKING REQUIREMENTS:  Notwithstanding new construction on vacant lots, existing and new uses associated with existing properties and buildings delineated on the following overlay map shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 22.1.1 through 22.1.15 provided that lot coverage existing on or before 10/19/1999 is not increased. 
An increase in lot coverage is not exempted and shall adhere to all the requirements of Section 22. 
22.7   CB ZONES ON STREET PARKING CREDIT 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22 of the Zoning Regulations, on street parking spaces which directly front a commercial lot may be counted toward the overall required parking space calculation for parking compliance purposes for commercial uses. 
A. Such space shall be not less than 9 feet x 18 feet; 

B. Parking spaces shall not be signed nor reserved. 


 

PARKING OVERLAY
SECTION 23 
 
CONSERVATION DESIGN DEVELOPMENT 
23.1 PURPOSE - It is the purpose of this section to provide more flexible standards (Conservation Design Development Subdivisions) to permit residential lots in specified districts to be reduced in dimension and designed to occupy less than the total tract to be subdivided.  The undeveloped portion of the tract shall be designed and dedicated as open space.  It is intended that use of these flexible standards and requirements will direct development to those land areas most suitable for development, will produce a more attractive, creative and efficient use of land and will achieve the following objectives: 
A. The preservation of natural or agricultural open space within new residential developments, the maintenance, and enhancement of the appearance, character and natural beauty of an area. 

B. The protection of the local ecology and the quality and quantity of underground and surface water; the preservation of significant stands of trees, steep slopes, ridge lines, vistas and archaeological and historic sites and stone walls and other areas of value including significant geological features, water bodies, wetlands, watercourses and other areas of environmental and aesthetic value; the minimization of flood hazards; and the prevention of soil erosion. 

C. The provision of active and passive recreation areas in close proximity to residents. 

D. The reduced cost of providing public services and infrastructure such as shorter more narrow roads and water & sewer infrastructure. 


23.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS –The Planning Commission shall require the provision of this section in the subdivision of any parcel of 10 acres or more in area or any subdivision of 4 or more lots.  
A subdivision under this section shall meet the following requirements: 
 A. Property must be in a RU-40, RU-80, and RU-120 Zoning Districts. 
 B. The Conservation Design Development must not result in the creation of more building lots than would occur in a standard conventional subdivision, except as provided in Section 6-1-3 of the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations. 
 C. The Conservation Design Development must be consistent with the East Lyme Plan of Conservation and Development. 
 D. The Conservation Design Development must otherwise comply in all respects with the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations of the Town of East Lyme. 
 E. The Conservation Design Development must be designed to meet all local and state sanitation ordinances, codes, and requirements for waste water disposal. 
23.3 The Planning Commission may require Conservation Subdivision by Design for subdivisions of any parcel of land less than 10 acres or a subdivision of less than 4 lots upon finding that such development will further the objectives specified in Section 23.1. 
23.4 PROCEDURE - Applicants for Conservation Design Development shall submit proposed plans in conformance with the application procedures of the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations. 
23.5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND CONTROLS 
A. Lots approved under this section shall meet the following minimum dimensional requirements: 
FRONT YARD SETBACK (MINIMUM) 
 10’ 
 
REAR YARD SETBACK (MINIMUM) 
 
REAR YARD SETBACK (when along perimeter of CDD Dev) 
 30' 
 
50’ 
 
SIDE YARD SETBACK (MINIMUM) 
 
SIDE YARD SETBACK (when along perimeter of a CDD Dev) 
 
 15’ 
 
50’ 
 
LOT COVERAGE (MAXIMUM) 
 25% 
 
BUILDING SETBACK TO        WETLANDS/WATERCOURSES** 
 100’ 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. BUFFERS 
1. A wooded or otherwise landscaped buffer shall be provided along the perimeter of the Conservation Design Development to Screen Development on the proposed lots from existing contiguous lots. The minimum width of the buffer shall be 40 feet, any portion of which may be either subdivision open space area or area contained within lots (e.g. conservation easement). Where variations in topography, natural features, or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the Planning Commission may waive or reduce these requirements if it can be shown that such a modification will further the purposes of the Conservation by Design Development. 
2. In the case of non-wooded areas, or open agrarian landscapes absent of scenic views and vistas, the Planning Commission shall require the planting of evergreen trees or similar vegetation (min 3-½ caliper), to screen this proposed development from the arterial or collector road.   
 Scenic views and vistas shall remain unblocked or uninterrupted, particularly as seen from public thoroughfares (arterial & collector road).  
 A.  In open agrarian landscapes, a deep “no-build, no-plant” buffer of a minimum of 200’ shall be maintained along the public thoroughfare where those views or vistas are prominently or locally significant.  
 B.  In wooded areas where the sense of enclosure is a feature that should be maintained, a deep “no-build, no-cut” buffer of a minimum of 200’ shall be respected, to preserve existing vegetation.  
 The Planning Commission may waive or reduce such buffers to no less than 100-feet if it can be shown that such waiver or reduction shall protect rural roadside character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly onto existing public roads and establishes a buffer zone along the scenic corridor or rural road with historic buildings, stone walls, hedgerows, and so on. 
3. In either case, wooded or non-wooded areas, natural features such as existing trees, vegetation, unique site features and significant resources such as wetlands and watercourses will be retained and protected to the maximum extent practicable.  The Planning Commission may require additional plantings as necessary to enhance screening in the buffer.  The buffer area within forty-feet (40’) of the perimeter of a CDD Development shall not be used for the placement of any above ground structures of any type. 
 
C.    PRIVATE OR COMMON DRIVEWAYS, STREETS, AND ROADWAYS 
1. The Planning Commission may require surety (e.g. performance and maintenance bonds or letters of credit), sufficient to ensure compliance and completion of site improvements with an approved subdivision or resubdivsion and any conditions placed thereon. Bonded improvements may include both public and common improvements, but are not limited to, erosion and sedimentation control measures, drainage, landscaping buffers, utilities, parking, recreational facilities, streets, private or common driveways, roadways, and sidewalks, or other elements as approved by the subdivision or resubdivision plan. Surety requirements shall conform to the requirements of Section 8 of the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations.  


 23.6 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS AND CONTROLS 
 A. The Conservation Design Development Plan shall result in preservation of subdivision open space with access, shape, dimension, character, location, and topography to accomplish one or more of the open space purposes specified in Section 23.1, as determined by the Planning Commission. 
B. The minimum area of open space for a Conservation Design development shall be as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Public/Community Sewer 
 Individual Septic 
 
RU-40 
 55% 
 30% 
 
RU-80 
 75% 
 50% 
 
RU-120 
 75% 
 50% 
 

 C. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the land to be dedicated as open space shall consist of wetlands or watercourses as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes, Section 22a-38 (15), and steep slopes as defined by Section 1.47 of the Zoning Regulations. 
 D. All building lots shall have reasonable access to subdivision open space areas, and the maximum number of lots compatible with good design should abut the open space. 
E. Small areas of subdivision open space scattered throughout the development shall be avoided.  To the extent possible, a contiguous system of open spaces shall be achieved by linking open space areas with pedestrian pathways.  Where there exists a contiguous development with an area of open space and when possible, the area of open space for the proposed CDD subdivision shall be designed to abut the open space area of an adjoining development. 
F. The subdivision open space land shall be shown on the plan and shall be labeled to specify the open space purpose.  Such purposes may include underground utilities such as a community septic system or water service if approved by the Planning Commission.  The plan will specify that the open space land shall not be further subdivided and is permanently reserved for open space purposes.  
G. The Subdivision open space land shall be conveyed by the applicant in accordance with Section l0 of the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations. 
H. Any setbacks required to wetlands and watercourses as part of these regulations may be included in the dedicated open space for conveyance in accord with Section 10 of the Subdivision Regulations or protected by a conservation easement on individual lots.  Areas protected by conservation easement for this purpose may be used to meet minimum open space requirements if those wetlands and watercourses are dedicated as open space. 
SECTION 24 
 
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS 
 Pursuant to C.C.S. Section 8-3(g), a site plan is required for certain uses permitted within these Regulations, in order to determine the conformity of a proposed building, use, or structure with the provisions of these Regulations.  This section establishes procedural and information requirements for fast track, administrative, and formal applications for site plan review.  These requirements are in addition to other applicable standards and requirements of these regulations. 
 Where a site plan is required, the site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the purpose and intent of these Regulations which is to: provide for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, prevent the erosion of soil and the excessive run-off of drainage water, protect natural resources: enhance the appearance of the Town and maintain property values through the preservation of existing vegetation and planting of new landscaping material: protect adjacent properties from excessive noise, glare, heat, dust, litter and loss of privacy; and protect public health, safety and general welfare. 
24.1  ACTIVITIES FOR WHICH A SITE PLAN IS REQUIRED 
Where required by these Regulations, no building or structures shall be erected, altered or enlarged, no building or structure shall be used, nor uses altered in space, time, or intensity, and no permit shall be issued by the Zoning Official, until a site plan or plot plan as required by these regulations and meeting all applicable requirements of this Section herein has been approved by the Zoning Official or the Zoning Commission. 
24.1.1  SITE PLAN EXEMPTIONS 
The following shall be exempt from permit review and shall only require the completion of a business registration form in the Zoning Office. 
A. Any use which is permitted as of right where there is no change in the building dimensions and which does not result in an intensification of use as defined in Section 24.2 A-3. 

B. Any change in the use for a nonconforming use or alteration for a nonconforming structure which decreases the nonconformity of the use or the structure. 


24.2  FAST TRACK SITE PLAN AND PERMIT REVIEW 
A.    A plot plan, as described in section 24.5, and a statement of intent shall be submitted to the Zoning Official for review for the following uses and structures: 
1. Construction of a new residential structure, or addition to a residential structure and/or accessory structure. 

2. Any non-residential or non-agricultural use within a residential zone. 

3. Within CA, CB, CM, or LI districts: 


A change of use within an existing structure and/or additions sized under 500 square feet of total ground floor area to existing commercial and industrial buildings provided that the Zoning Official, acting as an agent for the Commission, determines that the new addition will not result in an intensification of use. An intensification of use shall require an administrative review as described in Section 24.3.  For the purpose of this Section, intensification shall be defined as: 
a. An increase of 25 percent of more in the number of off-street parking spaces in CA Zones unless the Zoning Official determines that a shared parking agreement provides adequate parking for the proposed use or addition. 

b. An increase of 50 percent or more in the number of off-street parking spaces in CB and CM Zones unless the Zoning Official determines that a shared parking agreement provides adequate parking for the proposed use or addition. 

c. Additional employment exceeding 10 additional persons, additional floor space for sales of services, or additional required parking in LI zones. 


B.  The Zoning Official shall render a decision within 15 business days of receipt of the plot plan and a statement of intent. 
24.3 ADMINISTRATIVE APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW - ZONING OFFICE 
A. A site plan, as required in Section 24.5, will be submitted to the Zoning Official for site plan review for the following: 
1. For an addition to an existing structure 500-20,000 square feet in total ground floor area in CA, CM & LI Zones or an addition to an existing structure in CB Zones 500-10,000 square feet in total ground area. 

2. A new structure for a commercial and industrial use within CA, CM, and LI Zones, which is under 20,000 square feet in total ground floor area or a new structure for commercial use in a CB Zone which is under 10,000 square feet in total ground area. 

3. Any change in a property which results in an intensification of use as defined in Section 24.2 A.3. 


B. The Zoning Official, acting on behalf of the Commission, shall review applications to determine conformity with the Zoning Regulations. The date of receipt shall be designated as the date on which a complete application as described in Section 24.5.2 is submitted to the Zoning Office.  The Zoning Official may refer the site plan to other Town Departments for review as necessary.  All comments from other departments shall be submitted to the Zoning Official within 25 days.  The Zoning Official will review the site plan to ensure compliance with the Zoning Regulations and shall issue a permit within 30 days of receipt if all other applicable requirements of these regulations have been met.  The Zoning Official shall notify the applicant of the decision by certified mail within 30 days of the receipt of the application.  The Zoning Official may 
waive any part or all of the site plan application requirements, if he determined the information is not necessary for determining the conformity of a new use in an existing building.  The Zoning Official may waive the requirement for an A-2 survey, if he determines that the new use or structure will not alter the existing traffic or drainage patterns, the landscaping, or change the existing ground floor building dimensions. 
24.4  FORMAL APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW - ZONING COMMISSION  
A. An application for formal site plan review will be submitted to the Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 8-3(g) of C.G.S. for the following: 
1. A Special Permit application. 

2. An addition to an existing structure or a new structure within CA, CM, and LI Zones, which is over 20,000 square feet in total ground floor area or an addition to an existing structure or new structure within a CB Zone which is over 10,000 square feet in total ground area. 

3. An application for any new construction of multi-family or mixed commercial and multi-family building(s). 


B. The requirement of an A-2 survey shall be waived for the following: 
1. An application for a special permit if there is no change in the building dimensions and the new use, as determined by the Zoning Official, will not alter the existing on-site and off-site traffic pattern, drainage, or landscaping. 


24.5   CONTENT OF SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS 
24.5.1. Plot Plans - when required in these regulations, a plot plan shall be drawn to scale and submitted on a white sheet of paper no smaller than 8 1/2” by 11”.  The plot plan shall show the following information: 
A. Name and address of the applicant and owner of record 

B. Date, north arrow, numerical scale 

C. Property boundaries with dimensions of property lines indicated 

D. Location of the existing or proposed buildings 

E. Areas for parking and driveway 

F. Demonstration of minimum required parking spaces for use 


24.5.2 SITE PLAN APPLICATION - A site plan is required by these regulations shall include the following information: 
A. General Requirements 
1. Name and address of the applicant and owner of record 
2. Date, north arrow, numerical and graphic scale 
3. A Class A-2 survey, signed and sealed by a land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut (Waivable under Section 24.3 and 24.4) 
4. A written description of proposed use or uses. 
5. A table demonstrating the compliance of the site plan with the requirements of these regulations for lot size, frontage, setbacks, lot coverage, building height, number of parking spaces, and landscaping 
B. Existing and Proposed 
1. Property and street lines 

2. Adjoining property lines and names of adjacent property owners 

3. Easements and rights of way 

4. Topographical contours at two-foot intervals or other suitable intervals acceptable to the Zoning Official 

5. Wetlands, watercourses, slopes over 10%, wooded areas, rock outcrops, and other significant natural features 

6. Buildings, signs, fences, walls, and other structures, including elevations and exterior materials of all proposed structures 

7. Outdoor illumination facilities, including number, location, height if light standard, and method of shielding glare from adjoining properties 

8. Driveways, off-site parking and loading areas, pedestrian walks, fire lanes and vehicular and pedestrian traffic patterns 

9. Storm drainage 

10. Sewage Disposal 

11. Water supply 

12. Open Space Areas 

13. Existing vegetation to be retained and proposed landscaping with specific location, size, and scientific and common name 

14. Where applicable, the mean high water line, flood hazard area, coastal boundary and aquifer boundary 

15. Erosion and sedimentation controls 

16. Location of trash receptacles and screening 


C. Architectural Design 
No site plan under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Commission or Special Permit required under these Regulations shall be approved until the Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Official determines that the overall architectural character of the proposed site and building design is in harmony with the neighborhood in which such activity is taking place, or accomplishes a transition in character between areas of unlike character; 
protects property values in the neighborhood, and preserves and enhances the beauty of the community.  The applicant shall provide adequate information to enable the Commission and/or the Zoning Official to make that determination, including architectural plans of all buildings, other structures and signs.  Such plans shall include preliminary floor plans and elevations showing height and bulk, rooflines, door and window details, exterior buildings materials, color and exterior lighting.  Site plans shall show paving materials, landscaping, fencing, lighting design and other features of the site and buildings which are visible from the exterior of any building on the site or from adjacent properties or streets and which may impact on the character or quality of life on adjoining properties and throughout the Town of East Lyme.  The Zoning Official shall apply these regulations to all site plan applications submitted for review and may refer such application to the Zoning Commission for review and approval.  
Applicants shall adhere to the following guidelines: 
1. Building elements (e.g. protective canopies, stairs, columns, wall or roof projections and recesses, etc.) are designed to human scale at sidewalk level to encourage pedestrian use. 
2. HVAC Units shall be fully screened. 
3. Balance the visual relationships of building bulk and size with its site, especially when viewed from a distant vantage point. 
4. Building designs should create variety through compatibility rather than conformity. 
5. Maintain proportions between building height, length and width consistent with prevailing architectural standards. Avoid distortion or exaggeration. 
6. Break large building volumes into smaller forms to lessen the total building mass and to provide continuity with nearby smaller scale buildings.  Smaller forms could include projections (e.g. overhang, awnings, etc.) or recesses (e.g. windows) on smaller buildings, or stepping back upper levels on larger buildings. 
7. Building faces should present a clear, well defined and balanced façade. 
24.6 STANDARDS - The following general standards shall apply to all uses subject to approval of a site plan. 
A. SURFACING  AND DRAINAGE - Driveways to and from all buildings, outside storage, sales and display areas will be properly graded and paved.  The flow of storm water from the site onto the street will be minimized to reduce peak flow volume and sediment loads to predevelopment levels.  When deemed necessary by the Commission or Zoning Official due to such factors as emergency vehicle access requirements or the anticipated level of on-site traffic, the commission or the Zoning Official may require private driveways and/or parking areas to be constructed to Town road standards, as contained in the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations, for: width, geometry and cross-section; base construction and surfacing; sidewalks; lighting; street signs; and drainage. 
B. DRIVEWAYS - Driveway entrances and/or exits will be the minimum number necessary to provide efficient and safe access to the site.  Combined entrances/exits will be no less than 24 feet in width.  One-way entrances or exits will be no less than 16 feet in width. 
C. SIDEWALKS - Sidewalks shall be constructed to Town standards along the entire street frontage.  This requirement may be waived by the Commission upon a finding that sidewalks at the proposed location are not necessary or desirable for pedestrian safety and circulation.  Where required, sidewalks will be located within the road right-of-way, one foot off the front lot line.  If insufficient right-of-way exists to accommodate a frontage sidewalk, the property owner will deed property to the town or State of Connecticut, as appropriate, to increase the width of the right-of-way.  When deemed necessary for pedestrian safety, internal sidewalks may be required; internal sidewalks will connect to frontage sidewalks. 
D. SITE CONDITION - Provisions will be made for maintaining an uncluttered site so that equipment or refuse will not be stored or located on sidewalks, pedestrian ways, driveways, or parking areas, except when required for refuse pick up. 
E. LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERS - Landscaped areas will be provided on each lot requiring a site plan review. 
1. NATURAL FEATURES - Existing trees, vegetation, unique site features and significant resources such as wetlands and watercourses will be retained and protected to the maximum extent practicable.  Existing healthy trees and other vegetation of proper type, size and location will be fully credited against the requirements of this section. 
2. FRONT LANDSCAPING – Each lot will be provided with a landscaped strip, 6 feet or more in width, along the street line.  This strip will be curbed, planted with grass or suitable ground cover, and will include appropriate trees and shrubs.  At a minimum, one deciduous shad or evergreen tree, having a caliper of not less than two inches and a height of not less than six feet at the time of planning will be planted for each 20 feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof.  In cases where the edge of the pavement or sidewalk within a public right of way does not coincide with the front lot line, the property owner will also landscape the area between the front line and the edge of the pavement or sidewalk. 
3. BUFFER STRIP - A landscaped buffer strip will be required along all lot boundaries abutting any other lot.  The minimum width of buffer strips will be as follows: 
Commercial or multi-family District abutting a single-family residential district: 25 feet 
Industrial District abutting a commercial district:  25 feet 
Industrial District abutting a residential District:  50 feet 
Special Use District abutting a residential use or district: 50 feet 
Commercial uses within a Commercial district: 6 feet 
All others: 10 feet 
The buffer area will contain evergreen planting sufficient to shield abutting properties from headlight glare and visual intrusion and to reduce noise.  At a minimum, the planting will consist of one row of trees 6 feet in height planted at intervals of 10 feet on center.  An earthen berm, wall, or architectural fence may be substituted for any portion of the required planting with the approval of the Zoning Commission.  
Where appropriate, the commission may eliminate the side or rear buffer strip requirement. 
4. PARKING AREA LANDSCAPING - All off-street parking areas of 30 or more spaces will include a minimum of 15 square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space, located within the paved portion of the parking area.  Landscaping will be contained in curbed islands, located to aid in the safe and efficient channelization of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to separate the major access ways through the parking area from the parking aisles.  Each separate landscaped area will contain a minimum of 100 square feet, will have a minimum dimension of 6 feet, will be planted with grass, ground cover, and/or shrubs, and will include at least one deciduous shade tree of not less than 2 inch caliper, at least 6 feet in height at time of planting 
5. SCREENING - All outside storage areas, loading bays, machinery and equipment installations, and disposal containers will be fully screened from view from any street by a building, fence, wall, shrubbery, or embankment not less than 6 feet in height. 
F. MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT - All structures and areas contained within an approved Site Plan will be maintained.  Replacement of dead trees or shrubs is required within the next planting season. 
24.7 EXCEPTIONS - If any of the requirements of Section 24.6 cannot be met because of previously existing physical conditions, the Zoning Commission may authorize appropriate modification consistent with the objectives if this regulation. 
24.8 BONDING - Bonding may be required at the decision of the Zoning Official and/or Zoning Commission. 
24.9 AS-BUILT SURVEY - If a Class A-2 boundary survey was required as part of site plan submission, a Class A-2 as-built survey will be required, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, to verify accuracy of construction.  The Zoning Official may require an as-built survey for any development subject to site plan approval, if the Officer has reason to believe that the development may not have been constructed according to the approved plan. 
SECTION 25 
 
SPECIAL PERMITS 
25.l GENERAL PROVISIONS: - The uses for which conformance to additional Special Permit standards is required shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject to the satisfaction of the requirements and standards set forth herein in addition to all other requirements of this ordinance.  All such uses are hereby declared to possess such unique and special characteristics that the specific use shall be considered as an individual case. 
25.2 APPLICATION: An application for a Special Permit shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with Section 24.  The application shall describe the proposed use in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the provisions of these regulations and the following standards : 
25.3 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SPECIAL PERMIT USES 
25.3.1 The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations involved, the size of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to the existing and future streets giving access to it, shall be such that it will be in harmony with the orderly development of the district and the location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences will not discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof. 
25.3.1.1 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN 
No site plan under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Commission or Special Permit required under these Regulations shall be approved until the Zoning Commission and/or the Zoning Official determines that the overall architectural character of the proposed site and building design is in harmony with the neighborhood in which such activity is taking place, or accomplishes a transition in character between areas of unlike character; protects property values in the neighborhood, and preserves and enhances the beauty of the community.  The applicant shall provide adequate information to enable the Commission and/or the Zoning Official to make that determination, including architectural plans of all buildings, other structures and signs.  Such plans shall include preliminary floor plans and elevations showing height and bulk, rooflines, door and window details, exterior buildings materials, color and exterior lighting.  Site plans shall show paving materials, landscaping, fencing, lighting design and other features of the site and buildings which are visible from the exterior of any building on the site or from adjacent properties or streets and which may impact on the character or quality of life on adjoining properties and throughout the Town of East Lyme.  Application for administrative site plan approval for new buildings and structures under 20,000 sq. ft. 
in total ground floor area fall under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Official (as provided for in Section 24, Site Plan Review).  The Zoning Official shall apply these regulations to all site plan applications submitted for review and may refer such application to the Zoning Commission for review and approval.  
A. Applicants shall adhere to the following guidelines: 

B. Building elements (e.g. protective canopies, stairs, columns, wall or roof projections and recesses, etc.) are designed to human scale at sidewalk level to encourage pedestrian use. 

C. HVAC Units shall be fully screened. 

D. Balance the visual relationships of building bulk and size with its site, especially when viewed from a distant vantage point. 

E. Building designs should create variety through compatibility rather than conformity. 

F. Maintain proportions between building height, length and width consistent with prevailing architectural standards. Avoid distortion or exaggeration. 

G. Break large building volumes into smaller forms to lessen the total building mass and to provide continuity with nearby smaller scale buildings.  Smaller forms could include projections (e.g. overhang, awnings, etc.) or recesses (e.g. windows) on smaller buildings, or stepping back upper levels on larger buildings. 

H. Building faces should present a clear, well defined and balanced façade. 


25.3.2 Operations in connection with any special use shall not be more objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes, vibration or flashing lights, than would be the operations of any permitted use. 
25.3.3 Procedures: The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.   
25.3.3-1 Public Notice - In addition to notice of hearing by publication, public notice of application for special permit shall be made as follows: 
 Posting of Sign - At least 15 days prior to any public hearing on a special permit, the applicant shall post a sign on the premises indicating that such action is proposed. The sign shall be of durable material 4’ by 4’ in size and shall be firmly set at least three feet above ground surface and located so as to be clearly visible and legible from the most heavily used adjacent Town road or two lane state highway.  When in 
the opinion of the Commission or its designee, there is not sufficient land area to post the sign, a 2’ by 2’ sign may be posted in a window which is clearly visible and legible from the most heavily used adjacent Town road or two lane state highway.  The sign shall contain the following, in black block lettering not less than 3 inches in height for a road sign and 2 inches in height for a window sign on a white background:  The sign shall be removed within 10 days of completion of Public Hearing. 
 
Notwithstanding the above section, applicants for annual special permit renewals for restaurant outdoor dining facilities in CA or CB Zones where alcohol is served shall not be required to post an on premises public notice advertising sign. 
25.3.4 Expiration:  A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular use and shall expire if the use shall cease for more than six months for any reason. 
25.3.5 Existing Violations:  No special permit shall be issued for property where there is an existing violation of these regulations.   
 
 
 25.5 TABLE OF MINIMUM CONTROLS FOR SPECIFIC SPECIAL PERMIT 
  
 
 
  
  
 
USE 
 DISTRICT 
 CONTROLS 
 
 
  
  
 
Additions to 
Assisted Living Facilities 
 
Assisted Living Facilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CB 
 
 
 
 
CA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet, with public water & Sewer. 

2. Minimum living floor area: 


Efficiency Unit without cooking facilities   275 Square Feet 
Efficiency Unit with cooking facilities 325 Square Feet 
One Bedroom 475 Square Feet 
Two Bedroom 650 Square Feet 
3.   Common area: The common area of the structure shall be at least 35% of the total building area.  Common area shall be defined as all area not devoted to residential units. 

4. Parking requirements: .4 spaces per living unit. 

5. Transportation: The facility shall provide daily private transportation for residents to local facilities and services. 

6. Occupancy: Residential units shall be for persons of at least 62 years of age and in the case of multiple occupancy of a dwelling unit, one (1) person shall be at least 62 years of age, none less than 55 years. 

7. Emergency Call System: Each residential unit shall have an emergency call/intercom system with 24 hour on site response. 

8. Residential Unit Facilities: a) Each residential unit shall include at least a toilet, sink and one shower.  b) a residential unit may include cooking facilities 

9.  Density: 40 residential units/acre maximum density. 

10. Noise regulation: No outdoor sound systems shall be allowed. 

11. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be available or constructed to provide access to 


 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 neighborhood facilities and services. 

12. Gross Floor Area:  the minimum gross floor area for a building containing an Assisted Living Facility shall be 20,000 square feet. 

13. Common kitchen/dining facilities: The facility shall have kitchen facilities for preparing and serving full meals to residents.  Common dining facilities shall be provided. 

14. Open Space: In addition to required buffers and parking/roadway area the facility shall provide a suitably landscaped recreational/open space of not less than 10% of the total lot area.  Calculation for this area shall include all passive/active outdoor recreational facilities as well as other landscaped areas exclusive of the buffers and roadway/parking area. 

15. Staffing: a registered or licensed practical nurse shall be on site on call 24 hours/day. 


 
Agricultural or Farm 
 All Rural & Residence Districts 
 1. Use shall be on a lot not less than two acres. 

2. No animals or poultry (except household pets) shall be kept less than l00 feet from any property line. 


 
 Agricultural or Farm – Honey Bees 
 All Rural & Residential Districts, Commercial 
 The keeping of Honeybees shall be permitted as an accessory use to a residential principal use on any lot in accordance with the following hive density restrictions: 
 
1.Lot sizes of ¼ acre or less: up to two colonies and up to two nucleus colonies shall be permitted. 

2.Lots of ¼ acre to ½ acre shall limit the number of colonies to no more than 4 colonies and up to three nucleus colonies. 

3.Lots of ½ acre to 1 acre shall limit the number to 6 colonies and up to four nucleus colonies.  

4.Lots great than 1 acre shall not be limited as long as the guidelines on Best Management Practices are followed.   

5.Setbacks for relative zoning district shall apply. 





Limitations will not be imposed under the 
 

following two conditions: 
1. If the colonies are situated 100’ from a property line; or 

2.If the adjoining property is undeveloped land. 








Bees shall be maintained in accordance with Connecticut Best Management practices and the above regulations. 
 

 
Farm Events accessory to Agricultural or Farm Use 
 RU-40 
 6. A Farm owner or operators of a Farm to Agricultural or Farm Use  having more than fifty (50) acres of land may obtain a Special Permit to conduct the allowable Farm Events set forth below.   

7. Permitted Farm Events:  




a. Dinners At The Farm: A Farm dinner event with a maximum of 200 persons that occurs one (1) time per calendar year for five (5) consecutive nights subject to the requirements set forth below. 

b. Farm Education Events: Small events, classes and dinners with a maximum of twenty-five (25) persons that occur a maximum of twenty (20) times per calendar year subject to the requirements set forth below.  


 
3.     General Provisions Applicable to Farm Events.  
a. Events shall be limited to the areas as shown on an approved Special Permit, including outdoor and indoor areas of the Farm property.   

b. In no case shall the activities be conducted closer than 350’ to a residential property line.   

c. All outdoor activities shall cease no later than 10:00 p.m. 

d. Outdoor lighting shall not shed light beyond the boundaries of the subject property.   

e. For each Farm Event, the owner of the property shall obtain a zoning permit from the Zoning Official and shall provide to the Zoning Official the location of the event on the property, the hours of the event and the number persons attending the event.   


 
 

f. No two Farm Events will take place simultaneously with each other. 

g. The Farm Events must cease operation and the Special Permit shall terminate should the Agriculture and Farm use cease on the property.   


 
4.  Dinners at the Farm.   
a. Following issuance of a Special Permit, a Farm owner or operator may host a Dinner at the Farm event which may be held for a maximum of five (5) consecutive nights, Wednesday thru Sunday, one (1) time per calendar year.   

b. The maximum number of guests at a Dinner at the Farm event shall not exceed two-hundred (200) persons. 

c. A designated off-street Parking Area, which is temporary in nature, of sufficient size and suitability to accommodate the maximum number of persons attending the Dinner at the Farm event shall be provided and shall be shown on the Special Permit. Such Parking Areas may be sited on an adjacent property with written consent of the property owner.   

d. Tents and portable restrooms may be utilized on the grounds. 

e. Outdoor amplification of music shall be prohibited.   

f. Non-musical outdoor amplification shall cease by 10:00 pm and shall be subject to the provisions of the Town of East Lyme Noise Control Ordinance, as may be amended from time to time. 


 
5.  Farm Education Events. 
a. A Farm owner or operator may obtain a Special Permit to host Farm Education and Health and Wellness Events, such as cooking classes, seminars, programs, Farm to Table dinners, movies. at the Farm up to a total maximum of twenty (20) Farm Education Events per year.  

b. The maximum number of guests at an event shall not exceed twenty-five (25) persons. 

c. A designated on-site, Off-Street Parking Area shall be shown on the approved 


 

Special Permit.  


 
 
 
  
  
 
Agricultural or  
Farm Poultry 6 or less *** 
 RU 120, RU 80,  
RU 40 
 1. Use shall be on a lot not less than one acre. 

2. Minimum of 1 Acre required 

3. No roosters permitted. 

4. No more than six (6) hens may be kept. 

5. A chicken coop and enclosure (pen) shall be required on all properties where chickens are kept. 

6. Chickens are allowed only in the chicken coop and outdoor enclosure.  Free range activity is not permitted. 

7. The coop shall accommodate not more than six chickens.  The coop and coop yard may not be located in a front or side yard and shall not be visible from a street or neighboring property. 

8. The coop shall be a maximum size of six feet (6’) by eight feet (8’) by six feet (6’) in height. 

9. The coop enclosure area shall be fenced. 

10. The coop and enclosure may not be located within the required setback of the underlying zone 

11. Any composting of waste shall comply with the state of Connecticut's Best Management Practices for Agriculture.  

12. Waste materials must be disposed of in a manner that will not cause odors, flies or attract vermin.   


            The coop and enclosure must be clean and odor free, kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times, in a manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
 
 
  
 ***Note: A Special Permit is not required for uses under this section.*** 
 

 
Antique Shop 
 RU-80 RU-40 
 1. No permanent exterior displays. 

2. All temporary exterior displays shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner. 


 
Antique Shop 
 R-l0 
 1. Lot shall not be less than 40,000 square feet. 

2. No permanent or temporary exterior displays. 

3. Business must be in dwelling of proprietor. 


 
Bed & Breakfast 
 R-12, R-10 
 1. The lot must be a minimum of 10,000 square feet.  There will be not less than 5000 square feet of lot area for each bedroom in the facility including those of the resident or designated manager. 


 
 
 RU-40, RU-80 
 2. The lot must be a minimum of 40,000 square feet for RU 40 and a minimum of 80,000 square feet for RU80.  There will be not less than 5,000 square feet of lot area for each bedroom in the facility including those of the resident or the designated manager. 


 
 
  
 3. No retail facilities are permitted. 


 
 
 CA, CB, CM 
 4. In all districts the Owner of the facility or a designated manager must reside on the premises.  In the event a manager is designated, the Owner must provide an affidavit to the Zoning Official which includes the name and contact information for the designated manager. 


 
 
 all districts 
 5. Rooms must have bath facilities separate from those of residents. 


 
 
  
 6. Parking Area must be screened from adjoining properties with appropriate fencing of landscaping.  A landscaped buffer of not less than ten feet must be provided. In lieu of a fence, plantings within the buffer must provide for six-foot vertical growth with sufficient density to protect adjoining properties. 


 
 
  
 7. There will be a maximum stay of seven nights for guests of the facility. 


 
 
 CA, CB, CM all districts 
 1. 1 Parking Space per bedroom is required. 


 
 
  
  
 
Brew Pub 
 LI Zone 
 1. Public service/sales area shall not exceed forty (40%) percent of the gross floor area of 


 

the facility. 

2. The Commission may establish hours of operation for service/sales of beverages for consumption on the premises. 

3. Non-premises produced beer and/or wine shall not exceed forty (40%) percent of gross sales of beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises. 


 
 
Car Wash 
 CA 
 1. Facility must hook into Municipal Sewers. 


 
 
  
  
 
Cemeteries 
 Rural, Residential & Commercial 
 1. Located on a plot of not less than two acres  


 
 
  
  
 
Commercial Golf or Tennis Club, Private Club 
 Rural, Residence & Commercial 
 1. It shall be located on a plot of not less than five acres. 

2. No building shall be located within l00 feet of any street line nor within l50 feet of any other property line.  

3. No activity shall be carried on which results in objectionable noise audible off the premises. 


 
 
  
  
 
Commercial Indoor Recreation 
        LI 
 1. Lot shall not be less than 80,000 square feet. 

2. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the use as determined by the Zoning Commission. 


 
 
  
  
 
Dog Daycare & Training Center 
 LI 
 1. Must have a kennel license and training license. 

2. No overnight boarding allowed. 

3. Minimum of 2.5 acres. 

4. Stand Alone Building. 

5. Retail sales allowed as an accessory use, square footage limited to 10% of total building area. 

6. No grooming allowed. 

7. Outdoor exercise yard allowed, enclosed by a minimum 6’ high fence. 


 
 
  
  
 

Drive-in Theatre 
 LI 
 1. The lot shall be not less than five acres. 

2. Lights must be adequately screened from adjacent residential areas. 

3. The access road must be adequate to handle traffic loads. 


 
Drive-thru 
  
 Drive-thru facilities for Banks, Financial Institutions, Pharmacies, Bakeries and Restaurants. 
1. The drive-thru facilities shall clearly be accessory and subordinate to the primary use. 

2. Drive-thru facilities, including required stacking lanes, shall be located in the rear or side yards only. 

3. Drive-thru facilities shall not generate the need for additional driveway curb cuts. 

4. A minimum of five vehicle stacking spaces shall be provided on site for each drive-thru station, including the vehicle being serviced.  Where a restaurant order board and service window are proposed each service aisle shall provide a minimum of ten (10) stacking spaces with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces before the order board. Each service aisle shall not have more than two service windows. 

5. Stacking lanes shall be separate from internal traffic aisles to allow traffic to circulate through the site without entering the drive-thru facilities. 

6. Stacking lanes shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’) wide and each vehicle stacking space shall be twenty feet (20’) in length. 

7. Stacking lanes shall be designed to minimize traffic congestion and to promote pedestrian safety. 

8. Drive-thru facilities shall be screened from view from public streets with substantial landscaping using a variety of evergreen and deciduous species. 

9. Outdoor speakers shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any residentially zoned property and shall not be audible from other property. 


 

10. Drive-thru facilities should be designed as a compatible architectural element of the primary building; 


NOTE: All Fast Food Restaurants are by Special Permit. See Section 8.2.7. 
 
 
 
  
  
 

 
Elderly Housing 
 CA 
 1. All lots used for Elderly Housing, CA use shall have a minimum of 15,000 square feet 

2. At least one (l) off street parking space shall be provided per family unit. 

3. No building shall be less than 20 feet from the street line or l2 feet from the property lines, if not built on the property line in accordance with Section 20.l8 

4. Each lot shall contain not less than 80 feet frontage 

5. Required floor area in units shall contain not less than 650 square feet for one bedroom and 800 square feet for each two-bedroom unit 

6. Each dwelling unit shall be occupied by: 

a. At least one person who is 55 years of age or older 

b. Occupant pursuant to (a) above who survives 

c. Occupant pursuant to (a) above who’s co-occupant has entered into a long-term continuing care facility 


In b. and c. above, remaining occupant who remarries or cohabitates must meet all occupancy requirements 
7. A suitable landscaped buffer zone ten (l0) feet wide, suitable to provide, within a reasonable period of time, a visual barrier between different land used shall be provided 

8. No building or structure shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height 

9. The total floor area of all buildings and structures on a lot shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent 

10. The placement, size, arrangement and use of 


 

access routes to public or private streets shall be adequate to serve residents and provide no hindrance to the safety of existing or proposed streets.  Pedestrian walkways with all weather surfacing may be required where the density of population makes such advisable for convenience and safety unless such pedestrian walkways are provided across the street from the complex 

11. No elderly housing shall be approved unless municipal water and municipal sanitary sewers are provided, except with respect to developments containing six  units or less, municipal sanitary sewers shall not be required. 

12. Each structure shall consist of no more than six (6) units.  The shortest distance between any two (2) structures shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet.  The Commission may waive the separation if the design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing 

13. The minimum required area of a lot used for Elderly Housing, CA shall be the total of 2,200 square feet for each one bedroom unit and 2,400 square feet for each two-bedroom unit 

14. The burden of complying with 42 U.S.C. Section 3607 and 242 CFR Section 100.304, as amended, in providing housing for older persons shall be on the owner, association of homeowners or user of the property 


 
Elderly Housing 
 SU-E 
 1. Open space shall consist of 30% of the lot area.  The open space may be used for passive recreation.  The open space shall be contiguous.  Such open space shall not include wetland soils classified as poorly drained or very poorly drained by the National Cooperative Soils Survey.  No more than 50% of the open space can consist of wetlands. 

2. No building shall be less than 20 feet from all internal roadways.  No unit may be located less than 15 feet from any other single family detached residential unit. 

3.  


 

A. Each dwelling unit shall be occupied by: 

1. At least one person who is 55 years of age or older. 

2. Occupant pursuant to (a) above who survives. 

3. Occupant pursuant to (a) above who’s co-occupant has entered into a long-term continuing care facility. 


In 1 and 2 above, remaining occupants who remarries or cohabitates must meet all occupancy requirements. 
B. Required floor area in all units shall contain not less than 650 square feet for one bedroom and 800 square feet for each two bedroom. 

4. A project consisting of single-family detached residential units shall be designed in clusters of no more than 8 units, and each cluster shall be separated from adjoining clusters by a distance of 50 feet or more. 

5. Internal roadways for a project consisting of single-family detached residential units shall be constructed to the following standards.  The roadways shall be constructed to town standards for geometry and cross sections, base construction and surfacing, lighting, underground utility and drainage.  The main access roadway shall be no less than 24 feet in width and other interior roadways shall be no less than 20 feet in width.  No on - street parking shall be permitted on internal roadways. 

6. No more than 40 percent of the lot area may be covered with impervious surfaces. 

7. Each dwelling unit shall contain a basement or attic for storage. 

8. The purchase of a dwelling unit for investment purposes, i.e., by a person or entity not intending to occupy the unit, is prohibited except that a non-resident family member may purchase up to one unit for persons who will reside in the unit and who otherwise comply with the provisions of this regulation. 


 

9. An owner of a dwelling unit may rent his or her unit for a term(s) of not less than one year provided that the tenant fully complies with all of the conditions of this regulation. 

10. A walking trail system shall be provided within the proposed development.  Unpaved walking trails may be counted as open space. 


 

 
Dwelling, Multi-Family, Multi-Story Section 202 Housing for the Elderly 
 SU 
 1. Density: The minimum required area of a lot used for Multi-Family, Multi-Story Dwellings shall be a total of 2800 square feet for each efficiency or one bedroom unit, and 6000 square feet for each two bedroom unit.  In no case shall the total required area be less than ten acres. 

2. Required floor area for each unit shall not be less than the following: 


EFFICIENCY:           480 sf 
ONE BEDROOM      540 sf 
TWO BEDROOM     700 sf 
3. Elevators: Multi-Family, Multi Story Dwellings shall be equipped with a minimum of one elevator for three stories or more. 

4. No Multi-Family, Multi-Story Dwelling shall be approved unless municipal water and municipal sanitary sewers are provided. 

5. No parking shall be permitted within the buffer area. 


 
Hotel and Motel 
  
 1. No other commercial activities shall be carried on, except as incidental to servicing the needs of guests. 

2. Must be connected to sewers when available 


 
Kennels,  Veterinary Clinic, Riding or Boarding Stables 
 All Rural 
 1. Use shall be located on lots not less than three acres. 

2. No animals shall be kept in any building less than 100 feet from any lot line. 


 

 
Mixed Use Development 
 CB Zone 
 1. The purpose of this Regulation is to encourage development of Niantic Village, create an attractive environment, and provide an incentive for commercial development in the context of a mixed use. 

2. Submission Requirements: 

A. Site Plan as provided in Section 24. 

B. Traffic Study for developments exceeding 15,000 sq ft gross floor area. 

C. Architectural plans including building, elevations, floor plans, and exterior materials. All such plans shall be prepared by a licensed architect.  Such design shall reflect New England Village Character and shall be an enhancement to neighboring buildings.  Architectural consideration shall be a significant element of the commission decision. 

D. Those items as shall be required in Section 25 or Section 24. 

E. Such additional items as may be required by the Commission to fully evaluate the proposal. 

3. Controls: 

A. Minimum lot size: 7,500 sq ft. 

B. Residential Density: In addition to the minimum lot size, the following additional lot area shall be required for the residential portion of the Development. 


1,200 sq ft for each efficiency or one bedroom 
2,000 sq ft for each two bedroom 
C. Parking: Notwithstanding Section 9.3.6, parking shall be provided based upon the greater of the calculation for the commercial portion of the premises, or the residential calculation as provided in Section 22.1.3 plus 50% of that for the use requiring the lesser calculation.  Required parking may 


 

be provided at ground level under a portion of the building provided that the first floor thereof along the street line shall contain commercial use(s). The Commission may require all or portions of covered parking to be enclosed. 

D. Building height: In order to encourage attractive roof line designs, except for the south side of Main Street, the Commission may approve a building height not to exceed 40'; provided however, no such building shall exceed three (3) stories. The Commission may consider the goal of this regulation in determining whether to grant such additional height. 

E. Minimum floor area: 


Efficiency:  500 sq ft 
One bedroom: 650 sq ft 
Two bedroom: 850 sq ft 
F. Municipal Sewer and Water must be provided. 

G. No individual building shall exceed 30,000 sq ft. gross floor area.  Covered parking, whether or not enclosed, shall not be included in “gross floor area”. 

H. The ground floor commercial use must occupy no less than 30% of the footprint of any building, including elevated portions. 


 
In-Law 
  
 1. Eighty square feet of Accommodations separate sleeping area. 

2. No more than one set of additional housekeeping facilities. 

3. One off-street parking space. 

4. Separate fireproof entrance. 

5. Health Department approvals for sanitary facilities. 

6. No such accommodations are allowed where the "Family" is a group of four (4) unrelated 


 

persons. 


 
Residential Accessory Use (Golf Course SU) 
 SU 
 1. Such use shall only be available on a parcel of not less than two hundred fifty (250) acres. 

2. Not less than forty (40) percent of the overall area thereof, shall be devoted to such open space or golf course use. 

3. Single family, duplex and/or triplex units, only, shall be allowed under a common interest form of ownership. 

4. Density:  The average number of dwelling units per acre within the community shall not exceed that which would be allowable based upon the minimum lot size of the underlying residential zone.  This density calculation shall be based on eighty-five (85%) percent of the gross land area of the parcel. 

5. Grouping:  The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than the height of the taller structure, with a minimum of 24 feet.  Courts shall be completely open on one side.  Maximum heights of any building in the development shall be two stories, but such height shall not in any even exceed 30 feet.  The Commission may waive the separation requirement if design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing. 

6. Buffer Area:  There shall be provided a landscaped side or rear yard buffer area of at least 100 feet in width adjacent to each property line of the parcel to be developed.  All buffer areas shall be planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order so as to protect adjacent properties and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of ten feet.  If, the opinion of the Zoning Commission, the individual topographical and natural qualities of the site should suggest that this buffer region is not appropriate, the Commission reserves the right to alter the buffer requirements by vote of three-fourths of all the members of the Commission.  This buffer may not be increased to more than double nor decreased to less than half of the requirements herein. 


 

7. Use Restrictions:  Not less than fifty (50%) percent of the residential units (each portion of a duplex or triplex being a residential unit) shall be occupied by a senior citizens, age fifty-five (55) or older as follows: 

a. At least one person who is at least fifty-five (55) years of age or older. 

b. Occupant pursuant to (a) who survives; 

c. Occupant pursuant to (a) above who is co-occupant has ended into a long term continuing care facility. 

d. In (b) and (c) above remaining occupants remarries or co-habitats must meet all occupant requirements. 

e. For the purpose of such calculation, age restricted units contained on the same parcel as part of an SUE Zone shall be included. 

8. Access Streets and Sidewalks:  The placement, size, arrangement, and use of access routes to public or private streets shall be adequate to serve residents and provide no hindrance to the safety of existing or proposed streets.  The Commission may require the sidewalks and/or walking trails to be constructed in portions of the Community where the nature of contemplated activities indicates that there will be significant amounts of pedestrian traffic.  Where it is anticipated that children will be waiting for a school bus in or near a public highway, sufficient area shall be reserved and/or shelter provided.  In developments in excess of fifty (50) units, at least two points of access shall be provided to a public highway, provided however that in the event the topography or location of the frontage of the property makes such impracticable or impossible, the Commission may waive the requirement of two entrances upon the showing that one entrance is sufficient to maintain the public health and safety of the residents, including consideration of emergency access. 

9. Internal Roadways:  The main access road shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet in 


 

width and interior roadways shall be no less than twenty (20) feet in width.  Provided however, the Commission may require roadways in portions of the community to be in excess of the required width where the higher traffic levels, or visits from the general public in conjunction with recreational activities may be expected.  The Commission may also require that such roads be constructed to one or more of the standards contained in the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations for geometry, surfacing, lighting and drainage.  In areas of twenty (20) foot roadways, parking on the street shall be prohibited by adequate signage. 

10. Utilities:  No such development shall be approved unless the Commission is given clear satisfactory evidence of the means of providing water supply, has public sewer, or is suitable for approval by the Department of Health and/or Department of Environmental Protection for on-site septic systems.  This provision shall not require a permit from such agencies prior to such approval; but only sufficient evidence that the site is capable of supporting such approval. 

11. No such development may be constructed on a parcel if any portion of it lies within 2000 feet of the coastal boundary as defined by Section 22a-94 of the Connecticut General Statutes and as delineated in the coastal boundary map for the Town of East Lyme. 


 
Multi-Family 
 SU 
 1. Area:  A minimum of twenty Dwelling acres of contiguous land is required for a multi-family development. 

2. Density: The average number of dwelling units per acre in a development shall not exceed two.  In computing the number of acres in the parcel of land proposed for development for the purposes of this paragraph, the number of square feet in the buffer area pursuant to subparagraph (7) following, shall be excluded. 

3. Grouping: The shortest distance between any two structures shall be not less than the height of the taller structure, with a minimum of 24 feet.  Courts shall be completely open on one 


 

side. Each structure shall consist of no more than l2 units.  Maximum height of any building in the development shall be two stories, but such height shall not in any event exceed 30 feet.  The Commission may waive the separation requirement if design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing. 

4. Open space shall consist of 30% of the lot area.  The open space may be used for passive recreation.  The open space shall be contiguous.  Such open space shall not include wetland soils classified as poorly drained or very poorly drained by the National Cooperative Soils Survey.  No more than 50% of the open space shall consist of wetlands. 

5. Buffer Area: There shall be provided a landscaped side or rear yard buffer area of at least l00 feet in width adjacent to each property line of the parcel to be developed.  All buffer areas shall be planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order so as to protect adjacent properties and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of ten feet. 


If, in the opinion of the Zoning Commission, the individual topographical or natural qualities of the site should suggest that this buffer region is not appropriate, the Commission reserves the right to alter the buffer requirements by vote of three-fourths of all the members of the Commission.  This buffer may not be increased to more than double nor decreased to less than half of the requirements herein. 
6. Parking: Parking spaces shall be within 200 feet of the intended users. No parking shall be permitted within the buffer area 

7. Required Floor Area: in multi-family dwelling shall contain not less than the following area for each type of family unit: 


 
 
 BEDROOMS 
 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 
 
 
 EFFICIENCY 
 500 square feet 
 
 
 ONE 
 650 square feet 
 

 
 TWO 
 800 square feet 
 
 
 DETACHED DWELLING 
 900 square feet 
 
 
 Efficiency means a dwelling unit-containing bathroom and kitchen facilities. 
  
 
 
  
 8. Access Streets and Sidewalks: The placement, size, arrangement and use of access routes to public or private streets shall be adequate to serve residents and provide no hindrance to the safety of existing or proposed streets.  Pedestrian walkways with all weather surfacing may be required where the density of population or school bus routes make such advisable for convenience and safety. 

9. Utilities: No Multi-family development shall be approved unless there is provided public sanitary sewers and clear evidence of safe and satisfactory means of providing water supply. 


 
Nursery Greenhouse 
 All Residential  
Districts 
 1. Lot shall be not less than one acre. 

2. Buildings shall not be less than l00 feet from any lot line. 


 
Off-Premises Identity and Location Signs 
 CA, CB, CM SU, LI, 
 Signboards are required to the location and identification of facilitate businesses which are located on lots having no frontage on a public highway or approved town road. 
The businesses are of such a nature as to require location and identification by the public, as well as the town. 
The property on which the business activities are situated is clearly disadvantaged by its lack of exposure to the normal flow of traffic. 
The proposed location of the sign(s) and supporting structure is the minimum feasible distance from the disadvantaged property required for practical location and identification of the business activities thereon. 
Where a multiplicity of businesses are established on a lot having no frontage on a public highway or approved town road, all location and identification signboards shall be incorporated into a single supporting structure. 
Only one double-faced signboard shall be allowed for each business, the exposed surface of the signboard shall not exceed five square feet per side, 
 

and no signboard structure shall exceed an overall height of fifteen feet above ground. When necessary, the signboards may be arranged in two or more tiers within the supporting structure. 
The installation of the signboards and supporting structure shall not present an obstacle to the visibility and safe passage of traffic moving in all relevant directions. 
Applicants for special permits under the above provisions shall present the Commission with conclusive evidence of their right to erect the off-premises signboards in the proposed locations. 
 
Research 
 LI 
 Researching or testing use Laboratory shall not be dangerous by reason of fire or explosion, nor injurious or detrimental to the neighborhood by reason of dust, odor, fumes, wastes, smoke, glare, noise, vibration or other noxious or objectionable feature as measured at the nearest property line. 
 
Residential Units in CA and CB Commercial Structure 
  
 1. Residential units above first floor. 

2. Required floor area of dwellings shall not be less than 


 
 
 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 
 BEDROOMS 
 
 
 EFFICIENCY 
 500 square feet 
 
 
 ONE 
 650 square feet 
 
 
 TWO 
 800 square feet 
 
Deli/Coffee Shop, Cafeteria 
 LI 
 1. Lot shall be not less than 40,000 square feet. 

2. Off-street parking shall conform to these regulations. 

3. Location shall be directly accessible to a major street. 


 
Saw Mill 
 RU-120, RU-80 Only 
 1. It must be located on a lot of not less than five acres. 

2. All operations must be carried on not less than l00 feet from any street or property line. 

3. All sawing operations must be carried on at a distance of not less than 500 feet from any residence, except a residence on the same premises. 


 
Stand for Display and Sale of Farm Produce 
 RU-120, RU-80, RU-40 
 1. Such stand shall occupy not over 200 square feet in area (if temporary) or l,000 square feet  (if permanent). 

2. Off Street parking shall be provided for at 


 

least three cars. 

3. Such stand must have a minimum 20 ft. setback from the street. 

4. If it is a permanent building, it can only be used seasonally. 


 
Taproom Brewery 
 CB 
 1. No more than 5,000 barrels (155,000 US gallons) shall be produced annually. 

2. At minimum, 50% of all beer produced shall be sold via retail through the taproom for on or off-site consumption. 


 
 
  
 3. Sales volume of products manufactured on site/premises shall be at least 50% of the toal annual volume. 


 
Undertaking Establishment 
 R-12, R-10 
 1. Lot shall be not less than Establishment 20,000 square feet. 

2. Off-street parking shall be provided for all vehicles of the establishment plus not less than six additional vehicles. 


 

 
Small Animal Veterinary clinic 
 RU-80, RU-40, RU-120, CA & CB 
 1. The business may be contained within a separate building, shopping mall, or office business complex.  No external animal accessory facilities or structures shall be permitted. 

2. No objectionable or injurious wastes or other materials shall be discharged or emitted into any river, stream, pond or other body of water; public or private disposal system; or the ground, so as to endanger public health or safety or constitute an objectionable source of pollution. 

3. All solid waste shall be disposed of in special containers and collected by an agency maintained and operated for this purpose. 

4. Biomedical waste shall be disposed of in accordance with the regulations of the State Department of Health and local sanitary mandates. 

5. The ventilation system shall be of such design and construction that no objectionable odors are emitted to adjacent offices, businesses or residences. 

6. Kennel space provided for hospitalized 


 

animals shall not exceed 20% of the total clinic floor space. 

7. No animals will be boarded except as may be hospitalized when required for medical or surgical treatment. 

8. No objectionable sound shall be emitted through exterior walls or roofs enclosing the clinic.  When situated within a building accommodating other enterprises, the clinic area shall be treated acoustically in such a manner that no noise in excess of 45 decibels shall be presented to the other occupants. 


 
Wholesale Store 
 CA 
 1. Lot shall be not less than 40,000 square feet. 

2. Access must be from a street adequate to handle traffic loads. 


 
Yacht Club (Special Permit) 
  
 1. It shall be located on a plot of not less than five acres. 

2. No building shall be located within 50 feet of any street line nor within 75 feet of any other property line. 

3. No activity shall be carried on which results in objectionable noise audible off the premises. 


 

 
SECTION 26 
 
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
26.l The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the agent of the Zoning Commission of the Town of East Lyme, who shall be known as the Zoning Official. 
 26.l.1 It shall be the duty of said agent to receive applications and to issue zoning permits and certificates of occupancy and he is hereby given the power and authority to enforce the provisions of these regulations. 
 26.l.2 Such agent shall require that the application for building and zoning permits and the accompanying site plan shall contain all the information necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building complies with the provisions of these regulations.  No permit shall be issued until the agent has certified that the proposed building or structural alteration complies with all provisions of these regulations. 
 26.l.3 Such agent shall, upon notice and after inspection of the premises and building, issue a certificate of occupancy if the work done complies with the plans as authorized.  It shall be unlawful to use any part of any building or structure hereinafter erected. Until a Certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefore by the said agent, showing that the proposed use and construction are in accordance with these regulations. 
26.2 Under such rules and regulations as may be established by the Zoning Commission, a temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a building may be issued by the Zoning Official. 
26.3 Upon written request from the owner, the Zoning Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or premises existing at the time of passage of these regulations certifying, after inspection, the extend and kind of use made of the building or premises, including the number of employees and whether such use conforms to the provisions of these regulations. 
26.4 Violations of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-l2, Chapter l24 of the General Statutes, l958 Revision, as amended. 
 
SECTION 27 
 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
27.l The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and three alternates chosen as provided by law, who shall serve without compensation.  Said board shall elect a chairman from among its membership and shall appoint a secretary who shall keep a record of all its proceedings showing the vote of every member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.  Each rule or regulation and each amendment or repeal thereof and each order, requirement or decision of the board shall immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
27.2 All meetings of said board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as said board may determine.  The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
27.3 The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
27.3.l To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the agent of the Commission or any other official charged with the enforcement of these regulations. 
27.3.2 To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass by the specific terms of these regulations, and 
27.3.3 To determine and vary the application of the area requirements of these regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of these regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare preserved.  Use variances shall not be granted. 
27.4 The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be required to hear any application for the same variance for a period of six months after a decision by the Board or by a Court on an earlier application. 
27.5 Pursuant to the powers and duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in the General Statutes of Connecticut and the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme, all appeals to said board must be filed with the agent of the commission and the chairman or secretary of the board within 30 days of the date of the action from which the appeal is entered. 
SECTION 28 
 
Amendments to regulations and Zoning District Map. 
28.1 General – These regulations and the boundaries of zoning districts established hereunder may from time to time be amended or changed by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124. Section 8-3, of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1984, as amended. 

28.2 Application – Any individual, firm or party owning land within the Town of East Lyme may petition in writing for a change of zone or amendment of these regulations.  Such petition shall be delivered to the Zoning Official for submission to the Zoning Commission.  A request for a change in zoning district boundaries shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale showing the area of the lots included in such proposed change and designating the record owner or owners of said lots and of all adjacent lots within 500 feet from the boundary of the area subject to the zone change request.  Such applications shall also contain an accurate description by metes and bounds, of the lots included in such proposed change and shall further contain a statement of the reasons why such change is sought. 

28.3 Notification of adjacent property owners – The applicant shall prepare a list of names and addresses of owners of all properties within the area which is the subject of the application and of all properties 500 feet or less distant there from, all as shown on the latest grand list of the Town of East Lyme in the Assessor’s Office (or the actual owners of record or otherwise known to the applicant). The applicant shall mail notifications of said pending application to at least one owner of each such property not more than 30 days or less than ten days before the date set for the public hearing, by transmitting the text of the public hearing notice.  Evidence of such mailing shall be submitted, with the aforementioned list, in the form of United States Post Office Certificates of Mailing to the Zoning Official at least two days prior to the hearing date. 



The provisions of this section shall not apply in the case of re-zoning initiated by the East Lyme Zoning Commission. 
28.4 Referral – Application for zoning district boundary amendments shall be referred to the East Lyme Water and Sewer Commission for assessment of the availability of water and sewage capacity. 



28.5 Fees – An application fee in the amount of $300.00 shall accompany each application for a text amendment of these regulations.  An application fee in the amount of $400.00 shall accompany each application for a zone change.  Such fee shall be paid by check or money order payable to the order of the Treasurer of the Town of East Lyme and shall be used to defray the costs of the publication of required legal notices.  Such fee shall be non-refundable.  Furthermore, if the actual cost of legal advertising is found to be more than the application fee, the applicant shall pay such additional money as may be required to cover all legal advertising costs to the Town of East Lyme prior to the Commission taking action on the applicant’s petition. 
SECTION 29 
 
VALIDITY 
 
29.l If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of these regulations shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of these regulations shall be deemed valid and effective. 
 
SECTION 30 
AQUIFER PROTECTION DISTRICTS 
 
This section removed effective June 28, 2013. 
 
 
SECTION 31 
 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
31.1 GENERAL PURPOSE  The purpose of this regulation is to provide for the location of wireless telecommunication towers and antennae; reducing adverse effect through careful design, siting and vegetation screening; and to minimize the number of towers by encouraging shared use or joint use where practical.  These Regulations are consistent with the Federal Communications Act of 1996 in that they do not discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services, prohibit or act to prohibit the provision of personal wireless services or regulate the placement and construction of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with Federal Communications Commission regulations regarding such emissions.   



Except for the location and height of tower/antennae, this Regulation does not regulate any aspect of licensed (under Federal Communications Commission 47 CFR 97) amateur radio and small business communications. 
Should jurisdiction over the siting of telecommunication towers or facilities fall outside of the Town of East Lyme, a Public Hearing shall be held in accordance with state statutes and East Lyme Zoning Regulations.  The record of the Public Hearing and the findings of the East Lyme Zoning Commission shall be forwarded to the Connecticut Siting Council or other appropriate agency(ies) of jurisdiction. 
Telecommunication towers are permitted in all zones subject to the approval of a Special Permit and site plan approval.  A Special Permit shall be granted if the requirements of Section 25, Section 24 where applicable, and the following are satisfied. 
Telecommunication antennae and facilities are permitted in all Zoning Districts subject to site plan approval and the following conditions: 
31.2 GENERAL STANDARDS 
31.2.1 To discourage the proliferation of telecommunication towers, shared use of tower structures is both permitted and encouraged.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot may be permitted if all setbacks, design, and landscape requirements are met for each tower.  Applications for new towers shall be accompanied by documentation that no existing or planned tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant’s tower or transmitter.  The applicant shall include documentation regarding the availability of any existing or approved telecommunication towers or other non-residential structures within the transmission area that meets the needs of the applicant. 
It is a condition of any Special Permit issued under this Regulation that the permit holder shall provide an affidavit assuring good faith in 
allowing other providers to share space or co-locate on the site, provided that such shared use does not impair the technical level or quality of service.  In the event that a dispute arises as to whether the permit holder has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the Town of East Lyme may require a third party technical study at the expense of either or both the permit holder and the applicant. 
31.2.2 Applications involving the co-location of antennae on existing telecommunication towers are exempt from the need for a Special Permit and shall only be subject to site plan approval from the Zoning Commission. 
31.2.3 The lot on which a new telecommunication tower is constructed shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the underlying zone. 
31.2.4 The tower and/or antennae shall be erected to the minimum height necessary to satisfy the technical requirements of the telecommunication facility.  Documentation of the minimum height needed, prepared by a professional telecommunication systems engineer, shall accompany the application for Special Permit.  Such documentation may include propagation modeling and/or test results. 
31.2.5 All new structures shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zone or be set back from all property lines a distance equal to the height of the structure, whichever is greater.  Guy anchors shall meet the setback requirements of the respective zone.  A fall zone clear of utilities and structures other than the applicants accessory equipment, structures and sheds within the proposed site, shall be provided. 
31.2.6 Towers and antennae shall be a subdued, non-reflective color which shall blend in with all surroundings. 
31.2.7 Landscaped buffers shall be required around the perimeter of all structures, including guy anchors.  Such landscape buffers shall include evergreen trees of sufficient height and planted at sufficient distance to provide visual buffering as determined during the site plan approval process. 
31.2.8 Signal lights or illumination shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal Communication Commission or the Federal Aviation Commission. 
31.2.9 No advertising or signage, other than warning signs, is permitted on any tower. 
31.2.10 All unused telecommunication towers shall be removed within 12 months after cessation of use.  As a condition of site plan approval, the Zoning commission shall require a bond to insure removal of abandoned towers. 
31.2.11 No new or existing telecommunication service shall interfere with public safety, telecommunications or with any existing television or radio signal.  All applications for facilities under this Regulation shall be accompanied by a study which provides technical evaluation of 
existing and proposed transmissions including Electromagnetic Field transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems. 
31.2.12 Satellite dishes under 3 feet in diameter are exempt from this Regulation when ground mounted. 
31.2.13 The entry road and surrounding area of the facility and/or site must allow sufficient room for approach and deployment of fire rescue apparatus.  In addition, the following minimum requirements shall be provided for; 
A. Road service able to accommodate a vehicle of at least 60,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. 

B. Grade not to exceed 8%. 

C. A minimum vertical clearance of 12 feet. 


31.3 SITING PREFERENCES 
Siting preferences are listed in order of preference: 
A. On existing approved towers. 

B. On existing structures such as non-residential building/facades, utility poles, steeples, clock or bell towers, silos and water towers. 

C. On new towers located on property occupied by one or more existing towers.  The applicant must demonstrate that existing towers could not be replaced and/ or updated to avoid an increase in the number of towers on any one site unless the Zoning Commission determines that additional towers could be more appropriate to the site. 

D. On new towers located in Commercial Zones. 

E. On non-residential structures in Residential Zones. 

F. On residential structures in Residential Zones. 


31.4 LOCATION STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION 
31.4.1 Wireless telecommunication facilities where a new tower is located on property occupied by one or more towers erected prior to the effective date of these Telecommunication Zoning Amendments: 



A. All attempts shall be made to co-locate the antennae on existing towers. 

B. Tower height shall be site specific and of the minimum height necessary to meet technical transmission requirements. 

C. New equipment structures and buildings shall meet all applicable requirements of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 

D. The Zoning Commission may require independent engineering or technical review of submitted materials at the applicant’s expense. 

31.4.2 Wireless telecommunication facilities in a Commercial Zone where the existing topography, vegetation, building or other structures provide appropriate buffering: 




A. All attempts shall be made to co-locate the antennae on existing towers, buildings and structures. 

B. Equipment structures and sheds shall meet all applicable requirements of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 

C. All attempts shall be made to mitigate adverse impacts on surrounding residential areas. 


31.4.3 Wireless telecommunication facilities in a residential zone 
A. All attempts shall be made to co-locate the antennae on existing towers, buildings or structures outside of residential areas.  The application shall be accompanied by documentation prepared by a radio engineer that no other existing or planned tower or structure can accommodate the applicant’s antennae.  All structures existing within ¼ mile radius of the proposed site, documentation shall be provided that the owners of these locations have been contacted and have denied permission to install the antennae on these structures for other than economic reasons. 

B. Equipment structures and sheds shall meet all applicable requirements of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 

31.5 PLACEMENT STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS 31.5.1 Wireless communications may be located as specified below provided the following standards are met: 





A. No change is made to the height of a building. 

B. Panel antennae shall be of the smallest dimensions necessary and documentation shall be provided confirming this.  Dish antennae shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter. 

C. Equipment structures and sheds shall meet all applicable requirements of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 

D. Facilities shall be of a material or color matching the exterior of the building and shall blend into the existing architecture to the extent possible. 

E. Façade mounted antennae shall not protrude above the building structure and shall not project more than 3 feet beyond the wall or façade. 

F. Roof mounted antennae shall not exceed the highest point of the rooftop by more than 10 feet. 

G. Roof mounted antennae shall be set back from the front or side roof edge a minimum of 10 feet or 10 percent of the roof width, whichever is greater. 

31.5.2 Wireless Communication facilities where the antennae is mounted on existing utility poles, steeples, clock or bell towers, chimneys, silos, windmills and water towers, provided the following standards are met: 



A. No change is made to the height of the building or structure. 


B. Panel antennae shall be of the smallest dimensions necessary and documentation shall be provided confirming this.  Dish antennae shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter.  Whip antennae shall not exceed 25 feet in length and shall not exceed the height of the existing structure unless the Zoning Commission determines that it would be appropriate due to the nature of the structure and its location. 

C. Equipment structures and sheds shall meet all applicable requirements of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 

D. Facilities shall be of a material or color matching the exterior of the building and shall blend into existing architecture to the extent possible. 

31.5.3 Wireless telecommunication facilities where the antennae is mounted on an existing residential structure: 



A. Every effort shall be made to minimize the visual impact of telecommunication equipment on residential structures including the use of Radio Frequency screening materials. 

B. Shall meet the requirements of Section 31.5.2 of these Regulations. 

31.6 ACCESSORY FACILITIES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 



All accessory facilities, buildings and structures associated with wireless telecommunication facilities shall comply with the following: 
31.6.1 Within Residential Zones, the accessory building shall be as small as possible and shall have a roofline characteristic of other buildings in the vicinity.  Only one building per facility is allowed in Residential Zones. 

31.6.2 Each building shall comply with setback requirements, as well as other applicable zoning requirements for accessory buildings for the Zoning district in which it is located. 

31.6.3 If located on the roof of a building, it shall be designed to blend with the color and design of the building to the closest extent possible. 

31.6.4 All ground level buildings, boxes or structures shall be surrounded by a six-foot fence of materials appropriate to the zone.  All landscaping shall be maintained. 


31.7 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS 



A full site plan review shall be required of all applications for a telecommunication facility pursuant to Section 24 of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations.  In addition, a State of Connecticut licensed engineer must submit all plans.  The following information shall be submitted for each application where applicable.  The Zoning Commission may require independent engineering or technical review of submitted materials at the applicant’s expense. 
A. A map indicating the extent of the provider’s existing and planned coverage within the Town of East Lyme and a map indicating the search radius for the proposed wireless telecommunications site, identifying the 


location of potential site locations on existing structures within one mile of the proposed site. 

B. A report from the applicant indicating why the proposed site location is necessary to satisfy its function in the applicant’s proposed wireless telecommunications system and why at least one alternate site within one mile is not suitable. 

C. A scaled plan and elevation drawing showing where and how the proposed antennae and mounting supports will be affixed to a particular building or structure. 

D. A detailed list of all antennae and mounting supports indicating size and color. 

E. Elevations of all proposed visual screening and fencing and details of materials including color. 

F. Elevations of all proposed equipment buildings, enclosures and structures. 

G. Design plans and tower base elevation showing height and fall circles of all towers. 

H. A description of the tower capacity, including the number and type of antennae it can accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located antennae and minimum separating distances. 

I. A signed statement from the licensed radio engineer indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunications facility will comply with FCC radio frequency emission standards and will be operated in accordance with the owner’s Federal Communications Commission license and Federal Aviation Administration requirements. 

J. All proposed landscaping with a list of all materials. 

K. Proposed access to the site. 

L. Proximity of the site to residential structures. 

M. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties. 

N. Surrounding topography with 1,000 feet at contour intervals not exceeding 10 feet. 

O. Design of the tower with particular references to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 

P. A visual analysis showing all areas from which the tower would be visible and, if requested by the Zoning Commission, a simulation of the proposed site in order to help the Zoning Commission determine the visual impacts associated with the proposal.  This visual analysis should include a simulation (using balloon or computer generated landscape view from each octant of the compass) of the tower’s appearance during the winter months from the furthest extent of the tower’s visibility from the perimeter of the Town of East Lyme. 


Q. The Zoning Commission reserves the right to make its own assessment of visual impact of any tower or structure and further identify any additional sight lines. 


 
31.8 APPLICATION REVIEW STANDARDS 



In addition to other appropriate review standards found in these regulations, the Zoning Commission, in reviewing applications for wireless telecommunication facilities, shall consider: 
A. Detailed analysis of alternative sites, structures, antennae and access as provided by the applicant.  Particular attention will be placed upon the siting preferences found in Section 31.3 of the Regulations. 

B. Detailed propagation and antennae separation analysis relative to tower height. 

C. Tower sharing or co-location to facilitate the telecommunication needs of municipalities, emergency services, and other entities in order to reduce the need to construct additional towers.  The Zoning Commission reserves the right to require the applicant to utilize the provisions of Section 16-50aa of the State of Connecticut General Statutes to achieve tower sharing. 

D. Assessment of tower structure type. 

E. Design characteristics/architectural treatments that mitigate, reduce or eliminate visual impacts on surrounding areas. 

F. If located on a property of important historic and/or architectural character consideration shall be made of the preservation of such character. 

G. Future use or re-use of the site, with provisions for facility removal and site restoration if the towers or antennae are no longer used. 


SECTION  32 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DISTRICT 
32.1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:  A district designed to provide for, encourage and accommodate affordable housing, as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-39a and Section 8-30g, et seq. 
32.2 DESIGNATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING DISTRICT:  An Affordable Housing District (AHD) may be proposed for and located on parcels of land, or combinations of adjacent parcels of land, containing at least ten (10) acres. 
32.3 PERMITTED USES:  The following uses of buildings and/or land and no others shall be permitted subject to site plan approval in accordance with Section 24: 
32.3.1 An affordable housing development, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-30g.  The development may consist of single-family or multi-family dwellings arranged on single or multiple lots within the District. 
32.3.2 Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
32.4 DIMENSIONAL AND BULK REGULATIONS 
32.4.1 LOT SIZE:  Lots for single-family dwellings shall contain no less than ten thousand (10,000 square feet).  Lots for multi-family dwellings shall contain no less than ten (10) acres. 
32.4.2 HEIGHT:  The maximum height of single-family detached dwellings shall be thirty (30) feet. 
32.4.3 MULTI-FAMILY UNIT DENSITY:  The maximum number of multi-family dwelling units permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
            1 bedroom: 5,445 square feet / unit (8 units / acre) 
            2 bedrooms: 7,260 square feet / unit (6 units / acre) 
3 or more bedrooms: 8,712 square feet / unit (5 units / acre) 
On lots to which public sewer and water facilities are not available, the maximum density of multi-family dwelling units shall be one unit per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land. 
32.4.4 FRONTAGE:  Each lot and/or land area shall have not less than fifty (50) feet frontage. 
32.4.5 SETBACKS:  No new building or structure shall be placed less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the street line or less than one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any other lot or parcel outside of the AHD, unless such lot or parcel is already zoned for multi-family residential uses. 
32.4.6 BUFFERS:  A suitable landscaped buffer strip not less than one hundred (100) feet wide shall be provided along the boundary of any other lot or parcel outside of the AHD, unless such lot or parcel is already zoned for multi-family residential uses, in which case the 
Commission may provide for a buffer strip of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the adjacent boundary line.  
32.4.7 BUFFER AREA:  There shall be provided a landscaped side or rear yard buffer area of at least one hundred (100) feet in width adjacent to the boundary of any other lot or parcel outside of the AHD, unless such lot or parcel is already zoned for multi-family residential uses, in which case the Commission may provide for a buffer strip of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the adjacent boundary line.  All buffer areas shall be planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order so as to protect adjacent properties and present a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of ten (10) feet. 
32.4.8 GROUPING:  The minimum distance between any two (2) structures shall be twenty-four (24) feet, unless the Commission finds that the design of the proposed development would be benefited by closer spacing. 
32.4.9 YARDS 
Front Yard: 25 feet 
Side Yard: 25 feet 
Rear Yard: 50 feet 
32.4.10 LOT COVERAGE:  The total lot coverage of all buildings and structures on any lot shall not be greater than thirty (30) percent of the lot area. 
32.4.11 TIDAL WETLANDS: A 150’ non-disturbed buffer shall be required from tidal wetlands and watercourses. 
32.5 OFF-STREET PARKING:  Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 22 of these regulations.  Spaces within garages shall count towards the required minimum number of spaces. 
32.6 OPEN SPACE:  For any affordable housing development, an area equal to ten (10) percent of the total lot area shall be set aside as open space.  Buffer strips required pursuant to Section 32.4.6 shall be included in the computation of open space. 
32.7 AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTIONS 
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a development approved pursuant to this Article, there shall be recorded in the East Lyme land records a document entitled "Affordable Housing Development Restrictions," executed by the owner of the AHD; dated, witnessed, and acknowledged in the manner required for deeds; containing a real estate description of the AHD and containing substantially the following language in accordance with General Statutes Section 8-30g et seq.: 
Not less than thirty (30) percent of the dwelling units of a development in the AHD will be conveyed by deeds containing covenants or restrictions ("deed restrictions") which shall require that such dwelling units shall be 
sold or rented at or below prices which will preserve the units as housing for which persons pay thirty (30) percent or less of their annual income, where such income is less than or equal to eighty (80) percent of the median income.  Such restrictions shall remain in force for at least forty (40) years after the initial occupation of the proposed development. 
Within the AHD herein described, not less than fifteen (15) percent of all dwelling units in the development shall be sold or rented to persons and families whose income is less than or equal to sixty (60) percent of the median income.  The remainder of the dwelling units conveyed subject to the deed restrictions shall be sold or rented to persons and families whose income is less than or equal to eighty (80) percent of the median income. 
"Median income" means, after adjustments for family size, the lesser of the state median income or the area median income for the area in which East Lyme is located, as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
32.7.1 The owner of the land and buildings within the AHD may, during such forty (40) year period, change the designation of which units within the AHD shall be maintained as affordable, provided that the minimum thirty (30) percent set aside shall be maintained, and the AHD as a whole shall continue to comply with the provisions of these restrictions. 
32.7.2 These restrictions may be enforced by the applicant or by the East Lyme Zoning Official or the East Lyme Housing Authority, or any other suitable town agency selected by its Board of Selectmen. 
32.8. PHASED APPROVAL:  The applicant may request an approval of the development plan to be completed in stages.  The minimum amount of land to be included within any single stage of development shall be five (5) acres.  Each stage shall be capable of independent existence without the completion of succeeding stages.  Buffer requirements shall not apply to the common line between stages of development.  Each phase must contain the required percentage of affordable units. 
32.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
An application for designation as an AHD may be initiated in three ways: (i) a conceptual site plan in accordance with General Statutes Section 8-30g; or (ii) an application for approval of a Preliminary Site Plan ("PSP");  or (iii) an application for approval of a Final Site Plan ("FSP"). The Commission shall have the discretion to hold a public hearing on an application for approval of a PSP and/or on an application for approval of a FSP.  An application for designation as an AHD cannot be approved without an approved FSP. 
32.9.1 PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN:  The purpose of a PSP is to require the submission to the Zoning Commission of information sufficient to allow it to evaluate a development plan for under the standard of §8-30g, and to allow an applicant to defer, until approval is granted, completion of details and specifications that will define what is to be built but are not essential to §8-30g analysis.  Therefore, a PSP 
submitted with an application to rezone an eligible parcel or parcels of land as an AHD shall contain the following: 
A. An A-2 property line survey. 

B. Topographical contours at ten (10) foot intervals. 

C. Location of wetlands, watercourses, and slopes in excess of twenty-five (25) percent. 

D. General layout of all proposed buildings and structures. 

E. Areas proposed for open space and/or recreational purposes. 

F. Sewage disposal and water supply locations and system, ownership, operation, and maintenance. 

G. Preliminary storm water management plan; 

H. Coastal zone resources information. 

I. Traffic impact statement or report. 

J. Preliminary design plans for all proposed buildings and structures. 

K. A table showing the number of units and number of bedrooms for each unit. 

L. An Affordability Plan containing all of the documents and information required by General Statutes Section 8-30g. 

M. A list of all coordinate permits and approvals needed by the applicant before beginning construction 

N. Soil types from the New London County Soil Survey. 

O. A statement describing any impact on public health and safety, including emergency services. 


32.9.2 FINAL SITE PLAN:  An application for FSP approval shall contain all of the information required for a PSP, as well as any additional information that may be required for site plan applications under Section 24 of these Regulations. An application for FSP approval shall also demonstrate that (a) public water and sewer can serve the entire development, or (b) community septic and water can serve the entire development, or (c) a combination of public and onsite or community water and waste disposal can serve the entire development.  
32.9.3 DECISIONS ON SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS:  If the applicant submits an application for approval of a PSP in connection with an application for designation of an AHD, the Commission shall either approve, approve with modifications, or deny said PSP at the time it acts on the proposed AHD designation.  If the PSP is approved, or approved with modifications, the applicant shall file an application for approval of an FSP, which application shall include all information required under Section 24 of these Regulations for a site plan application.  If the FSP conforms to the PSP as approved, and includes all information required by section 24 of these Regulations, the 
Commission shall approve the FSP.  If the applicant submits an application for approval of an FSP in connection with an application for designation of an AHD without having first obtained PSP approval, the Commission shall either approve, approve with modifications, or deny said FSP at the time it acts on the proposed AHD designation. 
 
SECTION 33 
 
INCENTIVE HOUSING ZONE 
33.1 PURPOSE: 



The Incentive Housing Zone is intended to: 
a. Encourage a range of affordable housing types.  

b. Permit mixed-use development sensitive to neighborhood character.   

c. Enable infill development and the adaptive reuse of vacant or 



underutilized properties. 
33.2 AUTHORITY: 



The Incentive Housing Zone is adopted under the provisions of Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
33.3 DESIGNATION OF INCENTIVE HOUSING ZONE: 



The Incentive Housing Zone shall be an overlay zoning district subject to the provisions and requirements contained in Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes and within the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme.  The Incentive Housing Zone shall consist of four subzones designated as follows:   
 – Midway; 
– Niantic Village, three sites. 
The location and extent of each subzone is defined on the zoning map of the Town of East Lyme.  The Zoning Commission may, at a future date, consider reducing or adding to the number of subzones.   
33.4 APPLICABILITY: 



Where the general provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme conflict with the specific provisions of Section 33, Incentive Housing Zone, the permitted uses, requirements, and standards contained in Section 33 shall apply. 
33.5 DEFINITIONS: 



Following are definitions of terms related specifically to the Incentive Housing Zone.  Reference should be made to Section 1 of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme for definitions of other terms. 
33.5.1 AFFORDABLE HOUSING –  Housing that may be purchased or rented by 
households earning no more than eighty percent (80%) of the area’s median household income, as determined and reported by the U.S Department of Housing and Urban Development, and using no more than thirty percent (30%) of their annual income for housing costs. 
33.5.2 DEVELOPABLE LAND – The area within the boundaries of an approved 




Incentive Housing Zone that feasibly can be developed into residential or mixed uses consistent with the provisions of Sections 8-13m through 8-
13x of the Connecticut General Statutes.  Excluded from the area classified as developable land are the following: 
A. land already committed to a public use or purpose, whether publicly or privately owned;  

B. existing parks, recreation areas and open space dedicated to the public or subject to a recorded conservation easement;  

C. land otherwise subject to an enforceable restriction on or prohibition of development;  

D. wetlands or water courses as defined in Chapter 440 of the Connecticut General Statutes;  

E. areas exceeding one-half or more acres of contiguous land that are unsuitable for development due to topographic features, such as steep slopes. 

33.5.3 DWELLING TYPES  



A. Single-family dwelling – A detached building designed for or occupied by one family. 

B. Duplex (two-family dwelling) – A detached building designed for or occupied by two families. 

C. Townhouse – A residential building consisting of three or more attached units in which each unit shares with the adjacent unit(s) a wall which extends from foundation to roof and has exterior walls on at least two sides. 

D. Mixed-use dwelling – A building dedicated principally to a permitted non-residential use that also contains residential units. 

E. Multiple-family dwelling – A building designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently. 

33.5.4 ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD – A household whose annual income is at or  




 below eighty percent (80%) of the area median income, as determined and reported by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  
33.5.5 INCENTIVE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT – A residential and mixed-use 




development located in an Incentive Housing Zone approved in accordance with Section 33 of these regulations. 
33.5.6 INCENTIVE HOUSING ZONE – A zone, or a series of subzones, adopted by the Zoning Commission pursuant to Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes as an overlay to one or more existing zoning districts under the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme, and situated in an eligible location. 
33.5.7 INCENTIVE HOUSING ZONE CERTIFICATE – A written certificate 



 issued by the Secretary of the Connecticut Office of Policy and Management in accordance with Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
33.5.8 INCENTIVE HOUSING RESTRICTION – A deed restriction, covenant 




  or site plan approval condition constituting a binding obligation with respect to the restrictions on household income, sale or resale price, rent and housing costs required by Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and Section 33 of the Town of East Lyme Zoning Regulations. 
33.5.9 INCENTIVE HOUSING UNIT – A dwelling unit within an Incentive 




 Housing Development that is subject to incentive housing restrictions. 
33.5.10 MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT – A development consisting of one or 




  more multi-family or single-family dwelling units and one or more commercial, public, institutional, retail or office uses. 
33.6 PERMITTED USES: 
Subject to approval by the Zoning Commission of a site plan for any proposed incentive housing development, the following uses shall be permitted within all subzones of the Incentive Housing Zone. 
A. Single-family detached dwellings;  

B. Duplex (two-family) dwellings; 

C. Townhouses; 

D. Multi-family dwellings. 



33.7 MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT: 
Mixed-use development shall be required within Incentive Housing Zones. 
Non-residential uses permitted as-of-right or by approved site plan in the underlying zoning district of any Incentive Housing Subzone shall be permitted, subject to the determination by the Zoning Commission that such uses are compatible with the character of the neighborhood.  Additionally, other non-residential uses, as allowed in the underlying zone, shall be permitted. 
The Commission may allow by an approved site plan uses otherwise permitted by right or by site plan in the underlying zoning district, provided that the minimum residential densities are met for the total incentive housing development.  Bulk requirements for stand-alone non-residential uses in an incentive housing development shall be in accordance with the requirements of the underlying zoning district.  The first floor shall be limited to non-residential uses. 
33.8 LOCATION: 



33.8.1  DEVELOPMENT ON NON-CONTIGUOUS PARCELS – The dwelling units within an incentive housing development need not be located on contiguous parcels but shall be identified within a single integrated development plan.  This requirement shall apply even if the incentive housing development is to be constructed in phases. 
33.8.2 SUBDIVISION APPROVAL – Different housing types within an incentive housing development may be located on the same lot or on different lots.  If lots are to be subdivided, the approval of an incentive 
housing development is subject to prior subdivision approval by the East Lyme Planning Commission. 
If the Zoning Commission adopts a regulation for an Incentive Housing Zone that permits single-family detached homes on subdivided lots, requiring subdivision approval under the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of East Lyme, the Zoning Commission shall make a written finding that the applicability of such Subdivision Regulations shall not unreasonably impair the economic or physical feasibility of constructing housing at minimum densities and subject to an incentive housing restriction as required by Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes.   
If housing on subdivided lots is proposed in an Incentive Housing Zone, the Zoning Commission shall use its best efforts to encourage the Planning Commission to adopt subdivision standards that will ensure consistency of the single-family detached housing with the purposes of Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
33.9 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS: 



33.9.1 GENERAL – As provided in Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Zoning Commission may modify, waive or delete dimensional standards contained in the zone or zones that underlie an Incentive Housing Zone in order to support the minimum or desired densities, mix of uses or physical compatibility in the incentive housing zone. Standards subject to modification, waiver or deletion include, but shall not be limited to: building height, setbacks, lot coverage, parking ratios and road design standards. 
If an incentive housing development is to be developed in phases, each phase shall comply with the minimum residential densities and the incentive housing restrictions set forth in this subsection. 
33.9.2  MIMINUM DENSITY – The following densities for incentive housing development shall be based on developable land, as defined in Section 8-13m(3) of the Connecticut General Statutes and Subsection 33.5.2 of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme. 
The minimum allowable density for incentive housing development, per acre of developable land, shall be: 
A. six (6) units per acre for single-family detached housing; 

B. ten (10) units per acre for duplex or townhouse housing; 

C. twenty (20) units per acre for multi-family housing. 


The town may request a waiver of the above density requirements of this subsection, as authorized in Section 8-13n(3) of the Connecticut General Statutes, and the Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management may grant a waiver, if the town demonstrates in the application that the land to be zoned for incentive housing development is owned or controlled by the town itself, an agency thereof, or a land trust, housing trust fund or a nonprofit housing agency or corporation.  In such case, one hundred percent (100%) of the proposed residential units will be subject to an 
incentive housing restriction, and the proposed Incentive Housing Zone will otherwise satisfy the requirements of Sections 8-13m through 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes and Section 33 of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme. 
33.9.3 FRONTAGE – Each lot shall have not less than 50 feet of frontage on an 




  approved street. 
33.9.4 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH ALONG BUILDING LINE – The width of 




 each lot at the building line shall not be less than 50 feet unless a lesser width is permitted in the underlying district. 
33.9.5 COVERAGE, SETBACK, AND HEIGHT – The provisions of the underlying zone shall determine the coverage, setback, and height requirements within an Incentive Housing Zone 
33.9.6  MODIFICATIONS, WAIVERS OR DELETIONS – In accordance with Section 8-13n(7)(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Zoning Commission may, on a case-by-case basis, modify, waive or delete dimensional standards contained in the zone or zones that underlie an Incentive Housing Zone in order to support the minimum or desired densities, mix of uses or physical compatibility in the incentive housing zone.  Standards subject to modification, waiver or deletion include, but shall not be limited to, building height, setbacks, lot coverage, parking ratios and road design standards. 
33.10   ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN: 
   No site plan required under these Regulations shall be approved nor shall any structure be constructed or exterior renovations or substantial improvement to an existing structure in the Incentive Housing Zone be permitted until the Zoning Commission has determined that the overall architectural character of the proposed site and building design is in harmony with the neighborhood in which such activity is taking place, or accomplishes a transition in character between areas of unlike character; protects property values in the neighborhood, and preserves and enhances the beauty of the community, its historical integrity and architecture.  The applicant shall provide adequate information to enable the Commission to make that determination, including architectural plans of all buildings, other structures and signs.  Such plans shall include preliminary floor plans and elevations showing height and bulk, roof lines, door and window details, exterior building materials, color and exterior lighting.  Site plans shall show paving materials, landscaping, fencing, lighting design and other features of the site and buildings which are visible from the exterior of any building on the site or from adjacent properties or streets and which may impact on the character or quality of life of adjoining properties and throughout the Incentive Housing Zone.  Design review requirements shall apply to all structures, exterior renovations, and substantial improvements within the Incentive Housing Zone. 
 
33.11 OPEN SPACE: 
 Where deemed necessary and desirable, the Zoning Commission may require the  
provision of reserved open space in any incentive housing development.  Land so reserved shall be of such size, location, shape, topography and general character as to satisfy the need for open space as determined by the Commission. 
Open space reserved under this regulation may be used to protect natural resources, to enhance neighborhood character, to preserve or enhance historical or cultural resources or to provide both active or passive recreational opportunities. 
Where the Commission has determined the desirability of open space reservation within an incentive housing development, such reservation, typically, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total land area of such development and, typically, shall contain not less than one acre of contiguous land, as determined by the Zoning Commission. 
Open space reserved under this regulation shall be permanently reserved for the intended use(s) by means acceptable to the Commission. 
33.12  INCENTIVE HOUSING RESTRICTION: 
33.12.1  PRIVATE APPLICANT FOR INCENTIVE HOUSING 
  DEVELOPMENT – In the case of an incentive housing development proposed by a private applicant, at least twenty percent (20%) of the dwelling units shall be rented or conveyed subject to an incentive housing restriction requiring that, for at least thirty (30) years after the initial occupancy of the development, the dwelling units will be sold or rented at or below prices that will preserve the units for housing for which persons pay thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual income, where that income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median household income, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  In determining compliance with this subsection, the Zoning Commission will utilize regulations or guidelines published by the Connecticut Office of Policy and Management or any other successor agency designated in accordance with Sections 8-13m – 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
33.12.2   PUBLIC APPLICANT FOR INCENTIVE HOUSING 
 DEVELOPMENT – In the case of an incentive housing development proposed by a public applicant, one hundred percent (100%) of the dwelling units shall be rented or conveyed subject to an incentive housing restriction requiring that, for at least thirty (30) years after the initial occupancy of the development, the dwelling units will be sold or rented at or below prices that will preserve the units for housing for which persons pay thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual income, where that income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median household income, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  In determining compliance with this subsection, the Zoning Commission will utilize regulations or guidelines published by the Connecticut Office of Policy and Management or any 
other successor agency designated in accordance with Sections 8-13m – 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
  33.12.3   SUBMISSION OF AFFORDABILITY PLAN – Each applicant for an 
 incentive housing development shall provide an affordability plan that details the administration, monitoring and enforcement of the dwelling units to be rented or conveyed under the requirements set forth in Sections 33.12.1 and 33.12.2 of these regulations.  The affordability plan shall include proposed deed restrictions or covenants, lease agreements, common interest ownership documents, bylaws, rules and regulations, sample income calculations, and such other information as the Zoning Commission may require to establish compliance with Section 33 of the Zoning Regulations of East Lyme and Sections 8-13m – 8-13x of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
33.12.4   DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTERING AGENCY – The applicant 
 shall identify the name, address and other contact information for the agency that will administer the sale or rental of dwelling units that are subject to the below-market sale or rental under Section 33 of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme. 
33.13 METHODS OF OWNERSHIP: 33.13.1  DWELLING UNITS – Dwelling units may be offered for sale or for 






  rental in individual, public, cooperative or condominium ownership.  Documentation of the management, organization and incorporation of applicable ownership associations shall be submitted at the time an application for an incentive housing development is filed with the Zoning Commission. 
33.13.2 OPEN SPACE – All open space or supporting facilities and systems shall be in compliance with applicable law and provide for maintenance, liability, financing, and the rights of access and use by residents of the incentive housing development.  Open space areas shall be permanently reserved for the dedicated use(s) by means acceptable to and approved by the Zoning Commission.  The permanent reservation of open space may be achieved through, but is not limited to, the following: 



A. deeded to the Town of East Lyme; 

B. deeded to a non-profit organization acceptable to the Commission; 

C. held in corporate ownership by owners of the lots within the 

D. development; 

E. perpetual easement. 33.13.3 CONDITIONS OF OPEN SPACE CONVEYANCE – Title to the open space shall be unencumbered and shall be transferred at a time approved by the Zoning Commission.  Such transfer shall occur not 






later than the time at which title to the streets in the incentive housing development is accepted by the Town of East Lyme. 

33.13.4  DEED GUARANTEE – Regardless of the method employed, the 




 instrument of the open space conveyance must include provisions acceptable to the Zoning Commission and its legal counsel for guaranteeing the following: 
A. Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the common open space land and facilities requiring maintenance. 

B. When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance. 

C. Recovery of loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise. 


33.14  INCENTIVE HOUSING APPLICATION FEES – In addition to any fees required under the Zoning Regulations of the Town of East Lyme, the Zoning Commission, in accordance with Section 8-13t of the Connecticut General Statutes, may require the applicant for an incentive housing development approval to pay for the cost of reasonable consulting fees for the peer review of the technical aspects of the application for the benefit of the Zoning Commission. 


APPENDIX B 
 
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN  
REVIEW GUIDELINES 
CB COMMERCIAL ZONE 
NIANTIC VILLAGE 
 
Introduction 
Niantic is a traditional New England Village within the Community of East Lyme with unique qualities and a strong sense of place.  It has small and cohesive neighborhoods; a vibrant main street; extensive waterfront with marinas, beaches and a public walkway which promotes extensive pedestrian access along Niantic Bay.  The village center has historically functioned as the social, civic and commercial center of the community. 
These characteristics in themselves constitute a sense of place which contributes to the high quality of livability of the village.  A physically and aesthetically enhanced village also typically results in increased property values.  These values ultimately reflect on the degree of a place’s desirability. 
Purpose 
The purpose of these Architectural Guidelines is to provide a framework for design that draws inspiration from the traditions of Niantic and similarly situated New England Seacoast communities.  They promote safe, functional and attractive development of the village district, enhance the public experience, and grow and protect the commercial property values by beautifying the communities’ appearance.  These design standards establish guidelines for new or renovated commercial buildings that will preserve and augment the New England Character of the Niantic Village.   
Architectural Design 
 Design: New buildings and renovations should be designed to fit the specific characteristics of their particular site.  The architecture should be influenced by traditional New England building forms and town making patterns, the specific needs of the intended users, the nature of the intended use and other site specific factors.  All buildings shall follow fundamental architectural principles of scale, massing and appropriate detail, and special attention will be paid to the essential elements of building design.  These elements include, but are not limited to: foundations; windows, doors and shutters; porches, stoops, entries and railings; siding and trim; roofs and dormers; and appurtenances such as: chimneys, gutters and downspouts, columns, vents, exterior lighting and building identification. 
The overall architectural character of any proposed building design should be in harmony with the neighborhood in which such activity is taking place, or accomplish as a transition in character between areas of unlike character, protects property values in the neighborhood and preserves and enhances the beauty of the community, its integrity and architecture. 
Human Scale 
Buildings and site elements should be designed to human scale.  The forms, massing and openings of buildings should be proportional to the size of a human figure.  Many architectural elements can add scale to a building – watertables, planters, recessed openings, divided pane windows, building mounted light fixtures, dormers, cupolas, projecting rooflines, covered walkways, colonnades, and similar features – provided they are designed as integral parts of the overall structure. 
Freestanding Accessory Structures 
Where freestanding non-habitable structures are allowed (e.g., ATMs, garages, service stations, canopies, storage units, recycling sheds, trash enclosures, cart corrals, utility buildings) they should meet the same design standards as the principal building through repetition of architectural forms, materials, colors and detailing. 
Guide Line Criteria The following criteria should be considered in all the designs.  Designs should be in keeping with the architectural fabric of the CB zone and Niantic Village.   
 
Design Guidelines 
 
Design, Massing, Scale & Proportions 

 
A good example of an active commercial block- visually, interesting, balanced, modest in scale with many architectural elements. 

Building design should incorporate features that add visual interest to the building while reducing the appearance of bulk or mass. Buildings should avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roofs on their visible facades. They also should avoid long expanses of repetitive architectural elements. Whether symmetrical or asymmetrical, the buildings’ facades should be balanced in their composition. 
 

With the objective of maintaining a small-town character, buildings should appear to be modest in scale, relating to the scale of the immediate surroundings. The massing of larger commercial buildings should be deemphasized by the use of projecting and recessed sections, to reduce their apparent overall bulk.  
 
An example of a balanced and well-proportioned building. 

The mass of buildings can be reduced by further introducing small-scale architectural features.  The use of shutters, columns, and chimneys on building elevations and similar features help to establish a human scale at the street level. 
 
 
 
 
Architectural Style and Detail 

 
Buildings may be either traditional in their architectural character or a contemporary expression of traditional styles and forms  
 
 

Buildings should articulate the line between the ground and upper levels with a cornice, canopy, balcony, arcade or other architectural features. The cornice and/or parapet is an area where architectural detail and materials are important, as they can add distinctiveness and visual emphasis to a building, but they should be consistent with the body of the design in scale and detail. 
Cupola. 
 
 
Visually appealing façade in the Greek revival architectural style. 


Visually interesting roof of a commercial building. 

The use of special architectural elements, such as but not limited to towers & turrets, muntins & window shutters, chimneys and dormers etc., is encouraged at major street corners to accent structures and provide visual interest.  
 
Storefront 

 
Well-designed storefronts add vitality to the streetscape, encouraging pedestrian as well as vehicular traffic. Retail storefronts should make generous use of glass, face the street or sidewalk and not be obstructed by piers or other features that block view of the display windows. Carefully designed awnings coupled with appropriately scaled signage and lighting will further enhance the storefront’s appearance. 
 
 

Roof Types 
It is characteristic of traditional New England architecture that smaller-scaled structures have roofs that are sloped and articulated with dormers, chimneys, gables, cupolas, fascias etc.  
Vertically-aligned windows and entrances. 

Larger structures likewise can benefit from similar treatment that breaks up the massing into appropriately scaled elements. Avoid large flat-roofed areas, or conceal them behind parapets or sections of sloped roof. 

 
Windows 

Fenestration (arrangement of windows on the wall) should be architecturally related to the style, materials, colors, and details of the building. Windows and door openings should be proportioned so that verticals dominate horizontals. To the extent possible, upper-story windows shall be vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level, including storefront or display windows. 
 
Upper stories should incorporate window patterns  
and designs that are compatible with and  

complimentary to existing upper-story  

window patterns on the block. 
 
Window with muntins. 

First-floor window and display design should create a feeling of transparency on the ground floor of the building. This contributes to a sense of safety and is welcoming to pedestrians. The viewing zone of the first floor façade should be made up of approximately 75% transparent non-reflective glass. Window displays are encouraged, but visibility into the building from the sidewalk should be maintained. 
Window with shutters. 

 
With the exception of retail storefronts, modestly scaled, vertically proportioned windows articulated with muntins (dividers of panes of glass) are most appropriate to the local building vernacular. Shutters are also an enhancement.  
 
Entrances 

 

Architectural detail should be incorporated into the ground-floor façade to create an easily identifiable and welcoming entrance. As one of the most important parts of the facade, the main entrance should be easily identifiable. Doors and entryways should follow a traditional storefront design (usually recessed) and should be compatible with the architectural style of the structure. The entrances should also address the primary street or pedestrian pathway.  
Greek revival entrance. 

 

When rear parking is provided, the provision of secondary rear entrances and pleasing rear facades is strongly encouraged. The design of the rear entrances and facades should be appropriately detailed to provide an attractive appearance, but should not be overly embellished to compete with the main storefront. 
Victorian era entrance. 

 
er building with attractive entrances and windows facing both major streets. 

Where a new building is to be located on a corner, each side visible from a street should be considered a primary storefront façade and incorporate these fenestration patterns, unless doing so would unduly obtrude into a primarily residential street. 
 
Materials and Colors 

 

 
The town strongly prefers authentic natural materials such as wood, brick, and stone for the exterior of structures and landscape features. Construct windows, storefronts and public doorways of wood where possible. Synthetic materials should be as close in appearance and detail to the natural material it simulates.  

All sides of the building should use materials consistent with those on the front if visible from public streets or neighboring properties, and should be carefully designed with similar detailing, comparable quality, and compatible materials. 
Awnings 

Awnings that are functional for shade and shelter are encouraged. These awnings should be made of canvas or a canvas-like material should fit the shape and scale of the window or door they are sheltering, and should be designed to be compatible with and complimentary to building signage and design. Awnings should break at the vertical divisions of the structure (i.e., the break between the display windows and the entrance). 

The color and pattern of awnings affect the entire building and therefore should be carefully chosen. A facade with minimal architectural detailing can be enhanced with bright colors and patterns, while a more decorated facade may be complemented with a plain, subtle shade. The shape of awnings should be designed to fit the building’s architecture and relate to other awnings that exist along the street.  Traditional retractable awning styles are encouraged. 

Other Elements That Add to New England Heritage: 
 
Shade Trees 
 
Trees are an important element of landscape design.  The inclusion of shade trees in site design is encouraged.  Shade trees provide an aesthetic value as well as a functional purpose to Niantic village.  Shade trees are large deciduous trees with spreading canopies, with the most popular being oaks, maples, ashes, elms, and lindens. In addition to aesthetic qualities and commercial appeal of these trees, they also have more practical benefits such as reducing heating and cooling costs, reducing heat reflected from paved areas, converting carbon dioxide to oxygen, helping prevent soil erosion, increasing property value and much more. Therefore, preservation and protection of old shade trees as well as planting new ones is strongly encouraged.  
 
Plantings/Landscaping 
Thoughtfully designed landscaping appropriate to the context of a small New England town should include the careful use of stone walls, wood fencing, paving materials and plantings. These features can tie a structure to its landscape, define spaces and make for a pleasant pedestrian experience. Preserve mature plantings, stone walls and other historic features where possible and minimize modifications to the natural topography of the site.  
 
Lighting 

The exterior lighting scheme is important to the success of a storefront design. Lighting that highlights the sign and display area is often more effective than general lighting of the entire store. When a larger building has a number of storefronts, exterior lighting should be coordinated. Energy efficient lighting is also encouraged. East Lyme encourages energy conservation through the use of energy efficient bulbs and the elimination of extraneous light that can spill offsite or cause glare. Select pedestrian-scaled light fixtures appropriate to building type and location. Avoid the use of floodlighting, wall packs, and tall light posts intended for lighting large areas. 

 
Signage 
In buildings with multiple storefronts, a coordinated approach to signage throughout the building is particularly important. Use signs of similar size, proportion, and materials on each store. Varying the color of individual signs can add variety. 

Signage should be appropriately scaled to the building or surface onto which it is placed, should not obscure important architectural features. East Lyme has comprehensive signage regulations (see Section 18 of the Zoning Regulations), which provide further detailed requirements. 
 
In addition to all other requirements of the Zoning Regulations, the applicant for all buildings or structures and subject to these guidelines, should submit scaled elevation drawings of the proposed structures for a design review. The scale of such drawings should not be smaller than one-eighth inch equals one foot (1/8”=1’-0”). The drawings should locate and identify exterior materials, fixtures, roof pitch, and building or structure height and include dimensions and architectural characteristics. 
Pictured below are examples of types of Architecture that are discouraged. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Modification 
 
Substantial changes to the proposal after approval should be reviewed by the commission if the application was a special permit or formal site plan approved by the commission.  Minor changes that would not materially affect the applicant’s compliance with any of the criteria may be reviewed by the Zoning Official. 
 Special Criteria for Exterior Renovations and Substantial Improvement of Existing Buildings: 
In addition to the above criteria, exterior renovation or substantial improvement of a building or structure visible from a public street or from navigable waters should adhere to the following criteria. 
 
The removal or alternation of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided unless the alteration is a positive improvement to the renovation.  The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building or structure, its site, and its environment should not be destroyed. 
 
All buildings, structures, and sites should be recognized as products of their own time. Renovations should generally be compatible with the existing structure or buildings on-site, but renovations that have no historical character and which seek to create an inappropriate appearance are discouraged. 
 
Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history and development of a building, structure, its site and its environment. These changes may 
have acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected. 
 
 
Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterizes a building, structure, or site should be treated with sensitivity. 
 
Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired or replaced to the extent possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, texture and other visual qualities when feasible. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
 
Renovations and additions which destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural characteristics are discouraged. 
 
Designs should generally be compatible with the size, scale, material, and character of the original structure. 
 
Whenever possible, new additions or renovations to buildings and structures should be done in such a manner that if such additions or renovations were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would be unimpaired. 
 
Vocabulary 
. Arcade: A range of arches supported on piers or columns attached to or detached from the wall. 
. Awning: A roof-like cover extending over or in front of a storefront (as over the deck or in front of a door and/or window) as a shelter. 
. Bay: A main division of a structure. A regularly repeated unit on a building elevation defined by columns, pilasters, or other vertical elements, or defined by a given number of windows or openings. 
. Bay window: A window or series of windows forming a bay in a room and projecting outward from the wall. 
. Blank Wall: An exterior building wall with no openings and generally constructed of a single material, uniform texture, and on a single plane. 
. Brackets: Ornamental pieces placed under eaves, cornices, window sills, etc., which appear to provide structural support. 
. Bulkhead: A vertical partition separating compartments. 
. Canopy: An ornamental projection, over a door, window, niche, etc. 
. Clerestory: An outside wall of a room or building that rises above an adjoining roof and contains windows. 
. Column: A supporting post--often round in shape--found on storefronts, porches, and balconies; may be fluted or smooth. 
. Corner block: A square, relatively flat block of wood, often decoratively carved, placed at the upper corners on each side of the wood framing around a door. 
. Cornice: The projecting uppermost portion of a wall, sometimes treated in a decorative manner with brackets. 
. Cupola: A small roof tower, usually rising from the roof ridge. 
. Dormer: A window set vertically in a structure projecting from a sloping roof. 
. Eave: The part of the roof which extends beyond the side wall. 
. Façade: The face of a building, especially the principal face. 
. Fascia: Any relatively broad, flat, horizontal surface, as the outer edge of a cornice, a stringcourse, etc. 
. Fenestration: The arrangement of windows and other openings in a wall. 
. Frieze: The portion of the facade found just below the point where the wall surface meets the building's cornice or roof overhang. 
. Front Lot-Line: On a regular lot, the front lot line is the shared line between the lot and a sidewalk/public right-of-way. 
. Gambrel: A roof having two slopes on each side of the peak, the lower slope usually steeper than the upper one. 
. Gable: The vertical triangular wall between the sloping ends of gable roof. 
. Gable Roof: A roof that consists of two sloping planes that meet at the ridge or peak. The planes are supported at their ends by triangular, upward extensions of walls known as gables. 
. Hipped Roof: A roof with four sloped sides. 
. Mansard Roof: A roof that has two slopes on all four sides. 
. Massing of the Building(s): The combined effect of the arrangement, volume and shape of a building or group of buildings. Also called bulk. 
. Muntin (or Window Bar) – A short bar used to separate glass in a sash into multiple lights. Also called a windowpane divider or a grille. 
. Parapet: The portion of an exterior wall that rises entirely above the roof, usually in the form of a low retaining wall; the parapet may be shaped or stepped. 
. Pediment: A low triangular gable above a cornice, topped by raking cornices and ornamented. 
. Pilaster: A column partially embedded in a wall, usually non-structural and often decorated to resemble a classical column. 
. Public Right-of-Way: Includes the street, curb and sidewalk area in front of private property at the front lot line. 
. Quoin: Corner treatment for exterior walls, either in masonry or frame buildings. 
. Roof: Flat or Pitched. Pitched roofs can be: Hip, Mansard, Gambrel, Gable, and more. 
. Sash: (Window Sash) Framework of stiles and rails in which the lights of a window are set. 
. Scale: A relative level or degree; to make in accordance with a particular proportion or scale with the surrounding architecture. 
. Setback: An architectural expedient in which the upper stories of a tall building are stepped back  from the lower stories; designed to permit more light to reach the street. 
. Shingles: Thin pieces of wood or other material set in overlapping rows to form a roof or wall cladding. 
. Side light: A framed area of fixed glass alongside a door or window opening. 
. Storefront: The front side of a store or store building facing a street 
. Texture: The visual or tactile surface characteristics and appearance of a building 
. Transom: A small-hinged window above a door or another window. 
. Transparent Glass: Degree of Tinting: Capable of transmitting light so that objects may be easily seen on the other side. 
. Turrets: A small tower that projects from the wall of a building, such as a medieval castle or baronial house. A building may have both towers and turrets; turrets might be smaller or higher but the difference is generally considered to be that a turret projects from the edge of the building, rather than continuing to the ground. 
. Type A buildings: buildings originally built for commercial uses and constructed at the sidewalk edge which include commercial uses at the first floor area. 
. Type B buildings: buildings of residential character which are now at least partially used for commercial purposes. These buildings, which often occur at the edge of the commercial district, are typically set back from the street line and incorporate landscaped front yard. 
. Valance: A short drapery, decorative board, or metal strip mounted across the bottom of an awning to con- 
 
 

APPENDIX B 
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN (CB COMMERCIAL ZONE) 
NIANTIC VILLAGE


REVISION RECORD 
 
# 
 Section 
 Description 
 Date 
 
1 
 18 
 Complete rewrite of sign regulations 
 10/10/91 
 
2 
 21.1.6 
 Additions to single family nonconforming dwellings CB zones 
 12/12/91 
 
3 
 20.20.6 
 Liquor for standard restaurant 
 12/27/91 
 
 
 20.20.7 
 Proximity to place of worship 
 12/27/91 
 
4 
 1.62 
 Definition Small Animal Veterinary Clinic 
 12/27/91 
 
 
 8.2.9 
 Small Animal Veterinary Clinic 
 12/27/91 
 
 
 9.2.6 
 Small Animal Veterinary Clinic 
 12/27/91 
 
5 
 20.1.2-A 
 Cemeteries 
 11/28/92 
 
6 
 25.5 
 Cemetery controls 
 9/25/92 
 
7 
 1.10.1 
 Definitions – Cemeteries 
 11/28/92 
 
8 
 23 
 Open Space Cluster Development 
 11/28/92 
 
9 
 18.1.10 
 Open Flags 
 1/7/93 
 
10 
 20.20.7 
 Liquor Proximity to places of worship (Reduction 500 Ft to 200 Ft) 
 6/16/93 
 
11 
 8.2.10 
 Car Wash 
 7/1/93 
 
12 
 21.1.7 
 Gasoline Service Stations 
 3/26/94 
 
13 
 4.3.4 
 Lot Coverage RU 
  
 
14 
 25.5.2 
 (Add)  Amendment to Special Permit  - Elderly Housing SU zone 
 11/10/94 
 
 
 25.5.8 
 (New) Controls for Elderly Housing (SU zone) 
 11/10/94 
 
 
 25.5.9 
 (New) Internal Roadways (SU zone) 
 11/10/94 
 
15 
 25.5 
 Yacht clubs / Special Permit minimum controls 1,2 and 3 
 12/16/94 
 

16 
 8.2.11 
 CA Commercial District Parking Lots 
 12/16/94 
 
 
 9.2.7 
 CB Commercial District Parking Lots 
 12/16/94 
 
 
 1.40a 
 Definitions – Parking Lots 
 12/16/94 
 
17 
 22.5 
 Shared Parking CA and CB Commercial Districts 
 2/9/95 
 
18 
 20.1.3 
 Temporary Activities 
 7/10/95 
 
19 
 15 
 Flood Hazard (update) 
 8/9/95 
 
20 
 1.49 
 Definition – Standard Restaurant 
 9/1/95 
 
21 
 24.1 
 Site Plan Exemptions 
 6/28/96 
 
 
 24.1.4 
 Parking Spaces from 9 to 12 as waived by the Commission 
  
 
22 
 8.1.8.1 
 Child Care Center 
 5/13/96 
 
23 
 24 
 Site Plan Review requirements 
 12/11/96 
 
24 
 1.44a 
 Definition – Paving 
 12/11/96 
 
25 
 25.4.3-1A 
 Posting of Special Permit Application Sign 
 9/8/97 
 
26 
 20.20.6 
 Liquor for Standard Restaurants  
 9/19/97 
 
27 
  
 Note sections renumbered as appropriate 
  
 
 
 1.5 
 DELETE – Definition – Boarding House 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 1.58 
 DELETE – Definition – Tourist Home 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 3.2.1 
 DELETE – Hotel &Motel 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 3.2.1 
 ADD – Bed and Breakfast (New permitted use) 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 3.2.2 
 Delete – Tourist Home 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 4.2.2 
 Delete – Hotel and Motel 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 4.2.2 
 ADD – Bed and Breakfast (New permitted Use) 
 3/13/98 
 

 
 6 
 General Description and purpose (modified) 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 7.2.1 
 ADD – Bed and Breakfast (New permitted use) 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 8.1.4 
 DELETE – Boarding House, ADD – Inn 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 9/1/8 
 DELETE – Boarding House, ADD – Inn 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 10.2.4 
 ADD – Bed and Breakfast 
 3/13/98 
 
 
 25.5 
 Table of Minimum Controls for Special Permit 
 3/13/98 
 
28 
 22.1.3 
 Multi Family/ Parking increase CB Zones 
 11/17/98 
 
29 
 20.25 
 “ Temporary Water Moratorium” 
 12/11/98 
 
30 
 18.1.10 
 Sign Code, to permit “Community Bulletin Boards” 
 12/11/98 
 
31 
 11 
 Light Industrial District, to permit motor vehicle repairers stations as a use 
 12/11/98 
 
32 
 12.1.3 
 Elderly Housing: Modify minimum age requirement from 62 years of age to 55 years of age. 
 1/13/99 
 
 
 25.5 
 Table of Minimum Controls Elderly Housing CA & SU Zones 
 1/13/99 
 
33 
 12A 
 Special Permit Uses Elderly Housing create new Special Use District 
 6/25/99 
 
 
 25.5 
 Table of minimum controls: SU-E Special Permit 
 6/25/99 
 
34 
 2A 
 Greenway Conservation District Regulations  
 10/12/01 
 
34a 
 23 
 Open Space Cluster Development Regulations; Modify development standards and controls 
 8/11/99 
 
35 
 1.38 
 Definition of LOT SIZE 
 8/11/99 
 

36 
 1.21 
 Assisted Living 
 8/14/99 
 
37 
 20.13 
 General Regulations, Setback requirements for each Building 
 9/15/99 
 
 
 24.6.E.3 
 Site Plan Review, Standards, Buffer Strip 
 9/15/99 
 
38 
 22.6 
 (New) Areas of exemption from parking requirements. 
 10/15/99 
 
39 
 20.18.1 
 (New) Commercial Zones (Decks-eliminate side yards) 
 1/12/2000 
 
40 
 20.25 
 Temporary Water Moratorium (Change date to July 1st, 2000) 
 2/16/2000 
 
41 
 18.1.5.1 
 Theater Marquee Signs 
 4/19/2000 
 
42 
 28 
 Amendments to Zoning Regulations and Zoning District Map 
 7/21/2000 
 
43 
 20.26 
 Restaurant or food service establishment with Drive-through facility 
 7/21/2000 
 
44 
 20.17 
 Recreational Trailers – Mobil Homes, occupancy 
 1/15/2001 
 
45 
 11A 
 (New Zone) Gateway Planned Development District 
 3/13/2001 
 
46 
 8.3.5 
 Height 
 3/30/2001 
 
 
  
  
  
 
47 
 31 
 New Section: Telecommunication Facilities 
 9/14/2001 
 
48 
 21.1.8 
 Change in Use 
 11/09/2001 
 
49 
 18.1.5.2 
 Pre-existing Nonconforming Free Standing Signs 
 12/14/2001 
 
50 
 1.3 and 20.8 
 Back lots 
 8/8/2002 
 
51 
 20.20.7 and 20.20.8 
 Grocery Beer 
 8/8/2002 
 
52 
 SU-E  12A.2.1, 12A.2.2, 12A.2.3 and add 12A.3.2c 
 Amend Lot Size, Frontage, Setbacks and Required Document filing 
 6/13/2003 
 

53 
 24.5.2c and 25.4.1.1 
 Add Architectural Design review 
 6/13/2003 
 
54 
 32 
 (New Section) Affordable Housing 
 8/15/2003 
 
55 
 18 & 8.2.2, 9.2.3 
 Signs (Permit Suspended signs) 
 4/11/04 
 
56 
 21.1.9 
 (New Section) Reconstruction of existing residential structures” 
 6/12/2004 
 
57 
 12 & 25.5 
 Accessory Residential Use – Golf Course 
 9/24/04 
 
58 
 12A 
 Parcels of 300 Acres or More, Residential Use SU-E 
 10/29/04 
 
59 
 25.5 
 SU & SU-E Open Space 
 5/13/05 
 
60 
 9.3.3 
 Setback (Niantic Main Street) 
 6/24/05 
 
61 
 12.1 
 Non-Profit Subsidized Elderly Housing 
 3/16/06 
 
62 
 1.48 
 Outdoor Dining/Patios 
 5/18/06 
 
63 
 1.4 
 Bed & Breakfast 
 5/18/06 
 
64 
 11.0 & 24.6 
 Light Industrial and Buffer 
 1/26/07 
 
65 
 20.28 & 9.3.5 
 Drive Thru Facilities & CB Height 
 2/1/2007 
 
66 
 8.2.12 & 25.5 
 Drive-thru 
 4/12/2007 
 
67 
 1.3.1, 8.1.6 & 20.26 
 Retail Bakeries 
 4/12/2007 
 
68 
 13.3 
 Prohibited uses 
 6/29/2007 
 
69 
 20.1 
 Government Buildings 
 2/7/2008 
 
70 
 25.5 
 Mixed Use Eliminate restriction 
 2/21/2008 
 
71 
 11.A.9 
 Gateway Planned Development MDP 
 3/6/2008 
 
72 
 9.2.5, 9.2.8, 25.5 
 Multi-family, multi-story,  
 1/30/2009 
 
73 
 20.27  
 Outdoor Dining in CB Zones add 13.1 Renewal  
 6/4/2009 
 
 
74 
 1.2.1, 1.17.1, 1.60.1, 1.60.2, 11.2.10 
 Adult Uses 
 7/9/2009 
 

75 
 25.5 
 Section 202 Housing 
 8/6/09 
 
76 
 1.1,9.2.3,25.5 
 Multi Use 
 12/3/09 
 
77 
 24.0 
 Site Plan Regulations 
 1/21/2010 
 
78 
 20.27 
 Outdoor Dining CA 
 6/18/2010 
 
79 
 20.17.2 
 Agricultural Farm Store (Accessory Use) 
 07/08/2010 
 
80 
 33.0 – 33.14 
 Incentive Housing Zones 
 11/25/2010 
 
81 
 1.38 and 23 
 Cluster/Conservation by Design 
 12/17/2010 
 
82 
 20.27 
 Outdoor Dining 
 5/5/2011 
 
83 
 15 
 FEMA 
 7/18/2011 
 
84 
 Appendix B 
 Architectural Review Guideline 
 10/6/2011 
 
85 
 18 
 Sign Regulations 
 12/9/2011 
 
86 
 20.27 #2 
 Outdoor Dining 
 7/12/2012 
 
87 
 32 
 Affordable Housing District 
 12/14/2012 
 
88 
 9/25.5 
 Assisted Living Facility 
 4/12/2013 
 
89 
 13/30 
 Removal of Aquifer Sections 
 6/28/2013 
 
90 
 22 
 Parking Regulations 
 7/11/2013 
 
91 
 15 
 Flood Hazard Areas 
 7/11/2013 
 
92 
 4, 25.5 
 Chickens, less than 6 
 8/8/2013 
 
93 
 11.A.9.2.2 
 Gateway Residential Units 
 11/22/2013 
 
94 
 20.27 
 Outdoor Dining 
 6/13/2014 
 
95 
 20.29 
 Cluster Setbacks 
 9/12/2014 
 
96 
 18 
 Community Bulletin Boards 
 9/12/2014 
 
97 
 20.20.3 
 Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 
 11/6/2014 
 
98 
  9.2.10, 20.20.8, 25.5 
 Taproom Brewery 
 7/9/2015 
 
99 
 11.A.9.2.2 (C) 
 Gateway Master Deveopment Plan 
 10/1/2015 
 

100 
  11.2.11, 22.1.7, 25.5 
 Brew Pub 
 10/1/2015 
 
101 
 1.7, 25.5 
 Bed & Breakfast 
 2/26/2016 
 
102 
 1.3.1 
 Anchor Store Definition Gateway District 
 4/1/2016 
 
 
103 
 1, 5.2.9, 25 
 Farm Events 
 4/15/2016 
 
 
104 
 25.3.3-1 
 Public Notice Signs 
 9/9/2016 
 
105 
 11.2.7 
 Remove “Convalescent Homes” 
 1/5/2017 
 
106 
 9.0, 9.1.0, 9.3.1 
 Single Family Dwelling 
 1/27/2017 
 
107 
 11 
 Motels/Hotels 
 3/2/2017 
 
108 
 8 
 CA Commercial  
 3/2/2017 
 
109 
 11.A 
 Gateway 
 11/16/2017 
 
110 
 8.2.2 
 CB Commercial Parking 
 5/17/2018 
 
111 
 18 
 Table 1.5B Amended 
 5/17/18 
 
112 
 11.2 
 Light Industrial – Dog Daycare/Training 
 5/17/18 
 
113 
 1.48.1, 8.2.16 
 Medical Marijuana Dispensary 
 1/17/19 
 
114 
 15.5.2 
 Floodplain Management 
 3/15/19 
 
115 
 25.5 
 CA Zone Elderly Housing Standards 
 5/24/19 
 

TOWN OF EAST LYME
Subdivision Regulations
Adopted: September 7, 1952
Revised Through: February 1, 2011
Effective: February 1, 2011
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
2
SECTION 1 - TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY ..............................................................9
1-1 TITLE .................................................................................................................................................................................. 9
1-2 PURPOSE.......................................................................................................................................................................... 9
1-3 AUTHORITY ..................................................................................................................................................................11
1-4 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS ....................................................................................................................11
1-5 CONFLICTS....................................................................................................................................................................11
1-6 SEPARABILITY.............................................................................................................................................................11
1-7 AMENDMENTS ............................................................................................................................................................11
1-8 DATE OF ENACTION ................................................................................................................................................11
1-9 EFFECTIVE DATE ........................................................................................................................................................11
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................................................12
2-1 USAGE..............................................................................................................................................................................12
2-2 WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED...........................................................................................................................12
SECTION 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS...................................................................................................................16
3-1 SUBDIVISION APPROVAL REQUIRED ...........................................................................................................16
3-2 DISCLOSURE OF BENEFICIARIES OF REAL PROPERTY HELD IN TRUST ....................................16
3-3 PROPOSALS FOR DEVELOPMENTS USING WATER................................................................................17
3-4 PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT .....................................................................................17
3-5 CONFORMITY WITH ZONING.............................................................................................................................17
3-6 CHANGES IN SUBDIVISION OR ZONING REGULATIONS....................................................................17
3-7 EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 30, 2007,.........................................................................................................................17
3-8 PRIVATE STREETS OR ROADWAYS (RESIDENTIAL) PROVISIONS..................................................17
3-8-1 Ownership....................................................................................................................................................................17
3-8-2 Maintenance and Repair .........................................................................................................................................18
3-8-3 Miscellaneous..............................................................................................................................................................18
3-8-4 Liability.........................................................................................................................................................................18
SECTION 4 – APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURE .................................................................................19
4-1 PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH PLAN...................................................................................................................19
4-2 APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS ..........................................................................................19
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
3
4-2-1 Application..................................................................................................................................................................19
4-2-2 Application Fee ..........................................................................................................................................................20
4-2-3 Design Reports ...........................................................................................................................................................20
4-2-4 Yield Plan .....................................................................................................................................................................22
4-2-5 Subdivision Plan........................................................................................................................................................22
4-2-6 Construction Plans ....................................................................................................................................................22
4-2-7 Grading Plan...............................................................................................................................................................22
4-2-8 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan....................................................................................................................22
4-2-9 Coastal Site Plan Review Application................................................................................................................22
4-2-10 Base Map ......................................................................................................................................................................23
4-2-11 Easements and Deeds ...............................................................................................................................................23
4-2-12 Bond or Cost Estimate..............................................................................................................................................23
4-2-13 Construction Sequence Report..............................................................................................................................23
4-2-14 State Highway Agreement .....................................................................................................................................23
4-2-15 Utility Permits and Agreements...........................................................................................................................23
4-2-16 Other Data and Information..................................................................................................................................23
4-3 NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS REQUIRMENTS..............................................................................23
4-3-1 General ..........................................................................................................................................................................23
4-4 PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION PLAN CONSIDERATION..................................................................23
4-4-1 General ..........................................................................................................................................................................23
4-4-2 Date of Receipt............................................................................................................................................................24
4-4-3 Hearing and Public Notice .....................................................................................................................................24
4-4-4 Decision.........................................................................................................................................................................25
4-4-5 Approval.......................................................................................................................................................................25
4-4-6 Conditional Approval..............................................................................................................................................26
4-4-7 Minutes .........................................................................................................................................................................26
4-4-8 Endorsement ...............................................................................................................................................................26
4-4-9 Filing and Recording................................................................................................................................................26
4-4-10 Revision to Construction Plans/As-Built Drawings.......................................................................................27
4-4-11 Certificate of Compliance........................................................................................................................................27
4-5 TIME LIMITATIONS..................................................................................................................................................27
4-5-1 Expiration of Subdivision Approval ...................................................................................................................27
4-5-2 Failure to Complete Improvements.....................................................................................................................28
4-6 WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION.....................................................................................................................28
4-7 REVISIONS TO LOT CONFIGURATION ..........................................................................................................28
4-8 SIMILAR APPLICATIONS.......................................................................................................................................29
4-9 INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS............................................................................................................................29
4-10 EXTENSIONS ................................................................................................................................................................29
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
4
4-11 SUBDIVISION STRADDLING MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES.....................................................................29
4-12 WAIVERS ........................................................................................................................................................................29
4-13 APPLICABLE COMMISSION / AGENCY REVIEWS .....................................................................................30
4-13-1 Inland Wetlands Agency.........................................................................................................................................30
4-13-2 Regional Planning Commission............................................................................................................................30
4-13-3 Environmental Review Team (ERT) Evaluation.............................................................................................31
SECTION 5 – REQUIRED MAPS AND PLANS ...........................................................................................................32
5-1 PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH PLAN...................................................................................................................32
5-2 SUBDIVISION PLAN .................................................................................................................................................33
5-2-1 Subdivision Plan Submission Requirements....................................................................................................33
5-2-2 Subdivision Plan Requirements............................................................................................................................33
(A) Site Context Map ...................................................................................................................................... 34
(B) Natural and Cultural Resources and Site Analysis Plan............................................................. 34
(C) Resource Impact and Conservation Plan......................................................................................... 36
(D) Subdivision Improvements Plan/Construction Plan.................................................................... 36
(E) Stormwater Management Plan............................................................................................................ 40
(F) Grading Plan.............................................................................................................................................. 42
(G) Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan......................................................................................... 43
(H) Studies and Reports................................................................................................................................. 46
5-3 CONSTRUCTION SEQUENCE REPORT ...........................................................................................................46
5-3-1 Schedule........................................................................................................................................................................46
5-3-2 Extensions ....................................................................................................................................................................47
5-3-3 Notes ..............................................................................................................................................................................47
5-4 SANITATION REPORT .............................................................................................................................................47
5-5 WATER SUPPLY REPORT.......................................................................................................................................48
5-5-1 Private Water Supply...............................................................................................................................................48
5-5-2 Public Water Supply.................................................................................................................................................48
5-6 PESTICIDE REPORT..................................................................................................................................................48
5-7 COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT (“CAM”) SITE PLAN REVIEW..........................................................48
5-8 ARCHAEOLGICAL SURVEYS ................................................................................................................................50
5-8-1 Assessment Survey...................................................................................................................................................50
5-8-2 Reconnaissance Survey............................................................................................................................................50
5-8-3 Intensive Survey.........................................................................................................................................................50
5-9 FINAL RECORD SUBDIVISION PLAN ..............................................................................................................50
5-9-1 Drafting Standards....................................................................................................................................................50
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
5
SECTION 6 – SITE DESIGN STANDARDS ..................................................................................................................52
6-1 PURPOSES AND APPLICABILITY ......................................................................................................................52
6-1-1 Purpose .........................................................................................................................................................................52
6-1-2 Contextual Priorities.................................................................................................................................................53
6-1-3 Site Design Process....................................................................................................................................................60
6-1-4 Density Increases .......................................................................................................................................................61
6-2 LOT DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS...........................................................................................................................62
6-2-1 Lot Size and Configuration....................................................................................................................................62
6-2-2 Health Requirements................................................................................................................................................62
6-2-3 Unbuildable Lot .........................................................................................................................................................62
6-2-4 Building Locations.....................................................................................................................................................63
6-2-5 Lot Access - ..................................................................................................................................................................63
6-2-6 Energy Efficiency and Conservation...................................................................................................................64
6-3 ADDITIONAL NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS DESIGN STANDARDS...................................65
6-4 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS .................................................................................................................................66
6-5 PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT .....................................................................................66
6-6 SUBDIVISION NAME ................................................................................................................................................66
6-7 OPEN SPACES..............................................................................................................................................................66
6-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ..........................................................................................................................66
6-8-1 General Requirements..............................................................................................................................................66
6-8-2 Peak Flow and Volume Control............................................................................................................................68
6-8-3 Groundwater Recharge Volume (GRV) .............................................................................................................68
6-8-4 Water Quality Volume (WQV)..............................................................................................................................68
6-8-5 Requirements for Infiltration Basins/Areas ......................................................................................................70
6-8-6 Requirements for Filtration Basins/Areas..........................................................................................................71
6-8-7 Exemptions ..................................................................................................................................................................72
6-9 FLOODING REQUIREMENTS...............................................................................................................................72
6-10 STREET AND ROADWAY DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS...............................................................................73
6-10-1 Streets and Roadways..............................................................................................................................................73
6-10-2 The Design of Each Street .......................................................................................................................................74
6-10-3 Private Streets or Roadways ..................................................................................................................................74
6-10-4 Subdivision Street Construction...........................................................................................................................77
6-10-5 Access ............................................................................................................................................................................77
6-11 RESERVE STRIP...........................................................................................................................................................79
6-12 SIDEWALK DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS............................................................................................................79
6-13 STREET LIGHT SPECIFICATIONS.......................................................................................................................80
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
6
6-14 STREET SIGN SPECIFICATIONS..........................................................................................................................80
6-14-1 Street signs ...................................................................................................................................................................80
6-14-2 House numbers ..........................................................................................................................................................80
6-15 STREET TREE SPECIFICATIONS .........................................................................................................................80
6-15-1 Location.........................................................................................................................................................................80
6-15-2 Size..................................................................................................................................................................................80
6-15-3 Street Tree Easement ................................................................................................................................................80
6-15-4 Landscaped Buffers...................................................................................................................................................80
6-16 POTABLE WATER.......................................................................................................................................................81
6-16-1 Water Supply..............................................................................................................................................................81
6-16-2 Private Well Water ....................................................................................................................................................81
6-16-3 Public Water Supply.................................................................................................................................................82
6-17 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.................................................................................................................................83
6-18 SURETY............................................................................................................................................................................83
SECTION 7 - OPEN SPACES AND EASEMENTS ......................................................................................................84
7-1 PURPOSE........................................................................................................................................................................84
7-2 GENERAL........................................................................................................................................................................84
7-3 CONVEYANCE OF OPEN SPACE .........................................................................................................................86
7-4 LEGAL TRANSFER OF OPEN SPACE.................................................................................................................86
SECTION 8 - SUBDIVSION IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS ....................................................................88
8-1 GENERAL........................................................................................................................................................................88
8-2 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS............................................................................................................................88
8-3 STREETS..........................................................................................................................................................................88
8-3-1 General ..........................................................................................................................................................................88
8-3-2 Rights-of-Way.............................................................................................................................................................88
8-3-3 Arterial Streets............................................................................................................................................................89
8-3-4 Collector Streets..........................................................................................................................................................89
8-3-5 Residential Streets .....................................................................................................................................................89
8-3-6 Temporary Turnarounds ........................................................................................................................................89
8-3-7 Dead-End Streets .......................................................................................................................................................90
8-3-8 Block Length................................................................................................................................................................90
8-3-9 Turnaround..................................................................................................................................................................90
8-3-10 Minimum Grades.......................................................................................................................................................90
8-3-11 Centerlines ...................................................................................................................................................................90
8-3-12 Intersections.................................................................................................................................................................91
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
7
8-3-13 Corners..........................................................................................................................................................................91
8-4 STREET BASE CONSTRUCTION..........................................................................................................................91
8-5 STREET SURFACING.................................................................................................................................................92
8-6 SIDEWALKS...................................................................................................................................................................92
8-7 STREET LIGHTING.....................................................................................................................................................93
8-8 STREET SIGNS..............................................................................................................................................................93
8-8-1 Posts ...............................................................................................................................................................................93
8-8-2 Street signs ...................................................................................................................................................................93
8-8-3 Letters............................................................................................................................................................................93
8-9 DRAINAGE.....................................................................................................................................................................93
8-10 WATER SYSTEM..........................................................................................................................................................94
8-11 SEWERAGE SYSTEM..................................................................................................................................................94
8-12 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.................................................................................................................................95
8-13 FIRE PROTECTION....................................................................................................................................................95
8-14 PRIVATE STREETS AND ROADWAYS...............................................................................................................96
SECTION 9 - ASSURANCES FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.....97
9-1 BONDS.............................................................................................................................................................................97
9-2 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL AND SITE RESTORATION BOND.......................97
9-3 APPLICABILITY...........................................................................................................................................................97
9-4 BOND FORM.................................................................................................................................................................97
9-5 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS..................................................................................................98
9-6 PARTIAL RELEASE ....................................................................................................................................................98
9-6-1 Bond Reduction Schedule for Private Roads....................................................................................................98
9-7 FINAL RELEASE...........................................................................................................................................................99
9-8 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS..............................................................................................................99
9-8-1 Maintenance Bond.....................................................................................................................................................99
9-8-2 Snow Plowing and Other Maintenance.............................................................................................................99
9-9 MAINTENANCE SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED TO SUBDIVISION RESIDENTS ON
UNACCEPTED STREETS........................................................................................................................................100
9-9-1 Services....................................................................................................................................................................... 100
9-9-2 Building Permits ..................................................................................................................................................... 100
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
8
SECTION 10 - SUPERVISION OF IMPROVEMENTS ........................................................................................... 101
10-1 INSPECTION OF PROPOSED STREETS .........................................................................................................101
10-2 PROFESSIONAL INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS..............................................................................101
10-3 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM..................................................................................................101
10-4 INSPECTION OF EROSION SEDIMENT CONTROLS...............................................................................101
10-4-1 Inspections ................................................................................................................................................................ 101
10-4-2 Variations .................................................................................................................................................................. 102
SECTION 11 - ENFORCEMENT ...................................................................................................................................... 103
11-1 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT ..................................................................................................................................103
11-2 ENFORCEMENT OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROLS .............................................................103
11-2-1 Violations................................................................................................................................................................... 103
11-2-2 Cease and Desist Orders ...................................................................................................................................... 104
APPENDICES .......................................................................................................................................................................... 105
APPENDIX A – Typical Road Cross Section............................................................................................................... 106
APPENDIX B – Reserved for Future Use...................................................................................................................... 107
APPENDIX C – Site Testing.............................................................................................................................................. 108
APPENDIX D – Standard Details.................................................................................................................................... 110
APPENDIX E – Application Fee Calculation Sheet................................................................................................... 121
APPENDIX F – Declaration of Restrictions and Covenants................................................................................... 122
APPENDIX G – Signature Block for Final Mylars ..................................................................................................... 125
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
9
SECTION 1 - TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY
1-1 TITLE – These Regulations of the East Lyme Planning Commission shall be known and
may be cited as the “East Lyme Subdivision Regulations”.
1-2 PURPOSE – These Regulations are adopted to promote and ensure the orderly
development of land within the town so that the land, when subdivided, can be used for
building purposes without danger to health and safety and for the following specified
purposes:
(1) To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
town.
(2) To guide the future growth and development of the town in accordance with the
Plan of Development.
(3) To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood and
other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population.
(4) To protect the character and the social and economic stability of the town and to
encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the municipality.
(5) To protect and conserve the value of buildings and improvements upon the land,
and to minimize conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
(6) To guide public and private policy and action in order to make proper provision
for transportation, surface drainage, water supply, sewage disposal, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation, and the public requirements and facilities, and in areas
contiguous to brooks, rivers, or other bodies of water subject to flooding, including
tidal flooding, that proper provision shall be made for protective flood control
measures.
(7) To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings
and the circulation of traffic throughout the municipality, having particular regard
to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian
traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to
provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines.
(8) To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and
re-subdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to
ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
(9) To ensure that public facilities and services are available and will have a sufficient
capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
(10) To prevent the pollution of air and water; to assure the adequacy of drainage
facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
10
management of natural resources throughout the town in order to preserve the
integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land.
(11) To provide for open spaces and environmental protection through the most
efficient design and layout of the land, including the use of Conservation
Development by Design subdivision, while preserving the density of land as
established in the zoning ordinance of the municipality.
(12) To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the town and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
(13) To encourage energy efficient patterns of development and land use, use of solar
energy and energy conservation.
(14) To ensure that proposed streets are in harmony with existing or officially proposed
streets and arranged and constructed so as to provide an adequate and convenient
system for the present and prospective traffic needs.
(15) To provide that proper provision shall be made for soil erosion and sedimentation
control.
(16) To carefully manage the use, development and preservation of the coastal area so
as to protect and enhance coastal resources and water dependent use
opportunities.
(17) To conserve and protect the historic and cultural resources of the Town including
but not limited to historic structures and sites and archeological sites.
(18) To conserve and protect the natural resources of the Town including but not
limited to areas of unusual scenic beauty, significant trees and stone walls, areas of
ecological importance and areas of interrelated natural systems such as stream
belts, “flood plains”, wetlands, vernal pools, aquifers and wildlife corridors.
(19) To protect and preserve the waters within the Town of East Lyme from non-point
sources of pollution and flooding through the proper management of stormwater
flows and minimization of suspended solids, pathogens, toxic contaminants, heavy
metals, petroleum hydrocarbons, nitrogen and floatable debris to these flows
transported by stormwater and discharging to wetlands and watercourses within
East Lyme. Water is a valuable natural, economic, recreational, cultural and
aesthetic resource. The protection and preservation of ground and surface water is
in the public interest and essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens
of East Lyme. As such, changes to land cover due to development without proper
consideration of stormwater impacts can permanently alter the hydrologic
response of local watersheds and potentially increase stormwater runoff rates and
volumes, which in turn has the potential to increase flooding, stream channel
erosion, sediment transport and deposition and impact water quality. Increases to
impervious surfaces associated with development have been directly linked to the
degradation of water quality.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
11
(20) To incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) techniques into the site and facility
design, where possible and appropriate. Low Impact Development is a design
strategy with the goal of maintaining or replicating the pre-development
hydrologic regime through the use of design techniques to create a functionally
equivalent hydrologic site design. Hydrologic functions of storage, infiltration,
and ground water recharge, as well as the volume and frequency of discharges are
maintained through the use of integrated and distributed small-scale stormwater
retention and detention areas, reduction of impervious surfaces, the lengthening of
run-off flow paths and flow time. Other strategies include the preservation and
protection of environmentally sensitive features such as riparian buffers, wetlands,
steep slopes, valuable (mature) trees, floodplains, woodlands, and highly
permeable soils.
1-3 AUTHORITY – Pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 126, Connecticut
General Statutes, 1958 Revision, as amended, the Planning Commission of the
Town of East Lyme adopts the regulations controlling the subdivision and resubdivision
of land.
1-4 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS – These Regulations shall apply to any owner or
the agent of any owner of any land located within the Town of East Lyme who
subsequent to the effective date of these Regulations subdivides or re-subdivides land as
defined by these Regulations.
1-5 CONFLICTS – These Regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or provision of law. Where any
provision of these Regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any
other provisions of these Regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
1-6 SEPARABILITY – If any part or provision of these Regulations or application thereof to
any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such judgment shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these
Regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances.
1-7 AMENDMENTS – These Regulations may be amended by the Commission after a
public hearing on said amendment(s).
1-8 DATE OF ENACTION – Subdivision regulations for the Town of East Lyme first came
into effect on September 9, 1952.
1-9 EFFECTIVE DATE – The effective date of these Regulations shall be September 9, 1952,
as amended.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
12
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS
2-1 USAGE
(1) The numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used in these Regulations
shall be used, interpreted, and defined as this section provides.
(2) Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense
include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the
word “herein” means “in these Regulations”; the word “Regulations” means
“these Regulations”; words of the masculine gender include correlative words of
the feminine and neuter genders.
(3) A “person” includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association
of persons such as a club; “shall” is always mandatory; a “building” includes a
“structure”; a “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof; “used” or
“occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the
words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied”
2-2 WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED
2-2-1 Applicant – The subdivider or his agent or successor in interest that has
signed the subdivision application.
2-2-2 Application – An application for the approval of a proposed subdivision or
re-subdivision as provided in Section 4-2.
2-2-3 Back Lot – In a conventional subdivision design, a lot that lacks adequate
street frontage and is accessible by a permanent access-way of the same
ownership. Lots created using Conservation Design Development which
have less than the required average frontage shall not be considered back lots
as long as the average frontage requirement for the entire subdivision is met.
2-2-4 Cluster Development Subdivision – A building pattern of concentrating
units on a particular portion of a parcel so that at least one-third of the parcel
remains as open space to be used exclusively for recreational, conservation
and agricultural purposes.
2-2-5 Commission – The Planning Commission of the Town of East Lyme.
2-2-6 Conservation Design Development Subdivision - A controlled-growth land
use development that adopts the principle for allowing limited sustainable
development while protecting the area’s natural environmental features in
perpetuity, including preserving open space, landscape and vista, protecting
farmland or natural habitats for wildlife, and maintaining the character of
rural communities. In East Lyme this uses the cluster development concept
and extends it to consider the land areas most suitable for development to
produce a more attractive, creative and efficient use of the land.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
13
2-2-7 Conventional Subdivision – A subdivision of land in which all lots meet the
minimum area and dimensional requirements of the Zoning Regulations for
the district in which the subdivided parcel is located, without application of
the open space/ cluster development provisions of those regulations.
2-2-8 Driveway - A narrow stretch with a smoothed or paved surface, made for
traveling by motor vehicle, carriage, etc., between two or more points leading
from a street or other thoroughfare to a building, house, garage, etc.
2-2-9 Lot - A plot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one
principal building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental
to it, including open spaces as are required by these regulations. In the case
of multiple dwellings, institutional or commercial buildings, a group of
buildings under the same ownership may be considered as occupying a lot.
2-2-10 Planning Director – The planner who represents the Commission in the
implementation of its Regulations.
2-2-11 Pre-Application Sketch Plan – A Sketch Plan submitted by the applicant as a
diagrammatic basis for informal discussion with the Planning Commission or
Staff regarding the design of a proposed subdivision
2-2-12 Private Residential Street – A dedicated travel way owned in fee or in
common which is not a portion of any building lot and which is restricted
from public use. It does not serve the public as a whole nor function within
the Town’s overall comprehensive transportation policy. Private streets are
designed solely for the convenience of the residential properties they serve
and to provide access to and from local and other public streets. A private
street is subject to the restriction that such street shall not be offered to,
accepted by, or maintained by the Town of East Lyme.
2-2-13 Public Sewerage System – A sewerage system with a collection and
treatment facility approved by the State of Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection and East Lyme Water and Sewer Commission.
2-2-14 Public Water System – A water system from a common water supply or
distribution system; or any water supply provided by the East Lyme Water
and Sewer Commission.
2-2-15 Record Subdivision Plan – The record subdivision plan, drawing or
drawings, prepared for filing in the Office of the Town Clerk subsequent to
Commission approval.
2-2-16 Reserve Strip – Land controlling access to an area dedicated or to be
dedicated for public use.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
14
2-2-17 Re-subdivision – A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision
or re-subdivision if such change (a) affects any street layout shown on such
map, or (b) affects any area reserved thereon for public use, or (c) diminishes
the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if
any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or
recording of such map, pursuant to Chapter 126, Section 8-18, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. A re-subdivision shall not
include the use of an approved subdivision lot less than three (3) acres in size
for the construction of a town road.
2-2-18 Right-of-Way – An area dedicated to public or private use for pedestrian and
vehicular access or public utilities.
2-2-19 Sale – A voluntary transfer of title, including easements involving
substantially all of the interest in the land, long term (e.g. 50 year) leases,
gifts, devises and transfers for security purposes.
2-2-20 Special Erosion Control Area – That portion of a lot, which lies within fifty
(50) feet of one or more of the following natural resources:
(1) Tidal wetlands, as defined by Section 22a-29 of the Connecticut General
Statutes and as delineated on the tidal wetlands maps for the Town of
East Lyme prepared by the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection, or as more specifically determined to exist by in-field
inspection.
(2) Water courses, as defined by the Inland Wetlands and Water Courses
Regulations of the Town East Lyme and as delineated on the Inland
Wetlands and Water Courses Map of the Town, or as more specifically
determined to exist by in-field inspection, including: rivers, streams,
brooks, lakes, ponds, freshwater marshes, swamps and bogs.
(3) Beaches, dunes, and coastal bluffs and escarpments, as defined by
Section 22a-93 of the Connecticut General Statutes and delineated as to
their approximate location on the Coastal Resource Maps for the Town
of East Lyme prepared by the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection.
2-2-21 Street - Shall include any public or private roadway located within a right-ofway
designed, maintained, and used as a thoroughfare in accordance with
the laws of the State of Connecticut and the ordinances of the Town of East
Lyme, or recorded in the office of the East Lyme Town Clerk if constructed or
accepted before the passage of state and local regulations.
(1) Arterial Street – A street providing for through traffic movement
between areas and across the town.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
15
(2) Collector Street – A street intended to move traffic from residential and
light residential streets, and which is intended to accommodate
presently or at any future time traffic other than that of the immediate
neighborhood.
(3) Dead End Street – A street having only one intersection with a through
street, and having a turn-around entirely surrounded on its frontage
with separate lots.
(4) Dead End Street (Temporary) – A street having only one intersection
with another street and designed to be extended into adjoining
undeveloped land, with a temporary turn-around.
(5) Local Street – A street intended to provide access to other roads from
individual residential properties
(6) Loop Street – A two-way street that intersects itself and has only one
access point on a through street
(7) Light Residential Street – A street intended to provide access to other
roads from individual residential properties and to accommodate an
average daily traffic volume less than 400 vehicles. Classification of
streets as residential or light residential shall be based on the number of
dwelling units having direct access to the street, the number of vehicle
trips per day generated by each dwelling unit as estimated by the
Institute of Traffic Engineers, and the projected volume of through
traffic.
(7) Residential Street – A street intended to provide access to other roads
from individual residential properties and to accommodate an average
daily traffic volume between 400 and 1500 vehicles.
(9) Through Street – A street which intersects on each end at two (2)
different locations with another street or streets and is part of a network
of streets, which are similarly, interconnected, each having two (2)
separate outlets.
2-2-22 Street Frontage – The linear distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at the street line.
2-2-23 Subdivider – Any person who shall layout for the purpose of sale or building
development any subdivision or part thereof.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
16
2-2-24 Subdivision – The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more
parts or lots made subsequent to the adoption of subdivision regulations by
the Commission (September 9, 1952), for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding the
development for municipal, conservation, or agricultural purposes, and
includes re-subdivisions, pursuant to Chapter 126, Section 8-18 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
2-2-25 Subdivision Plan - A subdivision plan, drawing or drawings, prepared for
review by the Commission, prior to Commission approval.
2-2-26 Town Engineer – The engineer who represents the town Planning
Commission in the implementation of its regulations.
2-2-27 Town Plan of Conservation and Development – A plan for guiding the
development of East Lyme and which is adopted by the Planning
Commission, in accordance with Section 8-23 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
2-2-28 Work – All physical improvements required by the approved plan, other
than the staking out of lots, and includes but is not limited to the construction
of streets, storm drainage facilities and water and sewer lines, the setting
aside of open space and recreation areas, installation of telephone and electric
services, planting of trees or other landscaping and installation of retaining
walls or other structures.
SECTION 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
3-1 SUBDIVISION APPROVAL REQUIRED – No subdivision of land shall be made until
a plan for such subdivision has been approved by the Commission. Any person, firm, or
corporation making any subdivision of land without the approval of the Commission
shall be fined not more than $500 per lot sold or offered for sale or so subdivided.
Subsequent to the submission of an application and prior to the approval of such
application by the Commission, no construction or work of any kind, including any
building, street or any drainage or work facility, or any significant clearing of trees or
modification of the land involved in such application shall be commenced excepting
work associated with site testing and surveying.
3-2 DISCLOSURE OF BENEFICIARIES OF REAL PROPERTY HELD IN TRUST – Any
person who makes an application to the Planning Commission, the record title to which
is held by a trustee of any undisclosed trust, shall file with said application, a sworn
statement disclosing the name of the equitable owner of such real property or the
beneficiary of the trust.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
17
3-3 PROPOSALS FOR DEVELOPMENTS USING WATER – As required by Section 8-25
of the Connecticut General Statutes, no proposal for a development using water
supplied by a company incorporated on or after October 1, 1984, shall be approved by
the Planning Commission unless such company has been issued a certificate pursuant to
Section 16-262m of the Connecticut General Statutes.
3-4 PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT – The Plan for subdivision shall
conform to the comprehensive Plan of Conservation and Development for the Town of
East Lyme adopted by the East Lyme Planning Commission.
3-5 CONFORMITY WITH ZONING – All subdivision plans shall conform to the
requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
3-6 CHANGES IN SUBDIVISION OR ZONING REGULATIONS
3-6-1 Pursuant to Chapter 126, Section 8-26b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, when a change in the subdivision regulations is adopted by the
Planning Commission, no subdivision plan which has been approved prior to the
effective date of such change, and filed or recorded with the Town Clerk, shall be
required to conform to such change.
3-6-2 Pursuant to Chapter 126, Section 8-26b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, when a change is adopted in the Zoning Regulations or boundaries of
zoning districts, no lots shown on a subdivision plan for residential property
which has been approved prior to the effective date of such change, and filed or
recorded with the Town Clerk, shall be required to conform to such change.
3-7 EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 30, 2007, no application for residential subdivision or resubdivision
that includes construction of a town road will be accepted, considered or
approved for a time period not to exceed twelve (12) months from the effective date of this
amendment.
3-8 PRIVATE STREETS OR ROADWAYS (RESIDENTIAL) PROVISIONS
3-8-1 Ownership
(A) The land within the Private Road right-of-way, set forth specifically for
access to developed lots along the private road, shall be owned and
dedicated to a Common Interest Ownership Association, in accordance with
Connecticut General Statutes.
(B) If a Common Interest Ownership Association is applicable to a proposed
subdivision or resubdivision, the provisions of the Common Interest
Ownership must be submitted to the Planning Commission for their
approval. The legal provisions of the Common Interest Ownership
Association must be submitted at the time of application.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
18
3-8-2 Maintenance and Repair
(A) Private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
specifications found in these Regulations.
(B) A private street is subject to the restriction that such street shall not be
offered to, accepted by, or maintained by the Town of East Lyme.
(C) The Town of East Lyme shall not be held responsible at any time for short or
long term maintenance or repair of private road construction, street lights,
signs, or other appurtenances.
(D) The particular Common Interest Ownership Association being served by the
private road shall be responsible for all short- and long-term maintenance
and/or repair of the private road. The Association shall provide adequate
proof to the Planning Commission that proper Association fees will be
collected on a periodic, continuous basis from Association members.
Adequate proof shall include but not be limited to provisions for road
maintenance and repair inclusive of normal or emergency conditions.
Provisions shall consider the useful life of the private road and replacement
costs at the end of the useful life. Provisions shall consider routine costs for
mandatory winter snow removal and ice control, along with minimum yearly
inspections or a time frame acceptable to the Association and reports made
by an appropriate professional submitted to the Common Ownership
Association for their use to determine road conditions.
3-8-3 Miscellaneous
(A) Private roads shall be subject to the same requirements governing bonding as
public roads in these regulations.
(B) Private roads shall be subject to the same inspection requirements set forth
for public roads found in these regulations.
(C) Existing private roads may be extended or intersected by new private roads.
However, the new road extensions or new intersecting roads shall become
part of the original Common Interest Ownership Association. The
Association shall be required to meet all legal, liability and economic
requirements stated in these regulations for the combined proposed new and
existing private road layout.
3-8-4 Liability
(A) The Common Interest Ownership Association shall maintain a liability policy
which protects the Association against accidental damages and claims.
(B) The liability policy shall hold the Town of East Lyme harmless against claims
arising from damages happening on or caused by the private road.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
19
SECTION 4 – APPLICATION SUBMISSION PROCEDURE
4-1 PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH PLAN - Any person intending to subdivide land in the
Town of East Lyme shall present a pre-application sketch plan to the Commission or
Staff for informal review prior to preparing the official subdivision plan. Presentation of
the sketch plan is intended to facilitate general consideration of factors and problems
affecting development of the land to be subdivided and to indicate that basic
requirements can be met prior to incurring engineering, application and legal costs in
connection with the proposed subdivision. No fee or application form is required for
presentation and review of a pre-application sketch plan.
Presentation of the pre-application sketch plan shall not constitute an application within
the meaning of Title 8, Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended and
as the same may, from time to time, be amended, and the staff review of said preapplication
plan and comments, if any, shall not be deemed to be official "action" or
"decision" within the meaning of said Title and Chapter. The pre-application sketch plan
procedure shall in no way bind, bar or stop the Commission from taking any action it
deems fit and making any decision it deems advisable upon filing of an application.
4-2 APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS – In order to make formal
application for approval of a subdivision, the applicant shall submit the following:
4-2-1 Application – The original application form and copies of all maps, plans,
profiles, reports, documents, and data required by these Regulations shall be
submitted to the Town Planning Department with the application fee as follows:
(a) 12 copies of the application form;
(b) 12 copies of the Design Reports submitted in accord with Section 4-2-3;
(c) 12 copies of all maps, plans, and profiles as required by Section 4 -2-4
through 4 -2-12;
(d) 12 copies of the subdivision and the surrounding properties within 500 feet
of the subject property on 11”x 17” paper at a scale of not less than 1 inch =
200 feet.
The date of receipt of such application shall be determined in accordance with
the Connecticut General Statutes and as detailed below. The application for
approval of a subdivision shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the
Commission.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
20
If the owner, applicant, or subdivider has made previous application for
subdivision of the subject parcel which was denied, a brief discussion identifying
how the new proposal differs from previous applications shall be provided as
part of the application. Application forms are available at the East Lyme Town
Hall in the Department of Planning and on the Town of East Lyme website
www.eltownhall.com. The application shall be signed by the applicant and the
record owner of the property if different than the applicant.
4-2-2 Application Fee – Application fees shall be in accord with Section 2 of the Town
Ordinance Establishing Schedule of Fees for Inland Wetlands Agency, Planning,
and Zoning Commissions as may be amended from time to time and attached
hereto as APPENDIX E – Application Fee Calculation Sheet.
4-2-3 Design Reports - All applications for subdivision or re-subdivisions shall be
accompanied by the following reports and maps unless individually waived by
the Planning Commission:
(A) Natural and Cultural Resources and Site Analysis Plan at an appropriate
scale showing the following:
1. Accurate topography, mapped from field survey or partial survey
coordinated with other surveys, at a contour interval of not less than
2-foot intervals.
2. Slope analysis, based on the above survey, showing average slopes of
25% or greater as measured in 40 foot increments.
3. Soils mapping locating the extent of the various soils on the site
consistent with the soil classifications of the New London County Soil
Survey, including delineation by a Certified Soil Scientist of all
wetland soil types.
4. Accurately delineated flood plains, showing the boundaries and
extent of the “100 year flood hazard area” as determined from official
mapping prepared for the Federal Flood Insurance Administration.
5. The extent of any stratified-drift aquifers underlying the site,
determined from hydrologic mapping published by the U.S. Geologic
Survey but refined to show estimated boundaries of direct recharge
areas and estimated depths to maximum water table.
6. Generalized types of vegetation on the site, such as deciduous
forests, coniferous forests, brush land, pastures, farmlands and
grassland meadows, with boundaries clearly shown for each.
7. Drainage basin boundaries and areas, locating the approximate
watershed extent for all significant streams and drainage channels,
from topography as mapped above.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
21
8. Significant development, including all existing paved roads, wood
roads, trails, stone walls, driveways, right-of-ways, easements, utility
lines, buildings and structures including old foundations & animal
pens, paved areas, storm drainage systems, wells, septic systems, and
other waste disposal areas.
9. Landmark and Asset Trees (trees determined by the Tree Warden to
be of great age, rarity or scenic enrichment or trees of 18 or more
inches in diameter measured 4 ½ feet above ground level). Species to
be noted by name and drip-line circumferences shown.
10. Unique scenic features, such as (but not limited to) streams,
waterfalls, ponds, habitats, vernal pools, marshes, ravines, ledge
outcrops, cliffs, caves, rock shelters, ridge lines and distant views,
vistas, graves and/or burial grounds.
11. Areas of archaeological sensitivity and historical significance as
shown on maps available in the Planning Department and/or from the
Archaeological Survey required by Section 4-2-3(B) of these
Regulations.
12. Any areas identified on the “State and Federal Listed Species and
Natural Communities Map” indicating possible presence of
endangered species.
(B) Archaeological Survey meeting the performance criteria described in the
Environmental Review Primer for Connecticut’s Archaeological Resources
and as specified in Section 5-8 of these Regulations.
(C) Biological Survey if conducted as a requirement of a Natural Diversity
Database Review and/or any recommendations from DEP for avoiding or
minimizing impacts to species of special concern and significant natural
communities.
(D) Soil Scientist’s Report if one has been prepared in support of an application
for review by the East Lyme Inland Wetlands Agency.
(E) Pesticide Report - For lands that were at one time classified as farm land in
accordance with Section 12-107c of the Connecticut General Statutes or
other commercial use involving regular application of pesticides, a report
detailing the site history and an evaluation of the potential human health
impacts resulting from the past application of pesticides at the site shall be
submitted. The report and method of evaluation shall conform to the
requirements of Section 5-6.
(F) Traffic Report - For all subdivisions of 25 lots or more and all nonresidential
subdivisions, a traffic report shall be required. Where the
Commission deems it necessary, a traffic report may be required for any
other subdivision.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
22
(G) A Sanitation Report in conformance to Section 5-4 of these regulations.
(H) A Water Supply Report in conformance to Section 5-5 of these
regulations.
(I) A Stormwater Management Plan in accordance with Section 5-2-2(E) of
these Regulations.
(J) An Open Space Report consisting of a narrative indicating how the
proposed Open Space dedication meets the objectives outlined in Section 7-
2 and the proposed method of conveyance in accord with Section 7-3. Any
letters from organizations stating their willingness to accept Open Space as
required in Section 7-3-1 and draft legal documents required in Section 7-4
shall be included. The report shall reference a separate Open Space Plan
included in the Record Subdivision Maps showing any improvements
proposed to the Open Space areas.
4-2-4 Yield Plan - A yield plan showing a conventional lot and street layout
conforming to the zoning and subdivision regulations including a demonstration
of minimum area of buildable land requirements in Section 1.38 of the Zoning
Regulations. The plan shall be at the same scale as the Existing Features and Site
Analysis Map.
4-2-5 Subdivision Plan - A subdivision plan shall be submitted with the application
and shall conform to all of the requirements of Section 5-2 of these Regulations.
4-2-6 Construction Plans - Plan and profile drawings and cross sections and prints or
copies thereof, of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins,
manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, water mains and appurtenances,
community wells and pump houses, sidewalks, gutters, curbs, bridges, culverts,
and other structures and improvements required by these Regulations shall be
submitted with the application and shall conform to all the requirements of
Section 5-2-2 (D) of these Regulations.
4-2-7 Grading Plan - A grading plan shall be submitted with the application and
conform to all requirements of Section 5-2-2(F) of these Regulations.
4-2-8 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan - An erosion and sedimentation control plan
shall be submitted for activity creating a disturbed area cumulatively greater
than one-half acre in size in conformance with the requirements of Section 5-2-
2(G) of these Regulations.
4-2-9 Coastal Site Plan Review Application - If the subdivision or any portion thereof
is located within the coastal boundary, as defined by Section 22a-94 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, and as depicted on the coastal boundary map for
the Town of East Lyme, a coastal site plan review application shall be submitted
in accordance with Section 5-7 of these Regulations and Sections 22a –105
through 22a-109 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
23
4-2-10 Base Map - The base map used to determine watershed and drainage patterns
shall be submitted.
4-2-11 Easements and Deeds - Copies of all easements and deeds necessary to carry the
subdivision plan into effect, conforming to the requirements of these
Regulations, including instruments proposed to be executed or delivered after
approval of the application shall be submitted.
4-2-12 Bond or Cost Estimate - An estimate of the cost of construction of all subdivision
improvements shall be submitted. Estimates shall be made by an engineer
licensed as a Professional Engineer in the State of Connecticut in a form
acceptable to the Town Planner and Town Engineer. In addition, test borings or
deep test pits may be required at the discretion of the Town Engineer to
determine the substrata in the areas of the rights-of-way, so that when a bond is
set, the cost of ledge removal can be included. The results of said test shall be
furnished in a soils report prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer.
4-2-13 Construction Sequence Report - A schedule for the completion of improvements
shall be submitted with the application and conform with Section 5-3.
4-2-14 State Highway Agreement - A copy of any Agreement made with the State
Department of Transportation of any street intersection with the State Highway
or where a storm drain joins with a State Highway shall be submitted.
4-2-15 Utility Permits and Agreements - Copies of proposed agreements with utility
companies shall be submitted.
4-2-16 Other Data and Information - May be required from the applicant in order to
establish that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of these
Regulations.
4-3 NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS REQUIRMENTS
4-3-1 General – A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of
site plan approval set forth in the Zoning Regulations. Site plan approval and
nonresidential subdivision plan approval may proceed simultaneously. A
nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of these
Regulations, and shall conform to the East Lyme Plan of Conservation and
Development and Zoning Regulations.
4-4 PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION PLAN CONSIDERATION
4-4-1 General – The formal application shall be submitted to the Town Planning
Department on a form approved by the Commission. The procedure in Section
4-4 of these Regulations shall be followed by the Commission in the process of
reaching a decision on the application.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
24
4-4-2 Date of Receipt - The receipt date of a formal application shall be the date of the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission immediately
following the day of submission to the Commission, or thirty-five (35) days after
submission, whichever is sooner.
4-4-3 Hearing and Public Notice – Public hearings shall be held on applications for all
re-subdivisions and all subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots. The Commission
may hold a public hearing on any subdivision application if it deems that the
public interest might best be served by so doing. When a formal application is
submitted to the Commission and a hearing is held, such hearing shall
commence within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such application, and shall
be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences. Notice
of any public hearing shall be given as required by Section 8-26 of the
Connecticut General Statutes. Every applicant shall be afforded the opportunity
to appear before the Commission. In addition to notice of hearing by publication,
public notice of application for subdivision or re-subdivision shall be made as
follows:
(A) Notification of Adjacent Property Owners – Each application for
subdivision or re-subdivision for which a public hearing is held shall
include a list, prepared by the applicant, of the names and addresses of the
owners of all land included within the application and of all properties 200
feet or less distant there from, all as shown on the most recent records on
file in the Town of East Lyme’s Tax Assessor’s Office. The applicant shall
mail notification of said pending application to at least one owner of each
such property not more than 15 days nor less than 2 days before the date
set for the public hearing, by transmitting the text of the public hearing
notice as provided by the Commission. Evidence of such mailing, in the
form of United States Post Office Certificates of Mailing, shall be submitted
for inclusion in the record of the hearing.
(B) Posting of Sign – At least 15 days prior to any public hearing on a
subdivision or re-subdivision, or if no hearing is held, at least 15 days
before a decision is rendered by the Planning Commission, the applicant
shall post a sign on the premises indicating that such action is proposed.
The sign shall be made of durable material 4’ by 4’ in size, and shall be
firmly set at least three feet above ground surface and located so as to be
clearly visible and legible from the most heavily used adjacent Town road
or two-lane State Highway. The sign shall contain the following, in black
block lettering not less than 3 inches in height on a white background:
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
25
PUBLIC NOTICE
This Property Proposed for:
SUBDIVISION
For information, contact Planning Department
East Lyme Town Hall
Immediately after the public hearing, or if no hearing is held, immediately
after a decision is made by the Commission on the application, the sign
shall be removed from the premises.
4-4-4 Decision – The Commission may approve, modify and approve, or disapprove
the application within sixty-five (65) days after the close of the public hearing
thereon, or, if no public hearing is held, within sixth-five (65) days after the
receipt date thereof. Pursuant to Chapter 440 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
if an application involves an activity in or affecting an inland wetland or
watercourse regulated by the Conservation Commission, and the time for a
decision by the Planning Commission noted earlier in this subsection would
elapse prior to the thirty-fifth (35th) day after a decision by the Conservation
Commission, the time period for the Planning Commission decision shall be
extended to thirty-five (35) days after the decision of the Conservation
Commission. This provision, shall not be construed to apply to any extension
consented to by the applicant.
The Commission shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the
subdivision application by resolution, which will set forth, in detail, any
conditions to which the approval is subject and the expiration date, and the
reasons for approval or disapproval. Failure of the Commission to act thereon
shall be considered as an approval, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued
by the Commission on demand except as provided in Section 22a-105(f) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
4-4-5 Approval – The Commission, after the public hearing, if any, shall give approval
to the application if it finds that the application, plans and documents conform to
the requirement of these Regulations. Such approval shall be conditioned upon
presentation of suitable easement and deeds as applicable, as specified in Section
10, and shall be conditioned upon completion of all required subdivision
improvements. In lieu of completion of the improvements, prior to the final
approval of a plan, the Commission may accept a guarantee of performance in
the form of a bond or deposit, as specified in Section 9 of these Regulations.
When approval is granted, conditioned upon the filing of a bond with the
Commission, such bond shall be filed prior to the endorsement of the plan.
In granting approval, the Commission may attach such conditions that it deems
necessary to modify the subdivision map, plans, or documents, and to preserve
the purpose and intent of these Regulations.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
26
4-4-6 Conditional Approval - In lieu of completing the required subdivision
improvements or posting a bond for the improvements as provided in Section 9,
the Commission may grant a Conditional Approval. Such approval shall be
conditioned upon:
(A) The actual construction, maintenance and installation of any improvements
or utilities prescribed by the Commission, evidenced by a Certificate of
Completion issued by the Town Engineer and approved by the
Commission, or;
(B) The provisions of a bond, in accordance with Section 9 of these Regulations,
in a form acceptable to the Town of East Lyme and amount acceptable to
the Town Engineer and approved by the Commission. A Declaration of
Restrictions and Covenants RE: Sale or Transfer of Subdivision Lots in the
form prescribed by these Regulations in Appendix F shall be filed on the
Land Records.
Upon occurrence of either of the events described in (1) or (2) above, the
Commission shall grant Final Approval and authorize the Chairman or Secretary
to sign a release of the Restriction of Sale.
Any conditional approval shall lapse two (2) years from the date it is granted,
provided the applicant may apply for an additional period of one (1) year. No
more than eight (8) extensions of one (1) year each may be granted. Any person,
firm or corporation who, prior to such final approval, sells or offers for sale, any
lot subdivided pursuant to a conditional approval shall be fined not more than
five hundred ($500) dollars for each lot sold or offered for sale.
4-4-7 Minutes – The Commission shall state the grounds for its decision within its
minutes.
4-4-8 Endorsement – If the Commission shall approve a plan, or modify and approve a
plan, its approval with the date thereof, together with a statement of any
modifications applying to such approval, shall be endorsed on the plan and
signed by its Chairman or Secretary on behalf of the Commission. Final mylars
shall contain a signature block as shown in Appendix G.
4-4-9 Filing and Recording - All approved subdivision plans shall be delivered to the
applicant for filing or recording not less than thirty days after the time for taking
an appeal from the action of the Commission has elapsed, and in the event of an
appeal, not less than thirty days after the termination of such appeal by the
dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the applicant.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
27
Any subdivision plan, upon approval by the Commission, shall be filed or
recorded by the applicant in the office of the Town Clerk within ninety days of
the expiration of the appeal period specified under Section 8-8 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, or in the case of an appeal, within ninety days of the
termination of such appeal by dismissal, withdrawal or judgment in favor of the
applicant, except that the Commission may extend the time for such filing for
two additional periods of ninety days.
No such plan shall be recorded or filed by the East Lyme Town Clerk until its
approval has been endorsed thereon by the Chairman or Secretary of the
Commission. The filing or recording of a subdivision plan without such
approval shall be void.
Upon approval of the plan, the original Mylar, 7 copies and a digital copy in
AutoCAD R14 format or an approved equal shall be submitted for signature
within the time period specified by the Planning Commission.
4-4-10 Revision to Construction Plans/As-Built Drawings – Any revisions of the
approved construction drawings must be approved by the Town Engineer. Such
revisions shall be incorporated on as-built construction plans. A separate as-built
Mylar of the construction plans at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet,
shall be submitted to the East Lyme Water Department showing the location of
all water mains and appurtenances with location ties to all main line valves and
house service shut-off valves. Three (3) ties shall be drawn for each valve and
properly dimensioned from permanent visual objects such as catch basins,
hydrants, utility vaults, manholes, etc. An as-built plan, scale 1”= 40’ of the
subdivision streets shall be submitted to the East Lyme Planning and Water
Department. All underground utilities shall be shown.
4-4-11 Certificate of Compliance - Before release of any subdivision bond, or before the
Commission endorses any record subdivision map to permit filing with the
Town Clerk when no subdivision bond has been posted, the applicant shall
present a statement and a copy of the as-built construction plans, each signed
and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the State of
Connecticut certifying that all required subdivision improvements have been
completed as shown on the subdivision plans, together with a statement from the
Town Engineer reflecting that the public improvements have been completed.
4-5 TIME LIMITATIONS
4-5-1 Expiration of Subdivision Approval - Any person, firm or corporation making
any subdivision of land shall complete all work in connection with such
subdivision within five (5) years after the approval of the plan for such
subdivision pursuant to Chapter 126, Section 8-26c of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. The Commission’s endorsement of approval on the plan
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
28
shall state the date on which such five-year period expires. The subdivider or his
successor in interest may apply for and the Commission may grant one or more
extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with such
subdivision, provided the time for all extensions shall not exceed ten years from
the date the subdivision was approved. If the Commission grants an extension
of an approval, the Commission may condition the approval on a determination
of the adequacy of the amount of the bond or other surety furnished under
Section 9, securing to the municipality the actual completion of the work.
4-5-2 Failure to Complete Improvements - Failure to complete all work within such
five (5) year period in addition to any extensions granted by the Commission
shall result in automatic expiration of the approval of such plan provided the
Commission shall file on the land records of the town notice of such expiration
and shall state such expiration on the subdivision plan on file in the office of the
Town Clerk. No further lots shall be conveyed in the subdivision except with
approval by the Commission of a new application for subdivision of the subject
land. If lots have been conveyed during such period, as granted by the
Commission, not to exceed ten (10) years, the Commission shall call the bond or
other surety on such subdivision to the extent necessary to complete the work
required to serve those lots.
4-6 WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION
4-6-1 At any time prior to final action by the Commission on any application, the
applicant may withdraw such application by filing with the Commission, in
writing, a formal request to that effect.
4-6-2 If approval of an application has been granted by the Commission, the applicant
may, at any time prior to filing the approved plan with the Town Clerk, return
such approved plan to the Commission with a written request for cancellation of
such approval, and such cancellation of the plan shall be noted thereon.
4-6-3 No fees shall be refunded upon withdrawal.
4-7 REVISIONS TO LOT CONFIGURATION
4-7-1 Any change in the geometrical configuration of a lot or lots on an approved
subdivision map filed and recorded with the Town Clerk shall be subject to
review and approval by the Director of Planning for conformance with these
regulations. If the proposed revision(s) results in substantially different on-andoff-
site impacts, the plan shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for
approval.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
29
4-7-2 Upon approval by the Planning Commission or the Director of Planning, a map
showing the revision must be filed with the Town Clerk signed by the Chairman
or Secretary of the Commission or Director of Planning with the date of approval
noted thereon.
4-8 SIMILAR APPLICATIONS – The Commission shall not be required to consider an
application for approval of a subdivision while another application for subdivision of
the same or substantially the same parcel is pending before the Commission.
4-9 INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS - The Commission has the authority to determine
whether a submission constitutes a complete application in accordance with the
requirements of these Regulations. If after reviewing a submission, the Commission
finds the application to be incomplete in any material respects, it may vote to deny the
application for failure to satisfy the requirements of these Regulations, after the
applicant has been offered the opportunity to withdraw the application. If the
application is withdrawn, the applicant will be requested to submit the additional,
necessary information. No fees shall be refunded upon withdrawal of an incomplete
application.
4-10 EXTENSIONS - The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period
specified for the holding of a public hearing (65 days), completion of the public hearing
(35 days), and time for decision (65 days) found in Sections 4-4-3 and Section 4-4-4 of
these Regulations, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be longer
than sixty-five days.
4-11 SUBDIVISION STRADDLING MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES - Whenever access to the
subdivision can be had only across land in another municipality, the applicant shall
demonstrate that an access road has been legally established and that such access road is
adequately improved or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is
sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. Lot lines shall be laid
out so as not to cross town boundary lines.
4-12 WAIVERS - Only as specifically authorized within these Regulations, the Commission
may waive certain requirements by a three-quarters vote of all members, when it is
demonstrated that strict compliance with such Regulations will cause an exceptional
difficulty or undue hardship. The applicant shall submit a waiver request in writing at
the time of application, and the Commission shall require a public hearing, and shall not
grant a waiver unless it finds the following conditions are met:
(1) The waiver has been requested in writing by the applicant in the application
submission;
(2) The property for which the waiver is sought is affected by conditions, which
affect the property and are not generally applicable to other land in the area;
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
30
(3) Physical features if the property or its location cause exceptional difficulty or
unusual hardship in meeting the requirements of these Regulations;
(4) The granting of a waiver will not have a significantly adverse effect upon
adjacent property, the environment, or the public health and safety;
(5) The granting of the waiver will not be in conflict with the Plan of Conservation
and Development;
(6) Where it is proposed to vary any engineering standard contained in these
Regulations, a report from the Town Engineer has been requested and
considered by the Commission;
(7) The requested waiver is the minimum deviation from the requirements of these
Regulations necessary to permit subdivision of subject land.
In granting a waiver, the Commission shall state upon its record, the reasons for
granting any waiver.
4-13 APPLICABLE COMMISSION / AGENCY REVIEWS
4-13-1 Inland Wetlands Agency - If an application involves land regulated as an inland
wetland or watercourse under the provisions of Chapter 440 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, the applicant shall submit an application to the Inland
Wetlands Agency no later than the day the application is filed for subdivision or
re-subdivision. The Planning Commission shall not render a decision until the
Inland Wetlands Agency has submitted a report with its final decision to the
Planning Commission. In making its decision, the Planning Commission shall
give due consideration to the report of the Inland Wetlands Agency.
4-13-2 Regional Planning Commission – Whenever a subdivision of land is
planned, the area of which abuts or includes land in the Town of East Lyme and
an adjacent municipality, the Commission of each municipality shall, before
approving the plan, submit it to the Regional Planning Commission. Within
thirty (30) days after receiving the submitted subdivision plans, the Regional
Planning Commission shall report its findings on the inter-municipal aspects of
the proposed subdivision to the municipalities. Failure to submit such report
back to the municipalities within thirty (30) days after transmittal shall be
presumed to indicate that the Regional Planning Commission does not
disapprove the proposed subdivision. The report of the Regional Planning
Commission shall be advisory only.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
31
4-13-3 Environmental Review Team (ERT) Evaluation – Subdivisions of 20 lots or
more where more than 50% of the parcel(s) to be subdivided consist of
environmentally sensitive resources such as wetlands, steep slopes (>25%),
watercourses, flood hazard areas or ridge lines, shall be subject to an evaluation
by the Eastern Connecticut Environmental Review Team. This requirement does
not preclude the Commission from requesting an Environmental Review Team
Evaluation for applications which do not meet the above parameters but for
which concerns about environmental impacts of the development and their
proper mitigation exist.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
32
SECTION 5 – REQUIRED MAPS AND PLANS
5-1 PRE-APPLICATION SKETCH PLAN - A sketch plan shall be submitted by the
applicant as a diagrammatic basis for informal discussion with the Planning Commission or
Staff regarding the design of a proposed subdivision. Sketch plan submission is required by the
Town as a way of helping applicants and officials develop a better understanding of the subject
property and helps establish an overall design approach that respects the site’s special or
noteworthy features, while providing for the density permitted under the zoning regulations.
To provide a full understanding of the site's potential and to facilitate the most effective
exchange with the Planning Commission or Staff, the Sketch Plan should include the following
information listed below.
(1) Name and address of the legal owner, the equitable owner, and/or the applicant;
(2) Name and address of the professional engineer, surveyor, planner, architect,
landscape architect, or site designer responsible for preparing the plan;
(3) Graphic scale (not greater than 1" = 200 ft.; however, dimensions on the plan need
not be exact at this stage) and north arrow;
(4) Approximate tract boundaries, sufficient to locate the tract on a map of the Town of
East Lyme;
(5) Location map;
(6) Zoning district;
(7) Streets on and adjacent to the tract (both existing and proposed);
(8) 100-year floodplain limits, and approximate location of wetlands, if any;
(9) Topographic, physical, and cultural features including fields, pastures, meadows,
wooded areas, trees with a diameter of fifteen inches or more, hedgerows and other
significant vegetation, steep slopes (over 25%), rock outcrops, soil types, ponds,
ditches, drains, dumps, storage tanks, streams within two hundred (200) feet of the
tract, and existing rights-of-way and easements, and cultural features; such as all
structures, foundations, walls, wells, trails, and abandoned roads;
(10) Schematic layout indicating a general concept for land;
(11) Proposed general street and lot layout;
(12) In the case of land development plans, proposed location of buildings and major
structures, parking areas and other improvements; and
(13) General description of proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal, and
stormwater management.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
33
5-2 SUBDIVISION PLAN - The Subdivision Plan shall provide the name and address of the
legal owner or equitable owner of the subject property, and the name and address of the
applicant if not the same party, plus the following elements listed below. A deed or
agreement of sale evidencing that the applicant is the legal or equitable owner of the
land to be subdivided or developed shall be shown.
5-2-1 Subdivision Plan Submission Requirements - The submission requirements for
a Subdivision Plan shall consist of the following elements, and shall be prepared
in accordance with the drafting standards and plan requirements described
herein:
(a) Site Context Map;
(b) Existing Resources and Site Analysis Plan;
(c) Preliminary Resource Impact and Conservation Plan;
(d) Subdivision Improvements Plan/Construction Plan;
(e) Stormwater Management Plan;
(f) Grading Plan;
(g) Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan;
(h) Studies and Reports as set forth in Section 4-2 of these Regulations.
5-2-2 Subdivision Plan Requirements - The following plans and maps shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor, and landscape
architect. All plans shall be stamped, signed and sealed and include the address,
and telephone number of the engineer, land surveyor, and landscape architect
responsible for its preparation. Plans shall be produced and submitted by one of
the following processes: wash-off photographic polyester film, fixed line
photographic polyester film, original ink drawing on polyester film or linen, or
any other material approved by the public records administrator. They shall be
submitted on sheets of a size not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches wide and
thirty-six (36) inches long and shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 1” = 40’ and
a vertical scale of 1” = 4’, except that cross section drawings shall be drawn to a
horizontal and vertical scale of 1” = 10 feet. The minimum size for all plan
lettering shall be 80 guide “Leroy” or 3/32 inch. The original as revised shall be
submitted upon approval of the subdivision. An additional two (2) copies shall
be scaled in accordance with the pertinent tax map on file in the Assessor’s office.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
34
(A) Site Context Map
A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision within its
neighborhood context shall be submitted. For sites under 100 acres in area, such
maps shall be at a scale not less than 1"= 200', and shall show the relationship of
the subject property to natural and man-made features existing within 1,000 feet
of the site. For sites of 100 acres or more, the scale shall be 1" = 400', and shall
show the above relationships within 2,000 feet of the site. The features that shall
be shown on Site Context Maps include topography (from U.S.G.S. maps),
stream valleys, wetland complexes (from maps published by the U.S. Fish &
Wildlife Service or the U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation Service),
woodlands over one-half acre in area (from aerial photographs), ridge lines,
public roads and trails, utility easements and rights of way, public land, and land
protected under conservation easements.
(B) Natural and Cultural Resources and Site Analysis Plan
For all subdivisions a Natural and Cultural Resources and Site Analysis Plan
shall be prepared to provide the developer and the Commission with a
comprehensive analysis of existing conditions, both on the proposed
development site and within 500-feet of the site. Conditions beyond the parcel
boundaries may be described on the basis of existing published data available
from governmental agencies, and from aerial photographs.
The Commission and its staff shall review the Plan to assess its accuracy and
likely impact upon the natural and cultural resources on the property. Unless
otherwise specified by the Planning Commission, such plans shall generally be
prepared at the scale of 1" = 100' or 1" = 200', whichever would fit best on a single
standard size sheet (24" x 36"). The following information shall be included in
this Plan:
i. A vertical aerial photograph enlarged to a scale not less detailed than 1
inch = 400 feet, with the site boundaries clearly marked.
ii. Topography, the contour lines of which shall generally be at two-foot
intervals, determined by photogrammetry (although 10-foot intervals are
permissible beyond the parcel boundaries, interpolated from U.S.G.S.
published maps). The determination of appropriate contour intervals
shall be made by the Planning Commission, which may specify greater or
lesser intervals on exceptionally steep or flat sites. Slopes between 15 and
25 percent and exceeding 25 percent shall be clearly indicated.
Topography for major subdivisions shall be prepared by a professional
land surveyor or professional engineer from an actual field survey of the
site or from stereoscopic aerial photography and shall be coordinated
with official U.S.G.S. benchmarks.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
35
iii. The location and delineation of ponds, streams, ditches, drains, and
natural drainage swales, as well as the 100-year floodplains and wetlands
as delineated by a certified soil scientist licensed in the State of
Connecticut. Additional areas of wetlands on the proposed development
parcel shall also be indicated, as evident from testing, visual inspection,
or from the presence of wetland vegetation.
iv. Vegetative cover conditions on the property according to general cover
type including cultivated land, permanent grass land, meadow, pasture,
old field, hedgerow, woodland and wetland, trees with a caliper in excess
of fifteen inches, the actual canopy line of existing trees and woodlands.
Vegetative types shall be described by plant community, relative age and
condition.
v. Soil series, types and phases, as mapped by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service in the published soil
survey for the county, and accompanying data published for each soil
relating to its suitability for construction (and, in unsewered areas, for
septic suitability).
vi. Ridge lines and watershed boundaries shall be identified.
vii. A viewshed analysis showing the location and extent of views into the
property from public roads and from public parks, public forests, and
state game lands.
viii. Geologic formations on the proposed development parcel, including rock
outcroppings, cliffs, sinkholes, and fault lines, based on available
published information or more detailed data obtained by the applicant.
ix. All existing man-made features including but not limited to streets,
driveways, farm roads, woods roads, buildings, foundations, walls, wells,
drainage fields, dumps, utilities, fire hydrants, and storm and sanitary
sewers.
x. Locations of all historically significant sites or structures on the tract,
including but not limited to cellarholes, stone walls, earthworks, and
graves.
xi. Locations of trails that have been in public use (pedestrian, equestrian,
bicycle, etc.).
xii. All easements and other encumbrances of property, which are or have
been filed on record with the office of the Town Clerk, shall be shown on
the plan.
xiii. Total acreage of the tract.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
36
(C) Resource Impact and Conservation Plan
A Preliminary Resource Impact and Conservation Plan shall be prepared for all
subdivision applications to categorize the impacts of the proposed activities and
physical alterations on those resources shown on the Existing Resources and Site
Analysis Plan as required under Section 5-2-2(B). All proposed improvements,
including but not necessarily limited to grading, fill, streets, buildings, utilities
and stormwater detention facilities, as proposed in the other Subdivision
Improvements Plan documents, shall be taken into account in preparing the
Preliminary Resource Impact and Conservation Plan, which shall clearly
demonstrate that the applicant has minimized site disturbance to the greatest
extent practicable.
i. Using the Existing Resources and Site Analysis Plan as a base map,
impact areas shall be mapped according to the following categories: (1)
primary impact areas, i.e., areas directly impacted by the proposed
subdivision, (2) secondary impact areas, i.e., areas in proximity to
primary areas which may be impacted, and (3) designated protected
areas, either to be included in a proposed Greenway or an equivalent
designation such as dedication of a neighborhood park site.
ii. This requirement for a Preliminary Resource Impact and Conservation
Plan may be waived by the Planning Commission if, in its judgment, the
proposed development areas, as laid out in the in the Subdivision Plan
would be likely to cause no more than an insignificant impact upon the
site's resources.
(D) Subdivision Improvements Plan/Construction Plan
The plan shall show the proposed layout of lots, streets, improvements,
including but not limited to profile and cross section drawings of existing and all
proposed streets, storm drains, water mains and appurtenances, community
wells, and pump houses, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, water
courses, headwalls, gutters, curbs and other structures, and all contiguous land
of the applicant that may be subdivided in the future, in order to allow the
Commission to complete a general planning review of the proposed subdivision
including its relationship to the potential future subdivision of contiguous land
of the applicant. The plan shall incorporate a survey of the parcel in accordance
with the standards established by the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies,
Section 20-300b through 20-300b-20 inclusive which shall be tied to the
Connecticut State Plane Coordinate System by a closed traverse if land is within
a distance to base control of 1,000 feet. The copies shall contain the following:
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
37
i. Title - Title of subdivision, date, scale, graphic scale, north arrow, legend,
town, and state. All revisions shall be indicated by date and type of
change.
ii. Identification - Name and address of owner of the land to be subdivided;
name and address of the applicant, if different from the owner.
iii. Zoning District - The zoning district or districts including overlay zones
in which the subdivision is located and any zoning district boundary
lines.
iv. Location Map - A location map at a scale of 1” = 800’ showing the
location of the subdivision and proposed streets in relation to the main
town streets. Street names are to be shown on the location plan and the
plan is to be related by a distance to the nearest existing street.
v. Index Map - An index map, if the proposed subdivision is divided into
sections or is of such size that more than one sheet is required, showing
the entire subdivision with lots, lot numbers, streets, street names, and
delineation of areas covered by the section or sheet. The index sheet
should note all pages, dates, and revisions by page. The index shall show
the last revision date of any sheet of the plan.
vi. Wetlands and Watercourses - Existing and proposed watercourses and
ponds, conservation areas, and easements and rights-of-way; wetland
soils, other land subject to potential flooding, tidal wetlands; and the
location and limits of all wetlands and floodplains. For subdivisions of
five (5) lots or more wetland boundaries shall be staked by a soil scientist
or botanist, as applicable, and surveyed by a licensed surveyor.
vii. Topography - Existing contours at an interval not exceeding two (2) feet
based on field or aerial survey and using official Town of East Lyme,
State, or U.S. benchmarks, which shall be noted on the plan. Existing
contours shall be shown as dashed lines and proposed contours shall be
shown as bolded solid lines.
viii. Structures - Existing permanent buildings and structures.
ix. Limits of Clearing- Principal wooded areas and/or the approximate
location of all trees measured twenty-four (24) inches or greater in caliper
at breast height. The proposed vegetation clearing line shall be shown
along with all trees to be retained. The location of all proposed shade
trees along the street shall be shown.
x. Soils - Soil classifications, any ledge outcrops and existing stone walls
and fences.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
38
xi. Limits of Grading - The limits of any areas proposed for re-grading by
excavation or filling; and the limits of any areas proposed to be reserved
and protected from excavation or filling.
xii. Flood Elevations - Identification of flood elevations, zones and
floodplains, as identified on the Federal Insurance Administration Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated June 15, 1984, as revised.
xiii. Certificate of Title - When land is to be conveyed to the town for
highway purposes, a certificate of title running to the Town of East Lyme
is required.
xiv. Energy Efficiency - A written statement outlining how the energy
efficiency and conservation provisions of Section 6-2-6 of these
Regulations have been met.
xv. Lot Lines - Existing and proposed property and street lines with
dimensions, lot numbers, street names, adjoining property lines for a
distance of 200 feet and the names of all adjacent subdivisions and
property owners not part of the subdivision. For Lot lines an accurate
layout of all lots with lot numbers; setback lines and minimum square;
existing and proposed open space reserved for parks, playgrounds,
stream protection, protection of tidal wetlands and beaches, and other
open space, with dimensions, angles, bearings and curve data; square
footage of all lots, open spaces, and land included in the subdivision and
the total acreage of land included in the subdivision shall be shown.
xvi. Monuments - Existing and proposed monuments.
xvii. Streets - Accurate layout of existing and proposed streets, easements or
rights-of-way; including those for utilities and drainage either on or off
site, with accurate bearings and dimensions, including arc length, radii
and angle of all curves. For streets, the existing and proposed grades at
the center line of the street, including delineation of all vertical curves
and proposed cross sections and width of pavement shall be drawn for
each fifty (50) feet of the roadway and key elevations of existing adjoining
streets and spot elevations showing tentative grading of proposed streets
within the subdivision. Cross section drawings shall have a scale of 1-
inch equals 10 feet. In addition, a detailed drawing at a scale of 1” = 20’
shall be provided for all proposed cul-de-sacs and road intersections
with spot elevations every 10’ around the perimeter. Additional road
sections shall be provided as required by the Commission.
xviii. Sidewalks and Curbing - The location and composition of existing and
proposed sidewalks, curbs, gutters and special structures.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
39
xix. Culverts, Manholes, and Other Special Structures - Detail drawings of
any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, and other special structures
including the depth, invert slope and size of all pipes, ditches, culverts,
manholes and catch basins; including top of grate elevations, headwalls
and watercourses, and typical ditch and watercourse cross sections.
xx. Water and Sewer Mains and Other Appurtenances - Location and size of
existing water mains and appurtenances, community wells and pumps
houses, sanitary sewers and proposed extension of the water supply and
sanitary sewer lines including connections to the existing mains. All
existing facilities shall be shown in dashed lines and proposed
installations in heavy solid lines.
xxi. Utility Lines - Proposed plan views of underground power, telephone,
and TV cables shall be included in the submission. These utilities shall be
installed prior to paving and located. These utilities shall be located on
the as-built drawings.
xxii. Other Improvements - Details of all other proposed improvements or
modifications; including a statement specifying the requirements for site
preparation for each lot.
xxiii. Erosion and Sedimentation Control - Notation and details on erosion and
sedimentation control methods to be employed (see Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan Section 4-2-8)
xxiv. Computations - Computations shall be submitted for all proposed storm
sewer facilities and for structures, which are not included in Appendix E.
xxv. Test Pits - Location and results of all deep test pits, percolation test holes,
or other means of investigating the feasibility for subsurface sewage
disposal (see Appendix C).
xxvi. Coastal Area Management Site Review - If within the coastal boundary,
the narrative of the Coastal Area Management Site Review in accordance
with Section 5-7 of these Regulations must be submitted, and the
following note must be placed on the Mylar, “Reviewed and approved by
the East Lyme Planning Commission for coastal site plan review under
Connecticut General Statutes Sections 22a-105 through 22a-109, as
amended.”
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
40
(E) Stormwater Management Plan
A Stormwater Management Plan shall be included as a part of any subdivision
application. Changes to land cover due to development without proper
consideration of stormwater impacts can permanently alter the hydrologic
response of local watersheds and potentially increase stormwater runoff rates
and volumes, which in turn has the potential to increase flooding, stream
channel erosion, sediment transport and deposition and impact water quality.
Increases to impervious surfaces associated with development have been directly
linked to the degradation of water quality. Water is a valuable natural,
economic, recreational, cultural and aesthetic resource. The protection and
preservation of ground and surface water is in the public interest and essential to
the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of East Lyme.
i. The applicant’s Stormwater Management Plan shall include a narrative of
the objectives including potential impacts resulting from the proposal or
activity and a description of the practices, techniques, structures and
facilities proposed to mitigate such impacts. It shall provide, at a
minimum, the following information and shall be prepared by an
engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
ii. Existing site conditions inclusive of soil characteristics based on USDA
soil surveys including soil names, map unit, erodibility, permeability,
depth, texture and soil structure, and results of any on-site testing.
iii. Existing Drainage Area Plan showing subcatchment drainage areas and
analysis points with total area, groundcover, impervious surface area and
runoff coefficients used to calculate pre-development peak runoff rates
and volumes.
iv. Proposed Drainage Area Plan showing subcatchment drainage areas and
analysis points with total area, groundcover, impervious surface area and
runoff coefficients used to calculate post-development peak runoff rates
and volumes, location and description of receiving stormwater
conveyance systems, surface waters, wetlands and other sensitive
receptors.
v. Proposed site conditions including description of proposed stormwater
management system for construction and post-construction phases, total
disturbed area, increase in impervious surface due to development, and
any potential impacts to wetlands, watercourses, and groundwater on or
adjacent to the site.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
41
vi. A description of design methodologies, hydrologic, hydraulic, and water
quality computations for all practices and techniques, and structures and
facilities as prescribed in Section 6-8 of these regulations.
vii. Drawings including plan views, profiles, cross-sections, and typical
details of all storm water management system components at adequate
scale(s) and containing sufficient detail to clearly depict the intent of the
design; details of construction and/or installation, dimensions and
materials including planting and landscape plans and details associated
with storm water management system components.
viii. Structural design, geotechnical design and supporting information, as
required by the Town Engineer for stormwater management system
components including but not limited to, storm sewers, channels, outlet
protection measures, culverts, bridges, dams, spillways, outlet
worksweirs and other structures.
ix. Location of all easements (20’ width minimum) stating the specific
responsibilities of the grantor and grantee as to the access and
maintenance of the storm water system.
x. Estimated cost for bonding of construction of stormwater maintenance
system, including professional oversight and inspection until approval
and filing of final subdivision plan.
xi. Proposed operation, inspection and maintenance schedule program for
the stormwater management system and the proposed designation of the
party responsible for the operation, inspection and maintenance of the
stormwater management system. The following entities may be
designated as a responsible party:
a. A homeowner’s association comprised of the owners of all the lots
in the subdivision.
b. The owner(s) of each lot in the subdivision, who shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the stormwater management system.
c. Any suitable alternative approved by the Commission.
xii. If applicable, properly executed legal documents, including warranty
deeds for any transfers of title to the party designated to maintain and
operate the stormwater management system, shall be submitted with the
final subdivision plan to be filed. All such documents shall be acceptable
to the Town Attorney and the Commission and shall be filed with the
East Lyme Town Clerk simultaneously with the filing of the approved
final subdivision maps.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
42
(F) Grading Plan
The grading plan shall be drawn on maps produced by one of the following
processes: wash-off photographic polyester film, fixed line photographic
polyester film, original ink drawing on polyester film or linen, or any other
material approved by the public records administrator. They shall be submitted
on sheets twenty-four (24) inches wide and thirty-six (36) inches long and to a
scale of 1” = 40’ and shall bear the seal of a Professional Engineer licensed to
practice in the State of Connecticut. Contours and elevations shall be based on
the same benchmarks as provided in Section 5-1. The minimum size for all plan
lettering shall be 80 guide “Leroy” or 3/32 inch. In addition to the Mylar, the
original and ten (10) copies reproduced by black and white or similar contact
process shall be submitted. The grading plan may be combined with the
construction plan with permission of the Commission. The grading plan shall
show at least the following information:
i. Title of subdivision.
ii. Name and address of the owner of the land to be subdivided; name and
address of the applicant if different from the owner.
iii. Date, scale, graphic scale, north arrow, town, and state.
iv. Layout of existing and proposed lot lines and street lines.
v. Existing and proposed contours shown at an interval not exceeding two
(2) feet, based on field and aerial survey.
vi. Existing and proposed drainage and watercourses.
vii. Location of existing and typical location of proposed permanent
buildings and structures, including well and septic system locations, in
order to illustrate the feasibility of improving proposed lots.
viii. Locations, elevations and profiles of all test holes, test pits or borings,
located in accordance with the specifications of Appendix C.
ix. Notations and details on erosion and sedimentation control methods to
be employed.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
43
(G) Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
In accordance with Sections 22a-325 through 22a-329 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, soil erosion and sedimentation controls are required for any activity
which would create a disturbed area of cumulatively more than one-half (1/2)
acre in size. Any development creating a disturbed area within a special erosion
control area, as defined in Section 2-2-13, is subject to the requirements for filing
and obtaining certification of an erosion and sedimentation control plan. The
purpose of the sedimentation controls is to minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation that occurs as a result of rapid changes in land use resulting in the
construction of residential, industrial and commercial development, and land
disturbing activities associated with development. Soil erosion caused by such
land use changes necessitates costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills, and roads
and embankments, in addition to destroying the inherent soil capabilities to
support vegetation. The sediment, upon entering water bodies and wetlands, is
a major source of pollution and limits desired water quality and supply,
aesthetics, recreational and fish and wildlife habitat benefits. Deposition clogs
storm sewers, road ditches and may damage adjoining properties.
i. To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan
shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion
and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff on the
proposed site based on the best available technology. As a general rule,
the area disturbed at any one time shall be kept to a minimum. The
principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in
the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002),
as amended.
Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior
approval of the Commission. Said plan shall contain, but not be limited
to:
a. A narrative on the site plan describing:
1. The development;
2. The schedule for grading and construction activities including:
a. Start and completion dates;
b. Sequence of grading and construction;
c. Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and
sediment control measures;
d. Sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
44
3. The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control
measures and stormwater management facilities;
4. The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and storm water management facilities;
5. The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities;
6. The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater
management facilities;
7. Identification of a designated on-site individual responsible for
installation, monitoring and correction of sediment control plan
requirements and authorized to take corrective actions, as
required, to ensure compliance with certified plans.
b. A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show:
1. The location of the proposed development and adjacent
properties;
2. The existing and proposed topography including soil types,
wetlands, watercourses and water bodies; beaches and dunes, and
bluffs;
3. The existing structures on the project site, if any;
4. The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled
of graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if
applicable, new property lines;
5. The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and
sediment control and stormwater management facilities;
6. The sequence of grading and construction activities;
7. The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion
and sediment control measures;
8. The sequence for final stabilization for the development site;
9. Before and after contours at not less than 2 foot intervals;
10. Certification block entitled, “Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan Certified by vote of the East Lyme Planning Commission on
(date)” and a space for the signature of the Chairman or Secretary
of the Commission;
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
45
11. Submission of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
shall be accompanied by a complete application form, which is
available from the Town Planning Department;
12. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the
applicant or requested by the Commission or its agent.
c. Minimum Acceptable Standards
1. Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in
accordance with these Regulations and Appendix D using the
principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as
amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a
development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during
construction, is stabilized from erosion when completed, and does
not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation;
2. The minimum standards for individual measures are those in
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
(1985), as amended. The Commission may grant exceptions as
long as the proposed activity will not result in consequences
inconsistent with the purpose of these Regulations and those
standards;
3. The appropriate method from the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended, shall be used in
determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an
alternative, equivalent method is approved by the Commission;
4. The location and boundaries of tidal wetlands, watercourses,
beaches, dunes and coastal bluffs shall be shown. If an applicant
disputes the designation of any part of the land as a special
erosion control area, the applicant may be required to produce
such information, including documentation by a soils scientist for
inland wetlands or a botanist for tidal wetlands, as the
Commission or its agent deem necessary, to permit an informed
decision.
d. Issuance or Denial of Certification
1. The Planning Commission shall either certify that the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Plan, as filed, complies with the
requirements and objectives of this Regulation, or deny
certification when the development proposal does not comply
with these Regulations. Denial of certification by the Commission
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
46
of a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be sufficient
reason for denial of the overall subdivision application;
2. Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed as extending the
time limits for the approval of any application under Chapter 126
of the Connecticut General Statutes;
3. Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the Commission may
be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District
which may make recommendations concerning such plan;
provided such review shall be completed within thirty days of the
receipt of such plan by the county Soil and Water Conservation
District;
4. The Commission may forward a copy of the development
proposal to the Conservation Commission or other review agency
or consultant for review and comment.
e. Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
1. The estimated costs of measures required to control erosion and
sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, shall be covered
in a performance bond or other assurance acceptable to the
Commission in accordance with the provisions specified under
Section 9 of the Regulations;
2. Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and
sediment control plan is certified and those control measures and
facilities are installed and functional;
3. Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities
shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified plan;
4. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective
condition to ensure compliance with the certified plan.
As-built plans may be required by the Planning Commission for any
soil and erosion control facilities which are to be considered
permanent.
(H) Studies and Reports
i. As set forth in Section 4-2-3 of these Regulations.
5-3 CONSTRUCTION SEQUENCE REPORT
5-3-1 Schedule - A schedule for the expected completion of improvements shall be
submitted and noted on the subdivision plan to specifically include the following
notes:
(A) All improvements associated with the construction of the subdivision
which involves work as defined in Section 2-2-21 affecting adjacent
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
47
property for which an easement has been acquired shall be completed
within four (4) months of work begun within the easement.
(B) All work associated with off-site improvements for this subdivision shall
be completed within four (4) months of work begun on the off-site
improvements associated with the subdivision. Improvements for town
owned cul-de-sacs shall be exempted from this section and instead
regulated by Section 8-3.
(C) A site restoration bond for off-site improvements and improvements on
adjacent properties as described in Section 9-2 will be required as part of
the approval process. This bond is separate and distinct from the
performance bond as described in Section 9-1 of these Regulations.
5-3-2 Extensions - The Commission may grant an extension of the provisions
described in Section 5-3-1 (A) and 5-3-1 (B) for an additional period of four (4)
months, if it finds that no adverse impacts on adjoining property owners is
evident. No more than three (3) extensions of four (4) months each may be
granted, prior to calling the bond.
5-3-3 Notes - This note may be omitted from the record subdivision plan if there is no
work to be done on adjacent properties or no required off-site improvements.
5-4 SANITATION REPORT – When on-site sewage disposal is to be provided, soil testing
for on-site sewage disposal systems shall be conducted in accordance with Appendix C.
At least one (1) deep test pit and percolation test is required on each lot. The East Lyme
Health Department must be present to witness the digging and testing or receive
satisfactory certification of conduct of testing. Field testing shall be scheduled
sufficiently in advance to allow for a submission of the proposed final plan to the Health
Department for review at least three weeks prior to the anticipated formal submission to
the Planning Commission. A copy of the proposed plan must be provided to the Health
Department for review and field-testing purposes. A letter from the Health Department
must be provided certifying the land to be subdivided and subdivision plans are
satisfactory for on-site sewage disposal systems.
When a subdivision is to be served by the Municipal Sanitary Sewer System, a report
detailing the design discharge volume, the nature of wastewater and any special
pretreatment systems anticipated, as well as a description and plan of sewer connection
location and any proposed sewer collection system extensions, including pump stations,
shall be submitted. A letter from the Water and Sewer Commission shall be provided
noting review of the proposed sanitary system and indicating accessibility and
feasibility of the proposal.
When a subdivision is to be served by a public sewerage system other than the
municipal system, a report shall be submitted detailing the design criteria and volume
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
48
as well as a description and plan of the proposed distribution and disposal system.
Letter(s) indicating the approval of the system by the East Lyme Health Department,
East Lyme Water and Sewer Commission, and State Department of Environmental
Protection shall be provided. In addition, the letter from the Water and Sewer
Commission shall indicate that the developer has met all the requirements of and has
received approval for consideration as a public or community sewerage system in
accordance with Sections 7-245 through 7-246L Connecticut General Statutes.
5-5 WATER SUPPLY REPORT - Two (2) copies of the water report shall be submitted as a
part of the application. The design of the water system shall be in compliance with the
requirements and the provisions of Section 6-16 of these Regulations.
5-5-1 Private Water Supply - When a subdivision is not to be served by a public water
supply, a report from the Health Department shall be obtained and submitted by
the applicant certifying that the land to be subdivided and the subdivision plans
are satisfactory for the installation of private water supply.
5-5-2 Public Water Supply - When a subdivision is to be served by a water supply
system that will be connected to the East Lyme water distribution and
transmission system, a statement shall be provided from the Water and Sewer
Commission stating the impact on the existing East Lyme water system.
Evidence for compliance with Section 3-3 of these Regulations shall be provided.
Non-residential subdivisions and subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots shall
comply with the requirements and the provisions of Section 6-16 of these
Regulations.
5-6 PESTICIDE REPORT – Reports submitted in compliance with Section 4-2-3(E) of these
regulations shall detail the known history of pesticide use at the site, including the types
of pesticides used, application rates and the period over which such use occurred. In
addition soil and groundwater testing shall be performed by qualified professionals and
be of sufficient scope to reasonably evaluate potential human health impacts resulting
from the past application of pesticides at the site. Soil data shall be measured against
criteria established in the CT DEP’s Remediation Standard Regulations (RSR’s) for
Pollutant Mobility Criteria (PMC) and Direct Exposure Criteria (DEC). Groundwater
shall be sampled for pesticides via EPA Test Method 505 and meet drinking water
standards. All test results evaluated shall be included in the report. Where test results
show concentrations of pesticides in excess of RSR values, a remediation plan shall be
included in the report and areas of remediation clearly identified on a plan.
5-7 COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT (“CAM”) SITE PLAN REVIEW – A Coastal Site
Plan Review (“CSPR”) is required for all subdivisions within the coastal boundary of the
Town of East Lyme in accordance with Sections 22a-105 through 22a-109 of the
Connecticut General Statutes. All applicants for subdivisions located within the coastal
boundary shall file with the Commission ten (10) copies of a coastal site plan application
on such form as prescribed by the Commission.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
49
5-7-1 Pursuant to Sections 22a-105 through 22a-109 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, a coastal site plan shall include the following information.
(1) A plan showing the location and spatial relationship of coastal resources on
and contiguous to the site;
(2) A description of the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project
location, timing and methods of construction;
(3) An assessment of the capability for the resources to accommodate the
proposed use;
(4) An assessment of the suitability of the project for the proposed site;
(5) An evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project
on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development
opportunities and a description of proposed methods to mitigate adverse
impacts on coastal resources and water dependent uses.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that any unmitigated adverse impacts are
acceptable and that such activity is consistent with the coastal policies of Section 22a-92
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
5-7-2 In accordance with Section 22a-106(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, when
determining the acceptability of a proposed subdivision’s potential adverse
impacts on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development
opportunities, the Planning Commission shall:
(1) Consider the characteristics of the site, including the location and condition
of any of the coastal resources defined in Section 22a-93(7);
(2) Consider the potential effects, both beneficial and adverse, of the proposed
activity on coastal resources and future water-dependent opportunities,
and
(3) Follow all applicable goals and policies stated in Section 22a-92 and
identify conflicts between the proposed activity and any goal or policy.
5-7-3 In accordance with Section 22a-105(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Planning Commission may modify or condition the subdivision application to:
(1) Ensure conformance with the goals and policies of Section 22a-92;
(2) Minimize any anticipated adverse impacts on coastal resources, as defined in
Section 22a-93 (15); and
(3) Ensure that a portion of any waterfront subdivision satisfies the waterdependent
use criteria of Section 22a-93(16) and 22a-93(17).
5-7-4 In accordance with Section22a-106 (d) and (e) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Planning Commission shall state in writing the findings and reasons
for its action.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
50
5-8 ARCHAEOLGICAL SURVEYS – Archaeological surveys shall be conducted by a
professional archaeologist whose credentials are recognized by the Connecticut Historical
Commission and/or State Archaeologist. A report of all surveys conducted shall be sent
to the State Historic Preservation Office a minimum of 35 days prior to submission of the
subdivision application to the Planning Commission.
5-8-1 Assessment Survey - An Assessment Survey (sensitivity survey) shall be
conducted on all land proposed for subdivision to provide a general evaluation
of the archaeological potential of the property including identification of known
archaeological sites, areas of severe ground disturbance, and areas of low to high
probability for the existence of unknown archaeological sites.
5-8-2 Reconnaissance Survey - A Reconnaissance Survey (detailed field examination)
shall be conducted where the Assessment Survey indicates that an archaeological
site exists or is likely to exist. A reconnaissance survey is a detailed field
examination designed to locate all prehistoric and historic archaeological
resources within the project area.
5-8-3 Intensive Survey - An Intensive Survey shall be conducted where evidence of an
archaeological site has been found through the Reconnaissance Survey. An
intensive survey represents an in-depth archaeological field examination of a
particular archaeological site(s) for the express purpose of recovering sufficient
information to enable an evaluation of the context, integrity and significance of
the site.
5-9 FINAL RECORD SUBDIVISION PLAN – Final Record Subdivision Plans shall
conform to the Subdivision Improvement Plan, including any conditions specified by
the Commission. A Detailed Final Plan shall consist of and be prepared in accordance
with the following:
5-9-1 Drafting Standards - The subdivision maps shall be produced by one of the
following processes: Wash-off photographic polyester film, fixed line
photographic polyester film, original ink drawing on polyester film or linen, or
any other material approved by the public records administrator. This process
shall be certified by a live stamp applied by the producer. The stamp shall be
affixed with indelible red ink. The stamp shall include the name of the producer
and the process used. It shall measure 1” by 2”. Original ink drawing will be so
identified using the same process. The subdivision maps shall be thirty-six (36)
inches long and twenty-four (24) inches wide or eighteen (18) inches long and
twelve (12) inches wide at a scale approved by the Commission which shall have
a scale no greater than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. The index sheet or first
sheet shall contain a block to fill in all pages, dates, and revisions by page. The
plan shall incorporate a survey of the parcel in accordance with the standards
established by the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Section 20-300b
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
51
through 20-300b-20 inclusive which shall be tied to the Connecticut State Plane
Coordinate System by a closed traverse if land is within a distance to base control
of 1,000 feet. The minimum size for all plan lettering shall be 80 guide “Leroy”
or 3/32 inch. The original Subdivision Improvements Plan as revised shall be
submitted upon approval of the subdivision. An additional two (2) copies shall
be scaled in accordance with the pertinent tax map on file in the Assessor’s office.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
52
SECTION 6 – SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
6-1 PURPOSES AND APPLICABILITY
6-1-1 Purpose – In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and
improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access
to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and road maintenance
equipment, and to ensure the orderly growth and development of the Town of
East Lyme, to provide meaningful open space and the protection of significant
natural and community resources, and to promote the public health and welfare,
it is the purpose of this section to provide more flexible standards intended to
direct development to the land most suitable for development, produce more
attractive, creative and efficient use of land, and for the following specified
purposes:
1. To conserve open land, including those areas containing unique and sensitive
natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, floodplains and
wetlands, by setting them aside from development;
2. To provide greater design flexibility and efficiency in the siting of services
and infrastructure, including the opportunity to reduce length of roads,
utility runs, and the amount of paving required for residential development;
3. To reduce erosion and sedimentation by the retention of existing vegetation,
and the minimization of development on steep slopes;
4. To provide for a diversity of lot sizes, building densities, and housing choices
to accommodate a variety of age and income groups, and residential
preferences, so that the community's population diversity may be
maintained;
5. To implement adopted municipal policies to conserve a variety of
irreplaceable and environmentally sensitive resource lands as set forth in the
Town of East Lyme's Open Space Plan, including provisions for reasonable
incentives to create a greenway system for the benefit of present and future
residents;
6. To implement adopted land use, transportation, and community policies, as
identified in the Town of East Lyme's Comprehensive Plan;
7. To protect areas of the Town of East Lyme with productive agricultural soils
for continued or future agricultural use, by conserving blocks of land large
enough to allow for efficient farm operations;
8. To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open land, with
amenities in the form of neighborhood open space, and with a strong
neighborhood identity;
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
53
9. To provide for the conservation and maintenance of open land within the
Town of East Lyme to achieve the above-mentioned goals and for active or
passive recreational use by residents;
10. To provide multiple options for landowners in order to minimize impacts on
environmental resources (sensitive lands such as wetlands, floodplain, and
steep slopes) and disturbance of natural or cultural features (such as mature
woodlands, hedgerows and tree lines, critical wildlife habitats, historic
buildings and sites, and fieldstone walls);
11. To provide standards reflecting the varying circumstances and interests of
individual landowners, and the individual characteristics of their properties;
12. To conserve scenic views and elements of the Town of East Lyme's rural
character, and to minimize perceived density, by minimizing views of new
development from existing roads; and
13. To preserve existing lot yields consistent with conventional subdivisions so
as not to affect value.
As such, the provisions of this Section shall apply to all subdivisions of land
within the Town of East Lyme and are hereby required.
6-1-2 Contextual Priorities - All subdivisions and land developments shall avoid or
minimize adverse impacts on the Town of East Lyme's natural, cultural and
historic resources, as defined below. As a guideline, the design of Buildable Land
should be in a manner consistent with the following:
(A) Groundwater Resources - This section is intended to ensure that the
Town’s groundwater resources are protected for purposes of providing
public water for its residents and businesses, and to protect the base flow
of the Town’s surface waters. These regulations shall be applied in
conjunction with those provided for in Section 6-8 of these regulations,
dealing with stormwater management, groundwater conservation and
recharge.
The proposed subdivision and land development of any tract shall be
designed to cause the least practicable disturbance to natural infiltration
and percolation of precipitation to the groundwater table. (Through
careful planning of vegetation and land disturbance activities, and the
placement of streets, buildings and other impervious surfaces in locations
other than those identified on the Existing Resources and Site Analysis
Plan as having the greatest permeability where precipitation is most
likely to infiltrate and recharge the groundwater.)
(B) Agricultural Land and Prime Agricultural Soils - Site design should
avoid division of agricultural land and should minimize negative impacts
on agriculture on and adjacent to the parcel. Structure and driveway
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
54
locations should be located so as to be clustered at the edges of open
fields, away from areas of existing agricultural activity on or adjacent to
the parcel. Vegetated areas should be preserved where they buffer
agricultural operations.
(C) Ridge Lines and Scenic Roads - Development near prominent hilltops
and ridge lines should be sited so that building silhouettes will be below
the ridge line as viewed from nearby streets. Clear-cutting of lots along
ridgelines should be minimized. In considering the visual impact of
development, the Commission may require additional reasonable
restrictions to minimize the visibility of developments from existing
public streets. Structures should be located to avoid prominent placement
in the foreground of the viewshed. Subdivisions within view of national,
state or locally-designated scenic roads shall be of particular concern
relative to these standards.
(D) Natural Diversity Habitat Areas - Lots should be configured and
structures located so as to minimize disturbance and provide reasonable
protection for natural habitats and communities as described in the Site
Resource Assessment.
(E) Historic and Archaeological Resources - Historic and prehistoric
structures, sites and features shall be protected. Subdivisions and resubdivisions
shall be laid out to preserve all significant natural, cultural,
historical and archaeological features identified on the Natural and
Cultural Resource Map required in Section 4-2-3(A), or as determined by
the Commission from expert testimony to be of significant natural,
cultural or historical value.
i. Natural Resources are generally defined as environmentally valuable
areas such as wetlands, watercourses, flood plains, areas of steep
slopes, habitats, etc. Farmlands and forestlands are also to be
considered as natural resources.
ii. Cultural Resources tend to be more subjectively defined. They
include such things as vistas, scenic ridges, scenic roads, old houses,
old stone walls, roads bounded by old stone walls, archeological sites,
sites of historic interest, areas of traditional recreational value, animal
pens, mill and factory sites, graves and/or burial grounds, water or
shore access, etc.
iii. Archaeological Resources are areas of historic, prehistoric or symbolic
importance, upon which occurred important historic or pre-historic
events, or which are importantly associated with historic or prehistoric
events or persons, or cultures, or which were subject to
sustained historic or prehistoric activity of man. Historic Property
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
55
means any individual building, structure, object or site that is
significant in the history, architecture, archaeology and culture of the
state, its political subdivisions or the nation and the real property
used in connection therewith.
iv. Historic Structures and Sites - Plans shall be designed to protect
existing historic resources of all types and encourage the protection,
enhancement, and use of buildings and structures and appurtenant
vistas having historic and/or aesthetic value which represent or reflect
elements of the Town's cultural, social, economic and architectural
history. The protection of an existing historic resource shall include
the conservation of the landscape immediately associated with and
significant to that resource, to preserve its historic context. Where, in
the opinion of the Commission, a plan would have an impact upon an
historic resource, the developer shall mitigate that impact to the
satisfaction of the Commission by modifying the design, relocating
proposed lot lines, providing landscape buffers, or other approved
means.
Existing natural and cultural features that would add value to
residential development or to the Town of East Lyme as a whole shall
be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees or stone walls
shall be removed from any proposed subdivision, nor any change of
grade of the land affected, until approval of the subdivision has been
granted. All trees on the plan required to be retained shall be
preserved, and all trees, where required, shall be welled and
protected against change of grade. If the parcel to be subdivided is
found to contain an archaeological site(s), the Commission shall seek
to maximize protection and in situ preservation of archaeological
resources. The Commission may withhold approval of the plan
unless the applicant:
a. Restricts the full extent of the archaeological site, so as to preserve
the same area free from development, by means of a permanent
preservation easement granted to the Town or a recognized
conservation entity, with perpetual rights to conduct limited
archaeological research on the same area at reasonable times; or
b. Upon recommendation by the Connecticut Historic Preservation
Office and the State Archaeologist, the applicant has agreed to
develop and implement a Data Recovery Program prior to
construction, consisting of the professional documentation of the
archaeological site by means of its physical destruction through
archaeological excavation and removal. All costs associated with
the Data Recovery Program shall be borne by the applicant.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
56
(F) Historic Rural Road Corridors and Scenic Viewsheds - The Town of East
Lyme's Plan of Conservation and Development identifies a number of
historic rural roads in various parts of the Town of East Lyme. All
applications for subdivision and land development shall attempt to
preserve the scenic visual corridors along such roads by incorporating
them into Greenway areas or otherwise providing for building setbacks
and architectural designs to minimize their intrusion. In instances where
such designs fail to satisfactorily protect corridors, applicants will be
required to provide naturalistic landscape buffers to minimize their
adverse visual impacts. The species specified for such buffers shall be
selected on the basis of an inventory of tree and shrub species found in
existing hedgerows and along wooded roadside edges in the vicinity of the
development proposal.
(G) Stone Walls - Subdivisions should be designed to preserve all existing
stone walls. Portions removed shall be rebuilt elsewhere on the property, or
used to enhance other existing walls on the property. Stone walls fronting
any existing public or private street shall be maintained intact. Stone walls
or other natural and manmade features should be used for lot boundary
lines and proposed street right-of-way delineation.
(H) Wetlands and Watercourses - In order to protect water quality and wildlife
habitats, development and disturbance should be minimized within 100
feet of any wetland and of any watercourse as required by the East Lyme
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. These provisions do not
require the creation of an undisturbed buffer around any wetland or
watercourse.
(I) Stream Valleys, Swales, Springs and Other Lowland Areas - Stream
valleys (which include stream channels and floodplains), swales, springs
and other lowland areas are resources that warrant restrictive land use
controls because of flooding hazards to human life and property, their
ground water recharge functions, their importance to water quality and the
health of aquatic communities, and their wildlife habitats. They are
generally poorly suited for on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems. The
following activities shall be minimized:
i. Disturbance to streams and drainage swales; and
ii. Disturbance to year-round wetlands, areas with seasonally high water
tables, and areas of surface water concentration.
(J) Trails - The integrity of existing cart paths, historic ways, discontinued and
abandoned roads, and trails, which can serve as connections to
conservation open space lands or adjacent parcels should be preserved.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
57
1. When a subdivision or land development proposal is traversed by or
abuts an existing trail customarily used by pedestrians and/or
equestrians, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to
make provisions for continued recreational use of the trail;
2. The applicant may alter the course of the trail within the tract for which
development is proposed under the following conditions:
a. The points at which the trail enters and exits the tract remain
unchanged;
b. The proposed alteration exhibits quality trail design according to
generally accepted principles of landscape architecture (For
example: Bureau of State Parks publication Non-Motorized
Trails); and
c. The proposed alteration does not coincide with a paved road
intended for use by motorized vehicles.
3. When trails are intended for public or private use, they shall be
protected by a permanent conservation easement on the properties on
which they are located. The width of the protected area in which the
trail is located should be a minimum of ten feet. The language of the
conservation easement shall be to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission upon recommendation of the Town Attorney;
4. The land area permanently designated for trails for public use may be
credited toward the open space requirement described in Section 23 of
the Zoning Regulations;
5. An applicant may propose and develop a new trail. If said trail is
available for use by the general public and connects with an existing
trail, the land area protected for said trail may be credited toward the
open space requirement described in Section 23 of the Zoning
Regulations;
6. Trail improvements shall demonstrate adherence to principles of
quality trail design;
7. Trails shall have a vertical clearance of no less than ten (10) feet;
8. Width of the trail surface may vary depending upon type of use to be
accommodated, but in no case shall be less than three (3) feet or greater
than six (6) feet;
9. No trail shall be designed with the intent to accommodate motorized
vehicles.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
58
(K) Trees - Subdivisions should be designed to preserve healthy mature
woodlands, specimen trees and groups of trees that significantly
contribute to the aesthetic or natural character of the site and adjacent
streets, including trees over 18 - inches d.b.h (diameter at breast height),
woodlands and vegetated buffers along roadways, property lines,
watercourses, and stone walls as buffers between adjacent properties and
streets.
(L) Woodlands - All woodlands on any tract proposed for subdivision or
land development shall be evaluated by the applicant to determine the
extent to which such woodlands should be designated partly or entirely
as Conservation Land or Development lands. Evaluation criteria shall
include:
i. Configuration and size;
ii. Present conditions, i.e., stocking, health and species composition;
iii. Site potential, i.e., the site's capabilities to support woodlands, based
upon its topographic, soil and hydrologic characteristics;
iv. Ecological functions: i.e., in protecting steep slopes, erodible soils,
maintaining stream quality and providing for wildlife habitats; and
v. Relationship to woodlands on adjoining and nearby properties and
the potential for maintaining continuous woodland areas.
The evaluation of the tract's woodlands shall be undertaken by a forester,
landscape architect, horticulturist or another qualified professional
acceptable to the Planning Commission. This evaluation shall be
submitted as a report and made a part of the application for a preliminary
plan. At a minimum, that report shall include one or more maps
indicating boundaries and conditions of woodland areas accompanied by
a report addressing the above criteria.
In designing a subdivision and land development plan for any tract of
land, the applicant shall be guided by the following standards:
a. Healthy woodlands exceeding one acre shall be preserved and
designated as Greenway areas, to the maximum extent possible.
Proposed site improvements shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize the loss or degradation of woodland areas;
b. Subdivisions shall be designed to preserve woodlands along
roadways, property lines and lines occurring within a site such as
streams, swales, stone walls, fences and hedgerows. Such lines and
the native vegetation associated with them shall be preserved as
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
59
buffers between adjacent properties and between areas being
subdivided within a property. Preservation shall include ground,
shrub, understory and canopy vegetation.
c. Disturbance or removal of woodlands occupying environmentally
sensitive areas shall be undertaken only when approved by the
Planning Commission and on a limited, selective basis to minimize
the adverse impacts of such actions. This shall include but not
necessarily be limited to vegetation performing important soil
stabilizing functions on wet soils, stream banks, and sloping lands.
d. No clearing or earth disturbance (except for soil analysis for
proposed sewage disposal systems) shall be permitted on a site
before the completion of subdivision and land development
agreements. The determination of sight distance clearances along
roadways shall be made graphically and not by clearing on-site
prior to final plan approval.
(M) Slopes - Moderately sloping lands (15 to 25-percent) and steep sloping
lands (over 25-percent) are prone to severe erosion if disturbed. Erosion
and the resulting overland flow of soil sediments into streams, ponds and
public roads, are detrimental to water quality and aquatic life, and a
potential hazard to public safety.
i. Areas of steep slope shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
ii. All grading and earthmoving on slopes exceeding 15-percent shall be
minimized. On slopes of 15 to 25-percent, the only permitted grading
beyond the terms described above, shall be in conjunction with the
siting of a single family dwelling, its access driveway and the septic
system, which should typically be designed with a long, narrow
drainage field following the land contours.
iii. No site disturbance shall be allowed on slopes exceeding 25-percent
except grading for a portion of a driveway accessing a single family
dwelling when it can be demonstrated that no other routing, which
avoids slopes exceeding 25-percent is feasible.
iv. Grading or earthmoving on all sloping lands of 15-percent or greater
shall not result in earth cuts or fills whose highest vertical dimension
exceeds six feet, except where in the judgment of the Planning
Commission no reasonable alternatives exist for construction of roads,
drainage structures and other public improvements, in which case
such vertical dimensions shall not exceed 12-feet. Roads and
driveways shall follow the line of existing topography to minimize
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
60
the required cut and fill. Finished slopes of all cuts and fills shall be as
required to minimize disturbance of natural grades.
(N) Significant Natural Areas and Features - Natural areas containing rare or
endangered plants and animals, as well as other features of natural
significance, exist throughout the Town of East Lyme. Subdivision
applicants shall take all reasonable measures to protect significant natural
areas and features either identified by the Town of East Lyme's Plan of
Conservation and Development or by the applicant's Natural and
Cultural Resources and Site Analysis Plan (as required in Section 4-2-
3(A)) by incorporating them into proposed open space corridors or
avoiding their disturbance in areas proposed for development.
(O) Streets, Roadways, Sidewalks, and Driveways - Streets, sidewalks,
driveways and utility corridors should adapt to existing contours, terrain,
wetlands, watercourses, and other linear site features such as stone walls,
significant tree lines, and the pattern of open fields in order to minimize
disturbance of existing features, to minimize required cuts and fills and
the potential for erosion and to retain the rural characteristics of the
subdivision site. Streets, sidewalks, driveways and utility corridors shall
use or share existing accesses and rights-of-way where feasible; follow
existing contours to achieve angled ascents where practicable, and avoid
areas of very steep slopes.
6-1-3 Site Design Process - Proposals for all residential subdivisions shall follow a
design process as described below.
(A) Lot Yield - Describe how to determine yield using standard zoning and
subdivision regulations.
(B) Potential Density Increase - The Commission may approve one or more
of the following potential density increases in Section 6-1-4 below for any
residential development, provided at least one of the following
conditions are met:
i. For developments within the RU-40 Zone District utilizing
individual septic where more than 30-percent of the parcel is
permanently preserved as open space;
ii. For developments within the RU-80 and RU-120 Zone Districts
utilizing individual septic where more than 50-percent of the parcel
is permanently preserved as open space; and
iii. A substantial open space buffer is permanently preserved as open
space along the undeveloped portions of collector or arterial roads
and the buffer is:
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
61
• at least 200-feet in width and is significantly uninterrupted in
length unless waived by the Commission in accord with Section
23.5(B)2 of the East Lyme Zoning Regulations,
• not included in the calculation of any lot area, and
• retained in its natural state except for a public, private or common
roadway accessing development on the interior of the parcel.
OR;
iv. The development promotes housing opportunities, consistent with
soil types, terrain, and infrastructure capacity and promotes
housing choice and economic diversity to help meet housing needs.
(C) Building Site Locations - Building site locations shall be identified within
the designated buildable land. Buildings shall be constructed in the
location shown on the Final Approved Plan.
(D) Street Location - With building site locations identified, Applicants shall
delineate a street or driveway system to provide vehicular access to each
lot in a manner conforming to the tract's natural topography and
providing for a safe pattern of circulation, ingress and egress to and from
the building lots and the subdivision. Streets shall minimize adverse
impacts on existing open space land.
(E) Lot Line Location - Where practicable lot lines should follow the
configuration of building sites and streets in a logical and flexible
manner. Otherwise, the design of the lots and location of streets should
be consistent with the existing topography and landscape. Lot lines
should follow existing natural and man-made boundaries such as stone
walls, tree lines and patterns of open fields. All proposed lots shall show
the location of the proposed principal building, driveway, sewerage
leaching fields (primary and reserve), and well.
6-1-4 Density Increases - The Commission may increase the maximum residential
density allowed in a development provided:
(A) The density increase shall not exceed one-half-percent (.50%) for each
additional percentage that open space is preserved in excess of the
minimum open space requirement provided by the Zoning Regulations.
(e.g. if 50% of the parcel is preserved as open space, this is 20% greater than the
minimum requirement of 30% and the Commission may increase the density by
up to 10%.)
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
62
(B) The density increase shall not exceed ten-percent (10%) in the number of
units provided in a residential development to the extent that Housing
Affordability Units (Housing that may be purchased or rented by
households earning no more than eighty-percent (80%) of the areas
median household income, as determined and reported by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, and using no more
than thirty-percent (30%) of their annual income housing costs) are
developed (e.g. if 10% of the proposed housing units will be deed restricted as
Housing Affordability Units, the Commission may increase the density by up to
10%).
Prior to modifying any such requirement, the Commission shall make a finding
on the record that proper provisions have been made for water supply, sewage
disposal, control of wastes, and the protection of water quality.
6-2 LOT DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS – Lots shall be laid out in a manner generally
consistent with specifications of this section.
6-2-1 Lot Size and Configuration - The size of the lots shall be as required by the
Zoning Regulations. Corner lots shall be of sufficient dimensions so that any
structure placed thereon shall conform to the front building setback line on each
street. Where practicable lot lines should follow the configuration of building
sites and streets in a logical and flexible manner. Otherwise, the design of the lots
and location of streets should be consistent with the existing topography and
landscape. Lot lines should follow existing natural and man-made boundaries
such as stone walls, tree lines and patterns of open fields. There shall not be any
fragments of a lot or remainder of a subdivision area. No lot shall be created,
regardless of size, which is rendered useless for building due to utility easement,
rights-of-way, wetlands, watercourses, or topography. Such property shall be
combined with adjacent lots or Conservation Land. The building setback lines
shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations. Interior (Back Lots
or Rear Lots) Lots, herein defined as lots with an access strip that provides road
frontage and being primarily positioned behind another lot with adjacent
frontage on the same road shall be permissible provide adequate access is
provided.
6-2-2 Health Requirements – Unless systems are located in common Conservation
Land, in areas specifically designated by the Commission for this purpose, each
lot shall have sufficient area to accommodate, where public facilities are not
otherwise provided, a private water supply and a private subsurface sewage
disposal system and reserve area.
6-2-3 Unbuildable Lot - No lot shall be approved if found unsuitable for occupancy
and building by reason of utility easements, unstable or adverse soil conditions,
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
63
topography, water or flooding conditions, and/or public health concerns related
to water supply and/or wastewater disposal; such lots shall be combined with
another adjacent lot or Conservation Land.
6-2-4 Building Locations – The orientation of individual building sites should be such
as to maintain maximum natural topography and cover. Structures should be
oriented in a rational and pleasing manner in relation to existing and proposed
public and private streets. Buildings should be spaced and set back an
approximately uniform distance from an existing or proposed public street or
private road. Where site conditions, topography, configuration of existing lots,
roads, structures, rights-of-way, legal requirements, or other constraints preclude
full compliance with this Section, Applicants shall consult with the Town Planner
to determine recommended priorities and potential site design alternatives.
Where practicable, the Commission may alter the configuration and location of
Conservation Land, Buildable Land, streets, lots, lot lines, and building sites for
the purposes of better achieving the goals and objectives of these Regulations
and the East Lyme Plan of Conservation and Development.
6-2-5 Lot Access - Notwithstanding that all lots shall meet the suitability requirements
of this section, actual access to two (2) adjacent lots may be provided by a
combined access drive. The Commission may permit more than two (2) lots to
be served by a single access drive if it finds that no traffic hazard will result. If
the proposed access will serve more than three (3) lots, then the access shall
conform to the requirements of a private street.
(A) All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in a manner,
which prevents erosion and minimizes driveway drainage onto existing or
proposed streets and/or abutting properties and structural drainage
facilities shall be incorporated into the driveway design and construction,
as necessary, to prevent excessive drainage onto streets or abutting
properties.
(B) No driveway shall be greater than 15% slope at any point. Any driveway
having a grade of 10% or more, but not exceeding 15%, shall be paved for
the entire length of the driveway. Shared driveways shall not exceed 10%
or more on the shared portion of driveway.
(C) All driveways shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet.
(D) All driveways shall be paved with bituminous concrete from the edge of
the street pavement to the edge of the street right-of-way. The Commission
may require additional paving based on the location, environmental or
geological concerns.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
64
(E) The Commission may determine that a minimum of one (1) turn-around,
20' by 20', will be required if the length of the driveway exceeds 300 feet, or
if the surrounding terrain will pose a safety problem. The Commission may
also, if it chooses, direct that the Town Engineer or Town Planner make
such a determination as to the need for, and location of, any additional
turn-around.
(F) All plans for subdivision and re-subdivision which show common
driveways shall clearly state which lots are sharing the driveways. The
Commission shall require a note to be placed on the plan stating that the
deed(s) are to include all information regarding easements, rights and
responsibilities regarding the common driveway. All proposed easements
shall be shown on the plan with meets and bounds.
6-2-6 Energy Efficiency and Conservation
(A) The applicant shall demonstrate to the Commission that in developing the
subdivision plan, the use of passive solar energy techniques which would
not significantly increase the cost of the housing to the buyer, after any
available tax credits, subsidies, and exemptions, has been considered. Such
techniques shall maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss, and provide
natural ventilation during the cooling season. The site design techniques
shall include, but not be limited to: (1) house orientation; (2) street and lot
layout; (3) vegetation; (4) natural and manmade topographical features; and
(5) protection of solar access within the development. A written statement
outlining how this requirement has been adhered to shall be required.
(B) All subdivisions shall be planned and designed to encourage energy
efficient development patterns and the use of renewable energy forms
through the use of as many of the following guidelines as possible:
(1) Where natural features or other planning considerations do not limit
street layout and location, streets should have an east-west orientation
to the greatest extent possible with acceptable variations up to 15
degrees north or south of due east to provide for southerly building
orientation.
(2) Lot lines may be oriented in a fashion other than that provided in
Section 6-2-1 of these Regulations if such orientation is necessary to
secure, protect, or control solar access.
(3) Primary and reserve leaching field areas should be planned and located
to the south of a proposed building location whenever such location is
suitable for such purposes and will aid in the use of solar energy
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
65
systems due to tree removal and re-grading associated with the sewage
disposal system.
(4) Existing vegetation and natural terrain located to the north of any
proposed structure which serves as a wind barrier should remain intact.
Other methods of providing for manmade wind barriers, such as earth
mounds, should be encouraged, as appropriate.
(5) The location and designation of open spaces, parks and playgrounds,
should take into account the energy requirements, particularly for solar
and wind access, of the subdivision as follows:
(a) If the maximum possible number of lots have good solar or wind
access, land reserved for open space should be located so as to
avoid the creation of lots without good solar or wind access; or
(b) If the land is such that few lots can be provided with good solar
access, land for open space should be located on land which has
good solar or wind access in order to provide for future use of
community energy systems.
(6) The designation and reservation of land for open space, parks,
playgrounds, or their public uses should not preclude its use in meeting
community energy requirements. Such areas may be used to locate
facilities, subject to any other applicable requirements of these
Regulations and Town Zoning Regulations.
(7) Species of street trees should be chosen taking into account their
suitability in relationship with solar access objectives. Street trees
should be located in such a manner as to avoid shading the most
southerly side of proposed structures in order to facilitate the use of
solar energy systems.
6-3 ADDITIONAL NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS DESIGN STANDARDS - In
addition to the requirements and standards in these Regulations, which are appropriate
to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Commission that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically
adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The
following requirements and standards shall be met:
(A) Proposed industrial lots shall be suitable in area and dimension to accommodate the
types of industrial development anticipated.
(B) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and
volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
(C) Special requirements may be imposed by the Planning Commission with respect to
the street, curb gutter, and sidewalk design and construction.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
66
(D) Special requirements may be imposed by the Planning Commission with respect to
the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater drainage.
(E) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential
external impacts from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including
the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential
development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when
necessary.
(F) Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall normally not be
extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas.
6-4 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS – Subdivisions including related streets, drainage, and
other improvements required by these Regulations, shall be planned, designed, and
constructed in accordance with the standards hereinafter specified.
6-5 PLAN OF CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT – Subdivisions shall be planned
and designed in general conformity with the East Lyme Plan of Conservation and
Development and the Ordinance Concerning Flood Damage Prevention.
6-6 SUBDIVISION NAME – The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or
too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the town.
6-7 OPEN SPACES – The Commission shall require that land be reserved for open space
in accordance with Section 7 of these Regulations.
6-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT – It is recommended that all applicants meet with
the Town Engineer prior to any East Lyme applications that are subject to review by
these regulations and standards (e.g. wetlands). Stormwater management systems
shall be designed to manage site runoff to minimize or eliminate surface and
groundwater pollution, prevent flooding, control peak discharges and provide
pollutant renovation. Design of a stormwater management system shall be in
accordance with the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual and
the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Quality Manual,
as amended. This section, (6-8) shall prevail when conflicts arise between this
document and other reference documents. Additionally, all designs shall meet the
following specific criteria as amended:
6-8-1 General Requirements
(A) The applicant shall be fully responsible for constructing adequate
facilities for the control, collection, conveyance and acceptable disposal of
stormwater, other surface water and subsurface water, whether
originating within the subdivision area or in a tributary drainage area.
All drainage facilities shall be designed by an Engineer licensed as a
professional engineer in the State of Connecticut and shall be subject to
the approval and final acceptance of the Town Engineer.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
67
(B) The storm drainage system shall be separate and independent of the
sanitary sewer system.
(C) When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land
outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage easements must be secured
and indicated on the map.
(D) When the applicant proposes to connect the storm sewer to an existing
storm sewer, calculations must be submitted to demonstrate the
adequacy of the existing sewer to accept the added flow.
(E) Stormwater shall not be permitted to cross the surface of any street but
must be piped underground. Catch basins shall be located on both sides
of the street on continuous grades, at all sags in the roadway, and near
the corners of the roadway at intersecting streets.
(F) If in the judgment of the Commission the runoff from the subdivision will
adversely affect the receiving stream or natural waterway, other means of
runoff water disposal shall be required.
(G) Proper connections shall be made with any existing public drainage
system capable of handling the increased runoff, within 400 feet of the
subdivision, at the applicant’s expense as may be appropriate.
(H) Where adjacent property is not subdivided and no public stormwater
conveyance system is within 400 feet, provisions may be required by the
Commission for extension of the system by continuing appropriate
conveyance structures to the higher exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, at such size and grade as will allow for their proper
functioning.
(I) No unnatural depressions shall be allowed on lots, rights-of-way or
recreation and open space area unless properly drained or approved
under the Storm Water Management Plan.
(J) The proposed drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with any
town drainage plan and with due regard for the ultimate development
within the drainage basin.
(K) Any work to be performed on streams or within a designated inland
wetland area must be approved by the Inland Wetlands Agency of East
Lyme and any proposed work within the tidal wetlands must be
approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection. Work in
both tidal and inland wetlands located within the coastal boundary must
be consistent with the policies of the Connecticut Coastal Management
Act. Work in both inland and tidal wetlands may also require a permit
from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
68
(L) Prior to the Town accepting the streets in any new subdivision, the
applicant must convey by plans and deeds the rights-of-way for the
streets and easements for all drainage facilities within the Town road
system and in other areas the Commission deems necessary.
(M) Structures constructed as part of the Stormwater Management System
shall not be placed within the area designated as open space.
6-8-2 Peak Flow and Volume Control - The peak flow rates and stormwater
volumes shall be calculated for both pre- and post-construction conditions
using the most appropriate of the United States Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service, Technical Release (TR) and Army Corps of
Engineering, Hydrologic Engineering Center (HEC) series or other hydraulic
programs approved by the Town Engineer. The standard for characterizing
pre-development land use for on-site areas shall be woods in good condition
unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer. The calculation shall
assume full build-out of the subdivision using theoretical yields unless land is
set aside as buffer areas and protected in perpetuity through a conservation
easement.
(A) There shall be no increase in peak rate of run-off leaving the site
calculated for pre-construction and post-construction site conditions
using the 24-hour rainfall amount for storm frequencies of 2, 5, 10, 25, 50,
and 100 years for each sub-catchment drainage area. The volume
retained to mitigate the pre-construction to post-construction increase in
peak rate of runoff can be released at a rate not to exceed the preconstruction
peak rate by a method approved by the Town Engineer.
(B) The calculated volume increase from pre-construction to postconstruction
calculated using the 24-hour rainfall amount for storm
frequencies of 2, 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 years for each subcatchment
drainage area shall be retained on site and infiltrated or released by a
method to be approved by the Town Engineer.
6-8-3 Groundwater Recharge Volume (GRV) – The groundwater recharge volume
is the volume of stormwater that shall be captured and infiltrated for each
storm. The GRV shall be calculated as described in Sect. 7.5.1 of the DEP
Stormwater Manual. The size of the infiltration basin shall be calculated using
the formula and infiltration rates as specified for infiltration basins herein. The
GRV requirement may be met if the WQV is infiltrated.
6-8-4 Water Quality Volume (WQV) - The Water Quality Volume (WQV) shall be
calculated as described in Section 7.4.1 of the DEP Stormwater Manual. The
WQV shall be retained on-site in an off-line structure and treated by either
infiltration or filtration or a combination thereof for each sub-drainage area of
the site or as approved by the Town Engineer.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
69
(A) The WQV may be reduced by the following methods:
1. Decreasing the impervious area of the site using Low Impact
Development design;
2. Subtracting the area of land dedicated as Open Space in accordance
with Section 10 of the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations from the
total area of the site in the calculation of the WQV, provided the area
is to remain in an undisturbed natural state in perpetuity and is
protected during construction and does not discharge to downstream
WQV treatment structures;
3. Subtracting the GRV from the WQV if the GRV is infiltrated
separately in each sub-basin from the WQV and there is equivalent
treatment of pollutants;
4. Subtracting the area of land from the WQV calculation that drains by
overland sheet flow and then across a buffer strip prior to entering a
wetland or adjacent property that meets all the following conditions:
a. The slope of the overland sheet flow is less than 15%.
b. The length of the overland flow upgradient of the buffer used in
this calculation is limited to a maximum of 150 feet for pervious
surfaces and 75 feet for impervious surfaces. The WQV from
overland flow exceeding these limits must be intercepted and
treated accordingly.
c. The buffer strip is a minimum of 50 feet wide.
d. The buffer strip remains undisturbed and is protected in
perpetuity as open space, conservation easement or as approved
by the Director of Planning.
e. The calculated run-off velocity across the buffer strip is less than 2
feet per second.
f. The average slope of the buffer strip is 6% or less.
(B) Structures including swales, basins, bio-retention areas, rain gardens, and
gravel based vegetated wet basins constructed to capture the WQV shall
meet the following requirements:
1. Structures shall be designed with the WQV off-line unless approved
by the Town Engineer.
2. Basins shall be designed to drain within 12 to 72 hours.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
70
3. Infiltration basins shall be constructed a minimum of 1.5’ above the
maximum ground water level and be located a minimum of 50'
horizontally from a wetland. The maximum groundwater level is
defined as the level to which groundwater rises for a duration of one
month or longer during the wettest season of the year or as
determined by the Town Engineer. For the purposes of these
regulations the term "maximum ground water level" shall be
synonymous with the term "groundwater table".
4. WQV structures must be designed with a suitable overflow and or
outfall structure.
6-8-5 Requirements for Infiltration Basins/Areas
(A) Infiltration basins shall be sized to drain within a 24-hour period using
the following formula: tp=D/K, where tp is the ponding time in days, D is
the depth of the basin in feet, and K is the infiltration rate in feet per day.
The infiltration rates for each soil group shall be as follows:
Soil Group K (ft/day)
A 0.6
B 0.3
C 0.1
D 0.0
Infiltration rates determined from field-testing using the ASTM D 3385
Standard Test Method for Infiltration Rate of Soils in Field Using Double-
Ring Infiltrometer can be used in lieu of those listed above subject to a
factor of safety of 2 (use 50 percent of the measured infiltration rate) to
account for clogging over time.
(B) Basins shall be protected from the accumulation of sediment and debris
that adversely affect the infiltration rate of the basin (i.e. sediment
forebays, plunge pools, or deep sump catch basins).
(C) The areas proposed for infiltration shall be cordoned off during
construction to protect these areas from compaction by construction
equipment.
(D) Basins shall be completely vegetated with plants tolerant to frequent
inundation of water. Bare sand, gravel or stone surfaces are not allowed.
(E) Infiltration basins shall be tested in situ after construction to ensure the
design parameters are met. And, if design parameters are not met, the
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
71
area and/or depth shall be adjusted as necessary to meet design
specifications.
(F) Underdrains and/or curtain drains cannot be used to locally lower the
elevation of the existing ground water table adjacent to the infiltration
basin. Underdrains shall not be placed under infiltration basins.
(G) Infiltration basins must be constructed on in-situ soils unless otherwise
approved by the Town Engineer.
(H) The bottom of an infiltration basin shall be a minimum of 1.5’ above the
maximum ground water level.
(I) It is the applicant's responsibility to obtain all applicable permits. If
directed by the Town Engineer, the applicant shall have the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection Dam Safety Unit (DEP) review
the plans to determine if dam construction permits are required for the
construction of structures impounding water. The DEP’s determination
shall be submitted with the formal subdivision application to the Town
Planning Department.
6-8-6 Requirements for Filtration Basins/Areas
(A) Basins shall be protected from the accumulation of sediment and debris
that adversely affect the filtration rate of the basin (i.e. sediment forebays,
plunge pools, or deep sump catch basins).
(B) Basins shall be completely vegetated with plants tolerant to frequent
inundation of water. Bare sand, gravel or stone surfaces are not allowed.
(C) Filtration basins shall be tested in situ after construction to ensure the
design parameters are met. And, if design parameters are not met, the
area and/or depth shall be adjusted as necessary to meet design
specifications.
(D) Underdrains and/or curtain drains cannot be used to locally lower the
elevation of the existing ground water table adjacent to the filtration basin
or structure.
(E) It is the applicant's responsibility to obtain all applicable permits. If
directed by the Town Engineer, the applicant shall have the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection Dam Safety Unit review the
plans to determine if dam construction permits are required for the
construction of structures impounding water. The DEP’s determination
shall be submitted with the formal subdivision application to the Town
Planning Department.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
72
(F) Underdrains may be used adjacent to filtration basins above the
maximum ground water table. The discharge from the structures shall
be considered in the calculation of flow and volume.
(G) All structures shall be designed with an emergency spillway.
6-8-7 Exemptions
(A) Subdivisions consisting of 3 lots or less may request waivers, in
accordance with Section 4-13, of specific sections of 6-16 with the
approval of the Planning Commission provided all of the following
conditions are met:
1. The applicant can demonstrate that the water quality of the receiving
aquifer, wetland or watercourse is not adversely affected.
2. The proposed development will not cause or exacerbate downstream
flooding.
6-9 FLOODING REQUIREMENTS – Consistent with the East Lyme Ordinance concerning
Flood Damage Prevention as amended June 6, 1984, land subject to flooding, as
identified an the Federal Insurance Administration Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
dated June 15, 1984, as revised, on file with the Town Clerk, shall not be subdivided
unless the following conditions are met:
6-9-1 The Commission determines that the proposed subdivision is reasonably safe
from flooding and when a subdivision is proposed in a special Flood Hazard
Area, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated June 15, 1984, as
revised, it shall be reviewed to assure that:
(A) All proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage
within the flood-prone area.
(B) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(C) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(D) New and replacement water supply systems are designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems.
(E) New and replacement sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters.
(F) On-site disposal systems are located to avoid impairment of them or
contamination from them during flooding.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
73
(G) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and
other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or six (6) acres
(whichever is less).
6-9-2 Applicants for subdivisions within special Flood Hazard Areas shown on the
town’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated June 15, 1984, as revised, will be
required to submit with their applications a copy of those materials required
under Section 4.1 and Section 5.4 (Floodways) of the town’s Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance, as amended June 6, 1984, demonstrating that the floodcarrying
capacity will be maintained with any altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse.
6-9-3 The Planning Commission, in cooperation with the Building Official and Zoning
Enforcement Official, shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities,
the Southeastern Connecticut Regional Planning Agency, and the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection prior to approving any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notices to the Federal
Insurance Administrator.
6-10 STREET AND ROADWAY DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
6-10-1 Streets and Roadways - Proposed streets and rights-of-way shall be planned in
such a manner as to provide safe and convenient access to proposed lots, with
due consideration for accomplishing an attractive layout and development of the
land in the subdivision and in the neighborhood. Streets should, in general,
follow the contour of the land and shall have a location and grade which
preserve the natural terrain, substantial trees, woods and other natural features
in the subdivision and which enhance property values in the subdivision.
Proposed local streets and rights-of-way shall be planned to discourage through
traffic but also to provide a safe and convenient system for prospective traffic in
the subdivision. Local streets shall also provide a safe and convenient system for
present and prospective traffic in the neighborhood around the subdivision and
shall be planned where appropriate to provide for continuation of existing streets
in adjoining areas and for projection into adjoining properties when subdivided.
Proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing or proposed streets as shown
in the East Lyme Plan of Conservation and Development, especially with regard
to safe intersections with such streets. Thoroughfares shall be planned where
necessary to conform with the Town Plan of Conservation and Development and
where necessary as a feeder street to a neighborhood. Proposed streets which
may be projected into adjoining properties shall be carried to the boundary line;
no reserve strips will be permitted. Proposed streets shall be designed and laid
out so as to preserve important elements of natural or manmade topographical
feature, including existing roadways and paths, old stone fences or walls,
significant ledge areas, historical patterns of land use and to minimize impact on
environmentally sensitive coastal or wetland areas.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
74
6-10-2 The Design of Each Street shall reflect considerations of its function, vehicular
and pedestrian safety, and its use by maintenance and emergency vehicles. No
subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have
frontage on, and access from, an existing street that is suitably improved and
paved and is shown upon a map approved by the Commission and recorded in
the East Lyme Land Records. Such street, roadway, or driveway (including
private or common driveways) must be suitably improved as required by the
appropriate regulations and specifications, or be secured by a performance bond.
6-10-3 Private Streets or Roadways
(A) The Commission may approve a proposed street, roadway as a permanent
private street or roadway if the Commission finds that such street shall not
carry more traffic than is expected of a Light Residential Street serving only
abutting lots, that such street will not impair the orderly development of
the neighborhood, that there will be safe and convenient circulation for
vehicles and pedestrians, including emergency vehicles, and that there will
be suitable arrangements for maintenance and repair.
(B) Private Streets or Roadways approved under the East Lyme Subdivision
Regulations shall adhere to all Town road design standards. The design
speed of 25 miles per hour shall be used for all private roads. The following
items may deviate from the Town standards using the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
“Guidelines for Geometric Design of Very Low-Volume Local Roads
(ADT<400)” 2001 (LVR Guidelines) as amended and AASHTO’s "A Policy
on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets 2001" (for ADT<=400) as
amended:
i. Road width of the paved portion of the road may be reduced to 18 feet;
ii. Private Streets or Roadways must demonstrate that the proposed
street(s) meets the design requirements for Very Low-Volume Roads
ADT < 400 as set forth in the "LVR Guidelines" and the "Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets 2001" as amended and shall
not exceed 400 ADT, now or in the future, using ten (10) ADT per
household. The Proximity of lots to multiple entrances will need to be
considered in determining ADT. Any subdivision proposing over 40
building lots shall require a traffic study with a trip generation and
impact analysis demonstrating the private streets will not exceed 400
ADT;
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
75
iii. The "LVR Guidelines" for guiderail placement may be utilized. The
Planning Commission and/or Town Engineer may require guiderail in
locations that are deemed necessary;
iv. Curb may be eliminated if the shoulders slope away from the road and
adequate roadside drainage is proposed and properly designed to
handle a 25 year storm event (Minimum cover over water lines must be
maintained when crossing swales);
v. Catch basins may be eliminated if no adjacent curb is proposed and the
requirements of item “iv” are met;
vi. Underdrain may be eliminated if proposed drainage swales are deep
enough to intercept ground water and prevent ground water from
reaching the base and sub-base of the proposed road;
vii. Shallow drainage swales may be proposed when underdrain is
installed below to satisfy the requirements for underdrain and item
“iv”;
viii. Super-elevation may be proposed when the shoulder on the uphill side
of the private road slopes away from the road to provide drainage for
snow melt (see number items iv, vi and vii);
ix. The shoulder width shall be a minimum of 2 feet. Sightline for
driveways on private roads shall be designed in accordance with the
"LVR Guidelines" using a 25 mph design speed;
x. HDPE pipe may be used outside of the Town Right-of-Way (ROW) in
the private road ROW. (Minimum diameter allowed is 15 inches).
(C) The subdivision plans shall show the proposed street clearly labeled
“Private Street”.
(D) The subdivision plans shall contain a note, approved by the Commission,
which clearly states, “This Private Street will not be owned by the Town of
East Lyme. All maintenance, repair, and services such as snow removal,
sanding, and sweeping of the streets will be the responsibility of the
abutting landowners.”
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
76
(E) The subdivision plans shall contain a note approved by the Commission
which clearly states, “The Town of East Lyme shall not be responsible for
the initial cost, maintenance fees, or utility bills associated with all street
sign or street lights located on a private road or adjacent to and serving a
private road.”
(F) The subdivision plans shall contain notes, approved by the Commission,
which are intended to inform the purchasers of lots that certain public
services may be restricted from the private street. Services such as refuse
and recycling pickup, school bus access and postal delivery may be
identified, based on the scope of services offered and public policies in
effect at the time of approval.
(G) The Record Subdivision Plan shall contain the notes required by Section 6-
10-3 (D) and (E). The deeds for each proposed lot shall provide language,
intended to inform the purchasers of lots, which clearly states, “this Private
Street will not be owned by the Town of East Lyme. All maintenance,
repair, and services such as snow removal, sanding, and sweeping of the
street will be the responsibility of the abutting landowners and that certain
public services may be restricted from the private street such as refuse and
recycling pickup, school bus access and postal delivery.”
(H) A written agreement, which provides for the permanent, cooperative,
maintenance of the private street, by the owners of the lots that are served
by the private street, shall be prepared and filed in the office of the Town
Clerk with the Record Subdivision Plan. Such agreement may not be
amended without the prior approval of the Commission. The agreement
shall require that the developer is responsible for the maintenance and
insurance of the private road and all associated costs. The developer’s
responsibility for the private road shall continue until such time that the
ownership of the private road is transferred to the owners of the lots that
are served by the private road, which shall not occur until such time that
the Town deems the subdivision complete, as demonstrated by the final
release of security. Should the developer fail to complete the required
improvements, the Commission may use the security (bonded funds) to
complete the remaining work. If more than 80% of the lots have been sold,
then, at the discretion of the Commission and in cooperation with the
homeowners, the security may be released to the owners of the lots served
by the private street for the purpose of completing the required
improvements.
(I) The words “Private Street or Road” must appear on the street signs at the
intersection of all private roads.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
77
6-10-4 Subdivision Street Construction - All subdivision streets and roadways,
including private streets and roadways, shall be constructed in accordance with
Section 8 of these Regulations. Construction standards for private or common
driveway aprons shall also conform to the regulations set forth in Section 6-2-5 of
these Regulations.
6-10-5 Access - To ensure a sufficient and continuously available method of access in
the event of an emergency, the Commission shall require that subdivisions
containing more than twenty (20) lots be accessible by at least two (2) points of
access over existing streets, streets to be dedicated to the Town, or private streets.
This requirement may be waived by the Commission in accordance with Section
4-13 of these Regulations if the Commission finds that:
(A) The proposed subdivision provides access to an adjoining un-subdivided
parcel that has access to a collector street as designated by the Plan of
Conservation and Development;
(B) Feasibility of the future connection has been adequately demonstrated and
can be accomplished without an exceptional degree of site work to
overcome natural topographic constraints and without significant impact
on a wetland or watercourse;
(C) The future connection will improve the safety and efficiency of vehicular
traffic circulation; OR;
(D) An alternative form of emergency access has been provided, which shall
serve the purpose of this requirement.
Where a waiver has been granted in accord with this Section, a temporary
turnaround shall be provided.
6-10-6 Where a subdivision borders an existing street with less than adequate right-ofway,
and the Commission determines that there may be a need to realign or
widen the street, the Commission may require the applicant to dedicate land for
such future realignment or widening.
6-10-7 A minimum 25’ right-of-way from the centerline of the existing street shall be
provided along the frontage of the land to be subdivided. Where a subdivision
borders or increases the traffic on an existing street which does not conform to
Town street standards, or which is otherwise in need of improvement, and
where the proposed development increases the need for improvement of the
street or intersection, the Commission may require the applicant to improve the
existing street or intersection to the extent that the need for such improvements
or widening results from the increased traffic generation of the subdivision on
such streets or intersections or to the extent necessary to provide safe and
adequate access to any subdivision lot.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
78
6-10-8 Where a proposed subdivision abuts an approved subdivision containing a
dedicated future street right-of-way, the proposed street and all required
improvements shall be constructed from the proposed subdivision street to the
approved street in the existing subdivision. This requirement may be waived in
accordance with Section 4-13 of these Regulations if the Commission finds:
(A) The connection is not necessary to achieve a safe and efficient system of
vehicular circulation; and
(B) The connection cannot be made without an exceptional degree of site work
to overcome natural topographical constraints, or without significant
impact on wetlands or watercourses.
6-10-9 Where a parcel to be subdivided abuts vacant land with a minimum of 50’
frontage on and existing town road, the Commission may require an applicant to
provide means of street ingress and/or egress to any adjoining property. If
required by the Commission, the right-of-way for the proposed future street shall
be shown on the subdivision and shall be dedicated to the Town of East Lyme.
6-10-10 Where a parcel to be subdivided abuts land with neither frontage nor a dedicated
right-of-way onto an existing town road, the Commission may require that
access be provided to the landlocked parcel through the proposed subdivision in
the form of a 25’ R.O.W.
6-10-11 Where the Commission finds that a road layout meeting the Conservation
Development by Design standards will result in unnecessary disturbance of
natural features with no benefit to the overall circulation and serviceability of the
housing sites, the Commission may determine that a section of road need not be
constructed under the following conditions:
(A) The land previously dedicated for road right-of-way shall revert to the
adjoining lots unless the Commission chooses to retain the right-of-way for
future use.
(B) The applicant shall provide an additional 5% Open Space (not to include
the eliminated road R.O.W.)
(C) In no case shall the decision to waive a road requirement result in a
permanent cul-de-sac exceeding 2000’ or serving more than 20 lots on a
single cul-de-sac unless an alternate form of egress to a through road has
been provided in accord with Section 6-10-5.
(D) Uninterrupted road lengths exceeding 1000’ shall be designed to avoid a
lengthy straight section to minimize potential speeding.
6-10-12 All street names shall be shown on subdivision plans and shall be approved by
the Commission. Proposed street names shall be substantially different from any
present street names in the Town of East Lyme, to avoid confusion in sound or
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
79
spelling. Streets that become extensions of existing streets shall generally bear
the same name.
6-10-13 Prior to the town accepting the streets in any new subdivision, the applicant
must convey by plans and deeds the rights-of-way for the streets and
appurtenances to the town.
6-10-14 Where a new town road is proposed adjacent to an existing lot, the Planning
Commission may require up to a 50-foot vegetated buffer to screen the new road
from the existing lot. This requirement shall not apply to a re-subdivision where
the original subdivision plan showed a future road.
6-10-15 The Commission may reduce any of the requirements of Sections 6-10 for public
supply watershed protection, groundwater protection, aquifer protection,
wetlands, and other environmental, natural, cultural, agricultural, or historic
protection purposes.
6-11 RESERVE STRIP – No privately owned reserve strip shall be permitted which controls
access to any part of the subdivision from any street or other open space dedicated or to
be dedicated to public use.
6-12 SIDEWALK DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
6-12-1 In all zones, except the RU-80 zone, a sidewalk shall be installed on one side of
any street that functions as a collector or arterial street as designated by the
average daily traffic (ADT) volume and (as specified in the East Lyme Plan of
Development) in or abutting a subdivision of 10 or more lots or in any
subdivision in which there are existing sidewalks within 500 feet of the
subdivision boundary. The Commission may waive the requirements of this
Section in accordance with Section 4-13, if the Commission finds the subdivision
has been designed to provide adequate pedestrian and/or bicycle access in
accordance with Section 6-12-4.
6-12-2 In any subdivision, in all zones, sidewalks shall be installed on one side of every
street in or abutting the subdivision of 10 or more lots when any portion of the
subdivision is within a 6,000 foot radius of any portion of a school parcel, as
determined by the Commission. The Commission may waive the requirements
of this Section in accordance with Section 4-13 of the Regulations.
6-12-3 The Commission may require that a sidewalk be installed on one side of any
street in or abutting a subdivision which meets the location criteria of Section 6-
12-1 or Section 6-12-2 but which contains fewer than ten (10) lots.
6-12-4 In any subdivision where sidewalks are required to be installed under the
provisions of this Section, the Commission may permit the installation of suitably
surfaced walking or bicycle paths in lieu of sidewalks, provided that such paths
are located within areas of open space which provide access to street rights-ofway
and open space areas and that they connect or further the future connection
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
80
of the lots within the subdivision with collector or arterial streets or with a school
parcel.
6-13 STREET LIGHT SPECIFICATIONS
6-13-1 Street lighting systems shall be designed by the power company serving the area
of the proposed subdivision according to the minimum standards established in
the American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting (approved by American
Standards Association). It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to arrange
for and pay for the installation of streetlights. All poles erected for streetlights
shall be three (3) feet behind face of curb.
6-14 STREET SIGN SPECIFICATIONS
6-14-1 Street signs - Shall be installed at all street intersections in locations approved by
the Commission. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to install all street
signs.
6-14-2 House numbers - Neighborhood appropriate signage containing house or unit
numbers, adequate for identification in the event of an emergency response, shall
be provided for flag lots at locations acceptable to the Director of Public Safety
and approved by the Director of Planning.
6-15 STREET TREE SPECIFICATIONS - As a requirement of subdivision approval, the
applicant shall plant shade trees along new streets, except where, in the opinion of the
Commission, existing trees are to be retained by the applicant in sufficient number and
location to meet the intent of this Section.
6-15-1 Location - Shade trees are to be planted on both sides of the right-of-way within
five (5) feet of the right-of-way of the street or streets within and abutting the
subdivision. Where required, one (1) tree shall be planted every seventy (70) feet
of frontage along each street. Determination of precise locations for trees shall
consider future possible locations of driveways and utility connections.
6-15-2 Size - New trees to be provided pursuant to these Regulations shall be approved
by the Commission’s agent, shall be nursery grown, of specimen quality, balled
and burlapped, straight-stemmed, and free from disease. Such trees shall have a
minimum trunk diameter (measured twelve (12) inches above ground level), of
not less than two and one-half (2 ½) inches in caliper, and shall be guaranteed for
one season’s growth by the applicant. Only long-lived shade trees such as Sugar
Maple, Pin Oak, Red Oak, London Plane, or other species acceptable to the
Planning Commission, shall be planted
6-15-3 Street Tree Easement – The Subdivision plan shall reserve an easement for the
planting and future maintenance of street trees a minimum five (5) feet outside of
the required street right-of-way.
6-15-4 Landscaped Buffers – As required by Section 23 of the East Lyme Zoning
Regulations, a wooded or otherwise landscaped buffer shall be provided along
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
81
the perimeter of the Conservation Design Development to screen development
on the proposed lots from existing contiguous lots.
(A) The minimum width of the buffer shall be 40 feet, any portion of which
may be either subdivision open space area or area contained within lots
(e.g. conservation easement). Where variations in topography, natural
features, or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a buffer, the
Planning Commission may waive or reduce these requirements if it can
be shown that such a modification will further the purposes of the
Conservation by Design Development.
(B) In the case of non-wooded areas or open agrarian landscapes absent of
scenic views and vistas, evergreen trees or similar vegetation (min 3-½
caliper) shall be planted to screen the proposed development from the
arterial or collector road. Scenic views and vistas shall remain unblocked or
uninterrupted, particularly as seen from public thoroughfares (arterial &
collector road). In open agrarian landscapes, a deep “no-build, no-plant”
buffer shall be maintained along the public thoroughfare where those views
or vistas are prominently or locally significant. In wooded areas where the
sense of enclosure is a feature that should be maintained, a deep “no-build,
no-cut” buffer shall be respected, to preserve existing vegetation. Such
buffer shall be a minimum of 200-feet. The Planning Commission may
waive or reduce such buffer to no less than 100-feet if it can be shown that
such waiver or reduction shall protect rural roadside character and
improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding
development fronting directly onto existing public roads and establishes a
buffer zone along the scenic corridor or rural road with historic buildings,
stone walls, hedgerows, and etc….
(C) In either case, wooded or non-wooded areas, natural features such as
existing trees, vegetation, unique site features and significant resources such
as wetlands and watercourses will be retained and protected to the
maximum extent practicable. The Planning Commission may require
additional plantings as necessary to enhance screening in the buffer. The
buffer area within forty-feet (40’) of the perimeter of a CDD Development
shall not be used for the placement of any above ground structures of any
type.
6-16 POTABLE WATER
6-16-1 Water Supply - A potable, adequate, and dependable water supply shall be
provided for every lot.
6-16-2 Private Well Water – A private well shall be permitted provided that (1)
topographic and geological condition are satisfactory; (2) each well can be
designed, located and constructed in accordance with the standards and
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
82
requirements of the Connecticut Department of Health; and (3) each well shall
have the approval of the Town of East Lyme Health Department.
6-16-3 Public Water Supply
(A) Unless the East Lyme Water and Sewer Commission certifies to the
Planning Commission that it is not in the best interests of the Town of East
Lyme, any non-residential subdivision or a subdivision of ten (10) or more
lots which has a boundary within a 1,500 foot radius of the East Lyme
Water and Sewer Department supply system shall be required to provide a
piped water distribution system designed to serve the entire subdivision
and extend to the boundary in the direction of anticipated supply with
valved and capped or plugged end(s) to be provided by the applicant for
ready future connection(s).
(B) The design of any public water system within the Town of East Lyme shall
be in conformance with the East Lyme Water and Sewer Department
specifications as approved by the East Lyme Water and Sewer
Commission.
(C) No proposal for a development using water supplied by a company
incorporated on or after October 1, 1984, shall be approved by the Planning
Commission unless such company has been issued a certificate pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes Section 16-262m.
(D) Any planned public water supply system which has a potential surface
reservoir site with an estimated dependable yield of more than 500,000
gallons per day or one or more potential wells and an established confined
yield of fifty (50) or more gallons per minute shall be reviewed by the
Southeastern Connecticut Regional Water Authority, pursuant to Special
Act 381 of the 1967 Session of the Connecticut General Assembly.
(E) Not withstanding the provisions of Section 6-16-3(A) of these Regulations,
the Planning Commission shall not accept applications for non-residential
subdivisions or subdivisions of ten (10) or more lots which propose the use
of water supplied by the East Lyme municipal water system. The
amendment shall be effective for a period of time beginning on the effective
date of this amendment and ending on July 1, 2000 or when the Planning
Commission is notified by the East Lyme Water Sewer Commission that
there is a supply of municipal water sufficient to serve said subdivisions,
whichever date shall first occur.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
83
6-17 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
6-17-1 Underground electric transmission lines, telephone lines and cable television
lines shall be installed in each proposed subdivision, unless a waiver is granted
in accordance with Section 4-13 of these Regulations. In determining the
feasibility of underground installation, the Commission shall refer to the detailed
soils survey prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service, information on the
subdivision plan, site investigation by the Town Engineer and consultation with
the authorized representative of the utility or telephone company.
6-18 SURETY
6-18-1 The Planning Commission may require surety (e.g. performance and
maintenance bonds or letters of credit), sufficient to ensure compliance and
completion of site improvements with an approved subdivision or resubdivsion
and any conditions placed thereon. Bonded improvements may include but are
not limited to, erosion and sedimentation control measures, drainage,
landscaping buffers, utilities, parking, recreational facilities, streets, private
streets or roadways, driveways, and sidewalks, or other elements as approved
by the subdivision or resubdivision plan. Surety requirements shall conform to
the requirements of Section 8 of the East Lyme Subdivision Regulations.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
84
SECTION 7 - OPEN SPACES AND EASEMENTS
7-1 PURPOSE - To provide meaningful open space areas within private developments and
encourage site development sensitive to the area’s natural characteristics.
7-2 GENERAL - The Planning Commission shall require the provision of this section in the
subdivision of any parcel of 10 acres or more in area or any subdivision of 4 or more lots.
The Planning Commission may apply these provisions to subdivisions of less than 4 lots.
In determining the appropriateness of an open space and/or recreation area and whether
public access shall be required, the Commission shall consider Plan of Development map
designations and the subject site’s characteristics with respect to the following objectives:
(A) Protect surface and subsurface water resources and provide for public access
where appropriate.
(B) Expand existing open space.
(C) Assemble open corridors or greenbelts by providing linkages to existing open
space or connecting nodes of development, trails, wildlife corridors or riparian
buffers.
(D) Protect critical or threatened habitats with emphasis on those areas identified in
Connecticut’s Natural Diversity Database and Endangered Species List.
(E) Protect groundwater within existing or potential public drinking water supply
aquifers.
(F) Protect natural drainage ways.
(G) Protect lands and features of cultural importance including archeological and
historical sites.
(H) Provide sites for active and passive recreation of a non-commercial nature.
(I) Protect unique and significant natural features including wetlands, floodplains,
prime agricultural soils, scenic vistas, trap rock ridges, shorelines and tidal
marshes.
(J) Preserve farmlands and productive forestland.
(K) Preserve areas that shape community design and character i.e. buffer strips,
landscaped areas visible from main roads, walkways, community gateways.
(L) Protect steep slopes to control soil erosion and water runoff as well as
maintaining scenic views of and from areas such as bluffs, ridges, river ways, etc.
7-2-1 For Conventional Subdivisions, (less than 4 lots or less than 10 acres) dedication
of open space shall be in an amount not less than ten (10) percent of the gross
land area of the subdivision, unless waived in accordance with Section 4-13 of
these regulations. For Conservation Design Development Subdivisions,
designation of open space shall be in accord with the standards set forth in
Section 23.6 of the Zoning Regulations.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
85
7-2-2 If a parcel, or abutting parcels under common ownership, is subdivided in
stages, the open space dedication attributable to the subdivision of a portion of
the entire tract may, at the Commission’s discretion, be deferred to a later date
when more or all of the land remaining in the entire tract is subdivided. If
approved by the Commission, the following notation shall be placed on the
approved map: “The open space dedication attributable to the land depicted on
this map is hereby deferred to a later date when some, or all of the remaining
land is re-subdivided. At such later date, the open space attributable to this
subdivision will be combined with the open space dedication(s) attributable to
the remaining portion(s) of the entire tract in a size and at a location determined
by the Commission in accordance with the requirements set forth in the
Subdivision Regulations.
7-2-3 No more than fifty (50) percent of the open space land may be covered by water
or classified as inland or tidal wetlands.
7-2-4 No open space parcel or contiguous conservation easement area shall be less
than one acre unless it meets the total open space requirements for the
subdivision.
7-2-5 The Commission may require access ways to open space areas used for the
purpose of active or passive recreation to be graded and improved in a manner
suitable for safe pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. Access roadways which are
intended to accommodate vehicular traffic shall have a right-of-way no less than
50’ with a traveled way of 20’. The slope of an access roadway shall not exceed
12%. Parking may be required to accommodate the number and types of
vehicles expected to use the facility. Pedestrian easements or access ways shall be
no less than 15’ wide.
7-2-6 Land to be provided as open space for the purpose of conservation and
protection of wildlife and natural or scenic resources shall typically be left in a
natural state. Except for improvements approved by the Commission, open
space areas shall not be graded, cleared, or used as a repository for brush,
stumps, earth, building materials or debris.
7-2-7 All site improvements proposed for open space shall be shown on the
subdivision plans.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
86
7-2-8 The Planning Commission may waive the open space requirements if the
subdivision is to contain affordable housing, as defined in CGS Section 8-39a,
equal to 20% or more of the total housing to be constructed in such subdivision.
7-3 CONVEYANCE OF OPEN SPACE – The Planning Commission shall determine the most
appropriate method of conveyance after considering: the relationship of the subject
area(s) and its specific characteristics to the Plan of Development and the objectives cited
in Section 7-2; the desirability and suitability of public access and use, and the scope of the
subdivision proposal. The following options for conveyance may be utilized by the
Commission:
(A) Perpetual dedication to the Town;
(B) Perpetual dedication to the State of Connecticut;
(C) Perpetual dedication to the East Lyme Land Trust or other private organization
whose purpose is the preservation of historic and natural sites for the public
benefit and use;
(D) Dedication to a Homeowner’s Association formed under the Common Interest
Ownership Act (CIOA);
(E) Utilization of Conservation Easements, with or without public access;
(F) Utilization of a Recreation Easement;
(G) Private Ownership with the appropriate taking of development rights by a
public entity (state or town);
(H) Any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by the
Commission.
7-3-1 If an applicant proposes dedication of Open Space to the State of Connecticut, the
East Lyme Land Trust, or any other private organization, a letter from an authorized
agent for the State or private organization, stating its willingness to accept the open
space, shall be included with the application.
7-4 LEGAL TRANSFER OF OPEN SPACE – Properly executed legal documents, including
warranty deeds for any title transferals, shall be prepared in accordance with the
provisions of this section and shall be submitted in triplicate with the final subdivision
maps to be filed. All documents must be acceptable to the Town Attorney and/or the
Commission and shall refer to the approved subdivision map by title. All warranty deeds
for the dedication of land to the Town shall be held in escrow by the Commission to be
recorded on the land records upon acceptance by the Board of Selectmen. If the Board of
Selectmen chooses not to accept the open space, the deed shall be returned, and the
applicant shall return to the Commission for determination of an alternative means of
preserving the open space. In no case, shall the acceptance of any deed by the Commission
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
87
or an employee of the Town be deemed as acceptance of the open space and/or recreation
area by the Town.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
88
SECTION 8 - SUBDIVSION IMPROVEMENT
SPECIFICATIONS
8-1 GENERAL – Subdivision improvements shall conform to the State of Connecticut
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications Form 816, as revised, and shall be
installed by the applicant according to the following specifications.
8-2 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS - Monuments shall be set at corners and angles of all
streets and at all points of curvature and points of tangency of curved streets. Monuments
shall be set at corners of public easements dedicated to the town. Monuments shall be set
plumb, in line with street lines one (1) inch above finished grade. They shall be of granite
or pre-cast reinforced concrete, not less than four (4) inches square and thirty (30) inches
long, with a brass or copper plug or with a cross marking the center of the four (4) inch
square. No open holes in monuments will be permitted. No permanent monuments shall
be installed until all construction which could destroy of disturb the monuments in
completed. Permanent monuments and corner pins shall be set prior to a written formal
request to the Commission for acceptance of the public improvements. For subdivisions
which do not require the construction of public improvements, no building permit shall be
issued until monuments and corner pins have been set. In addition, written certification
by a licensed land surveyor shall be submitted to the Commission and the Town Engineer
indicating that the monuments and the corner pins have been set in accordance with the
approved plan.
8-3 STREETS
8-3-1 General - The entire area of right-of-way shall be cleared of trees, roots,
boulders, ledge and any other unsuitable materials, except that the Commission
may direct that certain existing trees be left standing which will not interfere
with the installation of utilities, the maintenance of sight lines, and provision for
snow shelves at the recommendation of the Town Engineer.
8-3-2 Rights-of-Way - The traveled portion of the right-of-way shall be constructed to
a width of twenty (20) feet between curbs for a light residential street permitting
traffic in one direction, twenty-eight (28) feet between curbs for a light
residential, residential and collector street, forty-six (46) feet for an arterial street.
The traveled portion of the right-of-way of streets in non-residential subdivisions
shall be construct to a width not less than twenty-eight (28) feet between curbs,
and the Commission may require a greater width upon recommendation of the
Town Engineer. The traveled portion shall be centered in the right-of-way with
a three-eighth (3/8) inch to one foot crown, except with special permission of the
Town Engineer.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
89
All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Typical Cross Section
provided in Appendix A. Waiver of this requirement may be granted in accord
with Section 4-13 under the following conditions:
(A) Where an extension of an existing street is proposed the width of which is
less than the widths specified in this section, or
(B) Where a stormwater management system utilizing Best Management
Practice (BMP) methods for controlling runoff and encouraging
infiltration has been incorporated in the design at the recommendation of
the Town Engineer. The BMP methods shall include but not be limited to
the minimization of impervious surfaces, minimization of curbing and
collection, the use of grass or vegetative filter zones, landscape
depressions, slotted curb spacers, perforated pipe for conveying storm
water, establishment of buffers from streams, wetlands and waterbodies,
and any combination of methods, where appropriate. The BMP’s
employed shall be designed in accordance with the latest update of the
CTDEP Stormwater Quality Manual.
8-3-3 Arterial Streets - If required by the Commission, arterial streets shall have a
right-of-way of not less than eighty (80) feet.
8-3-4 Collector Streets - Collector streets shall have a right-of-way of not less than
sixty (60) feet.
8-3-5 Residential Streets - Residential streets and light residential streets shall have a
right-of-way of not less than fifty (50) feet.
8-3-6 Temporary Turnarounds - Where a temporary turnaround is provided on a
street that is to be extended in the future, the fifty (50) foot street right-of-way to
the subdivision boundary shall be deeded to the town, and the segments of the
turnaround outside the fifty (50) foot street shall be deeded to the abutting lot
owners subject to an easement to the town for street purposes. When such street
is extended beyond the turnaround, the applicant shall remove the road
constructed in the segments of the temporary turnaround, place curbing, fill with
earth and loam and seed in an appropriate manner. The owner and developer of
the subdivision shall obtain a permit as required by Town Ordinance and shall
provide a separate cash bond to ensure satisfactory completion of the removal of
the temporary turnaround as designed in the Construction Sequence Report
(Section 4-2-13). Removal of the temporary turnaround shall be in accordance
with the Construction Sequence Report and as directed by the Town Engineer.
Removal of the temporary turnaround will be scheduled and performed with
minimal impacts upon adjoining property owners.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
90
8-3-7 Dead-End Streets - Permanent dead-end streets shall terminate in a circle not
less than fifty (50) feet in radius to the outside of the right-of-way, of which not
less than forty (40) feet in radius shall be constructed and surfaced. Permanent
dead-end streets shall include an island centered in the turnaround, provided
that such island does not constitute a lot and provided that it is left in a naturally
vegetated state or improved with landscaping to be maintained by a
homeowner’s association. The length of cul-de-sac and total number of lots
served shall not exceed the following:
Max. Length Max. # Lots
Standard Residential 700’ 12
Cluster / Open Space 1000’ 15
The length of a permanent dead-end street shall be measured from the edge of
pavement of the through street with which it intersects, along the centerline of
the dead-end street and across any center island in a straight line to the outside
edge of pavement of the turnaround.
8-3-8 Block Length - For conventional subdivisions, the maximum uninterrupted
length of any through street between points of intersection with other through
streets shall be 1500 feet. For open space/cluster subdivisions in the Rural or
Greenway Conservation districts, the maximum uninterrupted length of any
through street between points of intersection with another through street shall be
5000 feet.
8-3-9 Turnaround - The turnaround portion of a permanent dead-end street having a
center island shall be designed for one-way traffic with a travel surface twenty
(20) feet in width. The Commission may permit a loop street in lieu of a cul-desac.
The distance along the centerline from the mid-point of the loop street to the
edge of pavement of the through street with which it intersects shall not exceed
1500 feet and the number of lots served shall be not more than twenty (20).
8-3-10 Minimum Grades - Each local street shall have a minimum grade of at least 1.5
percent and a maximum grade of not more than ten (10) percent. Each collector
street shall have a minimum grade of at least 1.5 percent and a maximum grade
of not more than eight (8) percent and each arterial shall have a minimum grade
of at least 1.5 percent and a maximum grade of not more than five (5) percent.
8-3-11 Centerlines - Centerlines of alternate side streets shall not be closer than 125 feet
measured along the centerline of the principal street. Residential and light
residential street centerlines shall have radii in excess of 150 feet. Road
centerlines for collector streets shall have radii in excess of 300 feet. The tangent
distance between reverse curves shall not be less than 100 feet. Collector and
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
91
arterial street centerlines shall be designed so that a minimum of residential
properties face onto them.
8-3-12 Intersections - Unless waived by the Commission, in accordance with Section 4-
13 of these Regulations because of topography or other conditions, all streets
shall join each other so that for a distance of at least 100 feet the street is at right
angles to the street it joins.
8-3-13 Corners - Corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than thirty (30) feet
at the curb line if the intersection occurs at a right angle.
8-4 STREET BASE CONSTRUCTION
8-4-1 All streets shall be graded to their full width in accordance with the Typical
Cross Section provided in Appendix A.
8-4-2 The subgrade of the paved area shall be thoroughly compacted to grade.
8-4-3 Whenever the subgrade is unstable and material is removed to necessary depth
to ensure stability, the subgrade shall then be reestablished with gravel or other
suitable material.
8-4-4 Boulders or broken ledge one cubic yard or greater in size shall not be used for
fill within the right-of-way of subdivision streets, however, such rock may be
used as fill if approved by the Town Engineer.
The roadbed shall consist of the following:
(A) 12” of bank run gravel
(B) 4” of processed gravel
(C) 3 ½” compacted thickness of bituminous concrete installed in two (2)
layers. Base course shall be 2” and top course shall be 1 ½”.
(D) In rock cuts, twenty-four (24) inches of bank run gravel is required.
Processed gravel shall conform to the requirements stated in the State of
Connecticut Department of Transportation Standard Specifications Form
816, as revised. All gravel is to be placed in compacted lifts of 6 inches.
8-4-5 Both layers of bank run gravel and processed gravel shall be properly graded to
the elevations and crown as shown on the approved plans and each layer shall
be wetted down and thoroughly compacted through the use of a ten (10) ton
roller or equivalent.
8-4-6 Additional sub drainage shall be installed when and where deemed necessary by
the Town Engineer at the time of construction. The cost of such improvements
shall be borne by the applicant.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
92
8-5 STREET SURFACING
8-5-1 Applicants are strongly urged to complete the placing of hot bituminous concrete
before November 1. However, paving may be permitted after that date provided
the outside air temperature is above forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit measured in
the shade and the surface temperature is above thirty (30) degrees. Paving will
not be permitted after the first weekday in December unless warranted by
extraordinary circumstances and specifically authorized in writing by the Town
Engineer.
8-5-2 After surfacing, six (6) inches of machine-formed bituminous curbing shall be
laid on the finished road surface with a distance as specified in Appendix A
between faces of opposite curbings. No curbing shall be required in driveway
areas, but in its stead a ten (10) foot bituminous concrete apron shall be
constructed with a one and one-half (1-½) inch lip and with an upward grade of
six (6) inches. If top course is not installed within 5 days of base course, a 7”
temporary curb must be installed on base course.
8-5-3 The area between curbing and property lines shall be loamed to a depth of four
(4) inches from the top of curbing and graded with a cross slope of one-half (1/2)
inch to one foot toward road. Permanent vegetative cover shall be established
in accord with the latest update of the CT Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control.
8-6 SIDEWALKS
8-6-1 Public Sidewalks - All public sidewalks shall be concrete. All sidewalks at street
intersections shall be designed and constructed to provide a ramp and such shall
meet the following specifications: (1) The cut shall have a surface that is textured
and non-slip; (2) the cut shall be at least thirty-six (36) inches wide; and (3) the
cut shall have a slope not greater than one inch per foot and shall be beveled at
the bottom. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in width and shall be
located within the street lines with one edge 1’-0” from the property line. The
sidewalk shall be laid on a six (6) inch bank run gravel base, tamped and rolled,
and shall be constructed of air entrained concrete, four (4) inches thick, having an
ultimate strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch and having expansion joints
with pre-molded fillers spaced every twenty (20) feet and suitable weakened
plain joints. The Town Engineer may require increased slab thickness and/or
steel reinforcing at driveway crossings. Sidewalk width may be waived by the
Commission in accordance with Section 4-13 of these Regulations.
8-6-2 Private Sidewalks - All private sidewalks shall be designed to utilize permeable
surfaces such as pervious concrete , concrete block pavers, flexi-pave, or other
material satisfactory to the Town Engineer, Town Planner, and as approved by
the Commission. Stone dust and items such as gravel shall not be used.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
93
8-7 STREET LIGHTING – A minimum standard street lighting system shall be installed by
the power company serving the area of the proposed subdivision with the cooperation
of the applicant. The cost for the installation of any type of lighting fixtures and pole
shall be paid by the applicant. The developer shall bond such lighting facilities with all
other subdivision improvements.
8-8 STREET SIGNS – All street signs shall be installed according to the following
standards:
8-8-1 Posts – Shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet long, two-and-one-half (2-½) inch IPS
steel standard weight pipe which shall be set in a concrete block sixteen (16)
inches square by twelve (12) inches deep. The post shall be covered with a post
cap for a two and one-half (2 ½) inch (I.D.) pipe. Posts shall be painted green.
8-8-2 Street signs – Shall be six (6) inches wide by twenty-four (24), thirty (30), or
thirty-six (36) inches depending upon the length of the name and placed seven
(7) feet above grade. The material used shall be .080, 6061-T6 aluminum
mounted in a criss-cross assembly.
8-8-3 Letters – The size of primary copy shall be four (4) inches. The size of suffix
copy shall be two (2) inches. The letter shall be colored black on a white
background on reflector type finish.
8-9 DRAINAGE
8-9-1 The construction of the drainage system including methods of construction and
quality of materials used shall be in conformity with the Construction Plan and
shall conform to the Connecticut Department of Transportation Standard
specifications Form 816, as revised. The installation shall be inspected and
approved by the Town Engineer prior to back filling.
8-9-2 Minimum stormwater drainpipe size shall be fifteen (15) inches in diameter and
shall be reinforced concrete pipe or equivalent as approved by the Planning
Commission. There shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches of cover over
all drainage pipes. In general, all storm sewers shall be constructed of reinforced
concrete pipe class IV, unless a higher classification is necessary due to the height
of fill. Asphalt-coated corrugated metal pipe will be used on grades of ten
percent (10%) or greater, or where there is a poor foundation condition. The
proper gage is to be selected from the height of fill table in the Department of
Transportation Drainage manual.
8-9-3 Pre-cast catch basin tops shall be used over solid concrete wall construction. Precast
sumps shall be used.
8-9-4 Open ends of all drainage installations shall be protected by poured concrete end
walls or other approved structures.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
94
8-9-5 Earth drainage channels shall be planted with suitable vegetative cover. If
required by the Commission drainage channels shall be covered with riprap or
paved.
8-9-6 The proposed drainage facilities shall be designed with regard for ultimate
development within the drainage basins. The cost of installing oversized
drainage system shall be borne by the applicant.
8-9-7 A settling basin may be required by the Town Engineer if it is deemed necessary
to prevent silting of streams, wetlands, or other areas contiguous to the drainage
outfall. All storm sewer outlets within easements on private property shall be
piped at least 100 feet beyond the street line unless otherwise directed by the
Planning Commission.
8-9-8 Drainage easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide and shall be
located entirely on one of any two abutting lots.
8-9-9 The applicant shall acquire all drainage rights and shall be responsible for
connecting all new drainage to an existing, adequate town drainage system or to
an existing natural watercourse where drainage rights have been acquired.
8-9-10 Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or
stream, the Commission may require that there be provided a stormwater
easement or drainage easement of adequate width to conform substantially to
the lines of such watercourse.
8-10 WATER SYSTEM
8-10-1 A proposed subdivision that is required to have a public water supply shall
comply with the East Lyme Water and Sewer Commission specifications for
materials of construction and installation.
8-10-2 The principal water main or mains in any subdivision shall be sized to provide
for future expansion, except within coastal waterfront areas, where mains shall
be designed to accommodate existing land uses only. The size of all mains shall
be approved by the East Lyme Water and Sewer Commission.
8-11 SEWERAGE SYSTEM – Where applicable, any planned sewerage system, whether
public or private, shall be installed in accordance with the Construction Plan and shall
be in conformity with these Regulations and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut, and as approved by the Town department or corporation having
jurisdiction. In areas to be sewered, the sanitary sewer pipes shall be installed and
capped.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
95
8-12 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES - Unless a waiver is granted in accordance with Section
4-13 of these Regulations, underground utilities shall be installed. Underground electric
transmission, cable television and telephone lines shall be installed by the utility and
Telephone Company in cooperation with the applicant and in accordance with the
specifications of the utility and telephone company. In determining the location of the
underground lines the standards established in Appendix A shall be used as a guideline.
All underground utilities shall be installed prior to street paving. Easements for utilities
shall be placed along lot lines and shall be at least (15) feet wide.
8-13 FIRE PROTECTION – Where public water is available or required, fire hydrants may
be required where necessary to insure public health and safety. Fire hydrants normally
shall be located no more than five hundred (500) feet apart and shall be approved by the
Water and Sewer Department. To eliminate future road openings, all underground
utilities for fire hydrants, together with the hydrants, shall be installed before any final
paving of a road shown on the subdivision plan.
In subdivisions where public water is not and will not be available, the Planning
Commission may require the provision of alternative sources of water supply, such as a
pond or cistern with dry hydrant connections, if it finds that the size of the proposed
subdivision requires such a supply for fire protection purposes in order to insure public
health and safety.
8-13-1 In subdivisions with ten (10) lots or more having structures of 2,800 square-feet
or less and located outside a public water supply area, there shall be a minimum
30,000 gallons of accessible firefighting water within 2,200 feet of each lot. In any
subdivision or portion of any subdivision having structures greater than 2,800
square-feet, the minimum water supply for fire fighting shall be satisfactory to
the Fire Marshall, and approved by the Commission. It shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to notify the Fire Marshal of any application made under this
Section and notice shall be sent by Certified Mail within seven (7) days of the
submission of an application to Department of Planning.
8-13-2 Any impounded water supply, such as a cistern, tank, or other approved storage
facility, shall contain a minimum of 30,000 usable gallon. The supply shall allow
the fire department to withdraw water at a rate not less than 1,000 gallons per
minute at a maximum 15-foot lift using standard firefighting equipment. The
facility shall be designed to have adequate year round access from a public street.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
96
8-14 PRIVATE STREETS AND ROADWAYS – The traveled portion of the right-of-way
may be constructed to a width of twenty (18) feet between curbs for a light residential
street permitting traffic in two directions. The Commission may require a greater width
upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. Private streets or roadways, shall have a
right-of-way of not less than fifty (50) feet. Common access drives shall have a right-ofway
of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
8-14-1 Private Streets or Roadways shall provide underdrain in all road cuts or as
directed by the Town Engineer. A note shall be added to all site plan sheets
indicating that "Underdrain may be subtracted or added by the Town Engineer
at the time of construction, based on field conditions"
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
97
SECTION 9 - ASSURANCES FOR COMPLETION AND
MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
9-1 BONDS – In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements for the final approval
of a subdivision plan, the Commission may accept a bond in an amount and with surety
or other security and conditions satisfactory to it.
The bond shall secure to the town the actual construction and installation of such
improvements and utilities within one (1) year from the day of approval of the
subdivision Plan. The Commission may extend the completion date for public
improvements for additional periods. As a condition for such extension, the
Commission may require the increase in the amount of the bond.
9-2 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL AND SITE RESTORATION BOND
– The Commission may accept a bond in an amount and with other security and
conditions satisfactory to it to secure erosion and sedimentation and site restoration as
described in Sections 4-4-6, 5-3-1(C), 5-7, and 8-3-6.
9-3 APPLICABILITY - These bond requirements shall apply to improvements shown on the
approved plans whether the streets are to be public or private, except that no
maintenance bond shall be required for private improvements.
9-4 BOND FORM – Bonds shall be duly executed on forms provided by the town and
available from the Planning Department, with proper reference to all maps and plans
showing the streets, drainage, and other improvements covered by the bond. To ensure
the completion of all required improvements, including storm drainage system, erosion
and sedimentation control measures, roads and pavements, sidewalks and curbs, trees,
grading, setting of monuments, and any other requirements made as a condition for
subdivision approval or depicted on the endorsed Record Subdivision Plan, Plan and
Profile Plan, Grading Plan, Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, the Commission
shall require, prior to the release of the signed Approved Maps (mylar copy) any one of
the following:
9-4-1 A deposit of cash with the Town, of an amount satisfactory to the Town Engineer
and approved by the Commission which, will cover the cost of the
improvements.
9-4-2 A security agreement, in a form acceptable by the Commission, which provides
that no lots may be sold, or building permits issued until such time that all
required improvements are complete, or cash deposited, as outlined in Section 9-
4-1 for the remaining improvements.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
98
9-5 FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS – Where a bond has been posted and
required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such bond, the town
may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements
be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is
declared to be in default.
9-6 PARTIAL RELEASE – When the Town Engineer determines, based on site inspection
and certification by the applicant's engineer that a substantial portion of the public
improvements called for in the final plan approved by the Commission have been
completed, a recommendation may be made for one or more partial releases of a portion
of the surety, the balance to be sufficient to guarantee completion of the public
improvements. Such partial release shall be authorized by the Planning Commission
upon recommendation of the Town Engineer. Releases shall be granted in amounts of
no less than $1,000. In no event shall a bond be released below two percent (2%) of the
actual cost of improvements or no less than $3,000, whichever is greater.
9-6-1 Bond Reduction Schedule for Private Roads
First Release Clearing
Sanitary Sewer
Storm Drainage
Utilities
Subgrade
Base Material
BOND REDUCTION
As Recommended by Town
Staff and Approved by the
Commission
Second Release Binder Course
Curbing
Sidewalk
Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(Site Stabilization)
BOND REDUCTION
As Recommended by Town
Staff and Approved by the
Commission
Final Release
Turf Establishment
Street Trees
Top Course
As Built Drawings
Surveyor’s Certification
Removal of All Unauthorized
Objects from Rights-of-Way
Deeds
Street Signage
BOND REDUCTION
As Recommended by Town
Staff and Approved by the
Commission
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
99
9-7 FINAL RELEASE – Bonds will not be released until the following conditions have been
met:
(A) The Town Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed;
(B) The applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to the Town Engineer, through
submission of detailed as-built plans that the layout of the line and grade of all
public improvements is in accordance with the Construction Plan for the
subdivision. As-built plans shall include, a Grading Plan and a Construction Plan
as described in Section 5 of these Regulations. Such plans shall show any
modification or changes made during construction.
(C) All public improvements called for in the final plan have been accepted by the
town. A maintenance bond, as described in Section 9-8-1 shall be filed with the
town.
(D) All conditions and requirements of the Commission’s approval of the subdivision
application have been satisfied.
(E) The deed to all roads has been accepted by the town.
9-8 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS – The applicant shall be required to maintain
all improvements and provide for snow removal on streets until acceptance of said
improvements by the town.
9-8-1 Maintenance Bond – The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond
with the Town prior to the acceptance of the improvements, in order to assure
the satisfactory condition of the required improvements, for a period of one (1)
year after the date of acceptance of the improvements by the town. The
maintenance bond shall be in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the cost of
improvements and shall be of such form as described in these Regulations.
Pursuant to Section 9-3 of these Regulations, no maintenance bond shall be
required for private improvements.
9-8-2 Snow Plowing and Other Maintenance - In the case of conditional or final
approval a cash bond in the amount of $10,000 or five percent of the cost of
improvements excluding utilities not intended to be conveyed to the town,
whichever is the greater amount, shall be posted with the Town of East Lyme.
Such bond shall be accompanied by an agreement under which the Director of
Public Works may draw on such funds, after adequate notice, to effect snow
plowing or other maintenance necessary for the public health, safety and
convenience. Such monies may also be used to pay any electrical charges
necessary for street lighting. The extent of such payments to the Town shall be
specified in the agreement with the Town of East Lyme.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
100
9-9 MAINTENANCE SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED TO SUBDIVISION RESIDENTS
ON UNACCEPTED STREETS
9-9-1 Services – It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide snow removal,
ice removal and garbage collection services for all residents in the subdivision
until such time as the streets are accepted by the Town of East Lyme. Said
services are to be provided in the same degree as is normally provided by the
Town of East Lyme to residents living on an accepted street.
9-9-2 Building Permits – No building permits shall be issued by the Building
Inspector of the Town of East Lyme for the occupancy of any house of any house
or building in any subdivision when the street on which the house or building is
located has not been accepted by the Town of East Lyme unless all of the
following conditions have been met:
(A) A determination has been made by the Town Engineer that the unaccepted
street has been sufficiently developed and identified by temporary or
permanent street signs to permit access for the provision of municipal
services in a manner normally done by the town and that safe access to each
dwelling can be obtained from the street by both emergency apparatus and
the occupants of the dwelling. At a minimum, the street shall be improved
with the required processed gravel base up to the lot for which a building
permit is requested.
(B) The applicant has posted a surety or cash performance bond with the Town
of East Lyme to guarantee the providing of garbage collection and the
removal of snow and ice in the same degree as is normally provided by the
Town of East Lyme to residents living on town accepted streets. The amount
of said bond will be determined by the Commission based on the
recommendations of the Town Engineer.
(C) The applicant has provided the Commission and the Town Engineer, in
writing, the name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
who will perform the garbage collection, snow removal, and ice removal
services. Further, the Commission and the Town Engineer shall be informed,
in writing, of any changes in the name, address, and telephone number of the
person or persons performing these services.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
101
SECTION 10 - SUPERVISION OF IMPROVEMENTS
10-1 INSPECTION OF PROPOSED STREETS – Work on succeeding stages of construction
shall not proceed until inspection and approval has been obtained from the Town
Engineer. At least twenty-four (24) hours notice shall be given to the Town Engineer
when requesting an inspection. Inspection of proposed streets shall be made at the
below stated points of construction by the Town Engineer.
(1) Inspection of proposed street area prior to any construction.
(2) Inspection of roadway excavation prior to drainage provisions.
(3) Inspection of subgrade.
(4) Inspection of gravel subbase following the placement of each six inch compacted
lift.
(5) Inspection of rolled gravel base prior to placement of hot asphalt concrete
surface.
(6) Inspection of the placement of bituminous concrete pavement.
(7) Final inspection before submission to the Board of Selectmen.
10-2 PROFESSIONAL INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS – The Town Engineer shall
inspect all improvements. Before the release of any required bond or cash deposit, the
Town Engineer shall certify to the Commission that the work performed by the
applicant under the terms of such bond, has been completed in substantial compliance
with the subdivision plan.
10-3 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM – When the subdivision requires
installation of a public water system, such system must be inspected during construction
and approved by the East Lyme Director of Public Works.
10-4 INSPECTION OF EROSION SEDIMENT CONTROLS
10-4-1 Inspections – Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated
agent during development to ensure compliance with the certified erosion and
sediment control plan, and to ensure that the control measures and facilities are
properly installed, functioning and maintained. The Commission may require
the applicant to verify through progress reports that the soil erosion and
sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed
according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
102
10-4-2 Variations – The Commission or its designated agent may approve variations in
materials and methods to control soil erosion and sedimentation as shown on the
certified plan which do not result in any changes to or extensions of the
disturbed area, and are substantially consistent with the certified plan. The
Commission’s designated agent may require that such are necessary to control
soil erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the certified plan; the cost of
which shall be borne by the applicant. All inspection reports shall specify actions
taken pursuant to this section.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
103
SECTION 11 - ENFORCEMENT
11-1 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT - If the Commission determines that the requirements of
these Regulations, or the provisions of any plan approved or certified by the
Commission are not being adhered to, the following action shall be taken:
11-1-1 The Commission shall notify the owner or applicant of the violation by sending a
letter to such person by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
explaining in detail the violation and the corrective measures necessary. The
letter shall specify a reasonable time for the implementation of the corrective
measures.
11-1-2 If the corrective measures called for by the Commission have not been
implemented within the period specified, the Commission, through its
designated agent, shall issue a Cease and Desist Order, effective in a specified
reasonable time by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. In the
event there shall be an outstanding surety bond, a copy of such notice shall be set
in the same manner to the surety and to such other persons as the Commission
may deem appropriate.
11-1-3 If the Cease and Desist Order issued by the Commission is not obeyed within the
period specified, the Commission shall refer the matter to the Town’s counsel for
obtaining a restraining order against the violation.
11-1-4 Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exclude any other remedy or relief
available to the Commission by law or in equity.
11-1-5 Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude conferences and negotiations
between the Commission and any owner or applicant with respect to any alleged
violations.
11-2 ENFORCEMENT OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROLS - If the Commission
or its designated agent determines that the requirements of the certified soil erosion
sediment control plan are not being adhered to, the following action shall be taken:
11-2-1 Violations - The Commission or its designated agent shall notify the applicant of
the violation of the certified plan by transmitting a copy of the inspection report
prepared on site to the applicant, retaining a copy of such inspection report for
subsequent action as provided herein. The Commission or its agent shall specify
the corrective measures necessary to comply with the certified plan as
determined during the inspection. In those cases where corrective measures are
mutually agreed to, the inspection report shall detail such measures, time period
in which they will be implemented (not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours from
time of inspection) and shall have the signature of the Commission’s agent and
the applicant.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
104
11-2-2 Cease and Desist Orders - When determined by the inspecting agent that the
provisions of the certified plan are not being adhered to and no mutually
agreeable solution or measure to correct such violation is obtained with the
applicant, or such solution has not been implemented within a forty-eight (48)
hour time period, the inspecting officer shall issue a Cease and Desist Order,
effective immediately, in writing with a copy of the inspection report to the
applicant, contractor, responsible agent and the surety company. The Order shall
provide no more than forty-eight (48) hours in which to correct such violation
and shall act as notice to the surety company, contractor and applicant of the
Town’s intent to cause the required repairs to be made and bill the contractor,
applicant and surety company for the cost of the work then involved. Such
action shall be done without prejudice to any other remedy available to the
Town. As long as the Cease and Desist Order remains in effect, no new building
permits for lots within the entire subdivision shall be issued and no Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued if such structure is within a lot or such lot is affected
by the violation as determined by the Commission or its agent.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
105
APPENDICES
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
106
APPENDIX A – Typical Road Cross Section
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
107
APPENDIX B – Reserved for Future Use
This page intentionally left blank.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
108
APPENDIX C – Site Testing
A. Deep Test Pits:
1. Minimum of one per lot, additional pits as required by the East Lyme Health
Department.
2. Pits dug in area of the proposed sewage system and located on the Record
Subdivision Map by surveying.
3. Pits to be dug to approximately eight (8) feet deep, or four (4) feet below the
bottom of the proposed leaching system, whichever is greater.
4. The following information shall be submitted on the Sanitation Report and plan:
a. Soil types encountered including the depth of each horizon. Hardpan,
compacted or impermeable layers shall be noted.
b. Date of testing.
c. Depth to ground water.
d. Depth to ledge rock.
e. Any other information which may affect the operation or installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system.
B. Percolation Tests:
1. Minimum of one per lot, additional tests as required by the East Lyme Health
Department.
2. Percolation tests conducted in the area of the proposed system. Multiple tests
may be required if the proposed system spans different soil textures or horizons
which may adversely affect the design seepage rate. The seepage rate of the
lower soil layer shall be utilized as the basis of design for the system.
3. Test holes shall be located on the map by surveying.
4. Tests shall be conducted according to State of Connecticut Public Health Code,
Section 19-13-b10d (b).
5. The following information shall be submitted with the plan:
a) Date of testing
b) Stabilized percolation rate (i.e. minimum uniform rate rather than
average of drop).
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
109
C. Other Tests
1. Such other tests as may be required by the East Lyme Health Department
including, but not limited to, permeability tests, sieve analysis, and hydraulic
analysis, in order to determine the suitability for on-site sewage disposal.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
110
APPENDIX D – Standard Details
Drawing #
1 Standard Endwall and Wing Type Endwall
2 Type “C” Catch Basin
3 Type “C-L” Catch Basin
4 Type “C-G” Catch Basin
5 Type “D-G” Endwall
6 Type “C-L” Catch Basin Double Grate
7 Manhole
8 Underdrain, Ditch and Curb
9 Baffle Box
10 Riprap Channel or Ditch
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
111
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
112
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
113
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
114
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
115
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
116
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
117
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
118
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
119
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
120
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
121
APPENDIX E – Application Fee Calculation Sheet
2.1 Subdivision Application Review. For subdivisions and re-subdivisions, the following fees shall be
paid at the time of application to the Planning Commission:
2.1.1 # Lots __________ X $100.00 _______________
2.1.2 Base Fee $750.00
2.1.3 Public Hearing Fee, if applicable ($1250.00) _______________
2.1.4 Design Review Fee -LF new road ___________X $1.00 _______________
2.1.5 Professional/Legal Consultations (actual cost) _______________
2.1.6 State of Connecticut Fee $60.00
SUBTOTAL _______________
2.2 Subdivision Application Processing and Inspection. Upon approval of a subdivision/ re-subdivision
by the Planning Commission, the following fees shall be paid prior to the Chair’s signing the
app6oved subdivision plan:
2.2.1 # Lots __________ X $100 _______________
2.1.2 Base Fee $100.00
2.2.3 Road/Utility Document Review Fee ($400.00) _______________
2.2.4 Inspection Fee - LF of new road ________X $1.00 _______________
2.2.5 E & S Control Fee - # Lots ___________X $50.00 _______________
SUBTOTAL _______________
2.3 Coastal Area Management Review
# Lots ______X $10.00 ($25.00 min.) ________________
2.4 Application for Revision of Lot Line $150.00
TOTAL FEES ________________
Fees based on Section 2 of the Town Ordinance Establishing Schedule of Fees for Conservation Planning
and Zoning Commissions as amended.
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
122
APPENDIX F – Declaration of Restrictions and Covenants
DECLARATION OF RESTRICTIONS AND COVENANTS REGARDING
SALE OR TRANSFER OF SUBDIVISION LOTS
THIS DECLARATION; executed this day of , 200 , by
(Hereinafter referred to as “Grantor”) in favor of THE TOWN OF EAST
LYME PLANNING COMMISSION, (hereinafter referred to as “Grantee”) with respect to the
property shown on a map or plan entitled, “
(Hereinafter referred to as the “Subdivision”)
WHEREAS, the above referenced Subdivision plan was approved by the East Lyme
Planning Commission on , and
WHEREAS, said approval was conditioned upon the completion of the public
improvements and other items; and
WHEREAS, the mylars of said Subdivision plan have been endorsed by the Chairman or
Secretary of the Planning Commission and recorded on the East Lyme Land Records
(Drawer/Map); and
NOW THEREFORE, the Grantor hereby covenants and agrees as follows:
1. No lots in the above referenced Subdivision shall be sold or offered for sale or
otherwise transferred until the following requirement(s) have been met, and a
release of this Declaration shall have been executed by the Chairman or Secretary of
the East Lyme Planning Commission:
A. The completion and acceptance by the Town of East Lyme of all public
improvements, or in lieu thereof, the posting of a performance bond in such
amount and such form as shall have been approved by the East Lyme Planning
Commission with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
123
municipality the actual construction, maintenance and installation of such public
improvements within the period specified in the bond.
2. In the event that it should be necessary for the Town of East Lyme or its Planning
Commission to take action at law or in equity to enforce the provisions of this
Declaration, the Grantor shall pay the Town’s expenses for such action, including
but not limited to reasonable attorney’s fees. The Grantor also agrees that a violation
of this Declaration may be enforced by injunction, and that should the Town seek
relief by way of a temporary or permanent injunction, it shall not be required to
demonstrate irreparable injury and lack of an adequate remedy at law.
3. The provisions of this Declaration shall be binding upon the Grantor and his
successors and assigns.
__________________________________ By _______________________________
Witness Its
__________________________________
Witness
STATE OF CONNECTICUT )
) ss. East Lyme
COUNTY OF NEW LONDON)
Personally appeared ________________________, as aforesaid, signer of the foregoing
instrument, and acknowledged the same to be his/her free act and deed as such _____________
and the free act and deed of said commission, before me, this ______ day of , 20___ .
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
124
_________________________________
Commissioner of the Superior Court
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
STATE OF CONNECTICUT )
) ss.
COUNTY OF )
On this_______ day of , 200 , before me, the undersigned officer, personally
appeared and acknowledged the
same to be his free act and deed and the free act and deed of said corporation as of said
limited liability company.
_________________________________
Commissioner of the Superior Court
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
125
APPENDIX G – Signature Block for Final Mylars
APPROVED BY THE EAST LYME PLANNING COMMISSION
Chairman/Secretary: ________________________________
Approval Date: ________________________________
Filing Deadline: ________________________________
Expiration Date: ________________________________
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
126
APPROVED EFFECTIVE SECTIONS DESCRIPTION L.N. T.C.
08/13/02 09/07/02 6-13-6 Back Lots
11/19/02 01/01/03 10 Open Space
01/06/04 02/01/04 4-3-3, 4-3-4, 4-10, Extensions
4-1-4, 4-7 Fees, Lot Line Rev.
03/02/04 04/01/04 6-9 (1-12), 7-3-6 Streets
05/03/05 06/01/05 3-5, 4-1-1, 4-3-6,
Aquifer, Conditional
Approval
4-3-8, 4-7 Lot Line Rev., Sig. Block
09/06/05 10/01/05 6-9-2, 6-9-10 Unnecessary Roads
10/18/05 11/08/05
1-2, 4-1, 5-11, 6-9,
614
Design Standards for the
Protection of Natural &
Cultural Resources
04/06/06 05/01/06 6-14-6 Back Lots
05/02/06 05/31/06 4-3-6 Conditional Approval
10/03/06 11/01/06 7-3-2, 7-3-8, 7-4-5 Road Standards 10/21/2006 10/20/2006
7-5-2, 7-5-3, 7-9-1,
6-11, 5-1-3, 5-2-1,
5-2-2 & 5-2-10
11/13/07 11/30/07 3-5 Subdivision Moratorium
09/03/08 7-3-7 Subdivision Improvement
10/24/08 11/28/08 1-2 (19,20), 4-1-4(l ),
5-7, 6-16,
Appendix B
Stormwater Management 11/25/08
C:\Documents and Settings\jlindo\My Documents\Planning\2011 Subdivision Regulations- February 1, 2011.doc
127
2/1/11 2/1/11 Sections 1, 2, 3,
4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,
and Appendices.
Comprehensive Rewrite
Conservation
Development by Design
Subdivision
2/5/11

INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
REGULATIONS
TOWN OF EAST LYME
CONNECTICUT
Approved October 6, 2008
Revised through April 11, 2011

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Revisions ………………………………………………………. Page 1
Title and Authority ……………………… Section 1 ………………… Page 6
Definitions ……………………… Section 2 ………………… Page 7
Inventory of Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses ……………………… Section 3 ………………… Page 10
Permitted and Nonregulated Uses ……………………. Section 4 ………………… Page 10
Activities Regulated by the State ……………………. Section 5 ………………… Page 11
Regulated Activities to be Licensed ………………….. Section 6 ………………… Page 12
Application Requirements …………………….. Section 7 ………………… Page 12
Application Procedures ……………………… Section 8 ………………… Page 15
Public Hearings ……………………… Section 9 …………….….. Page 16
Considerations for Decisions ……………………… Section 10 ……………….. Page 16
Decision Process and Permit ……………………… Section 11 ……………….. Page 18
Action by Duly Authorized Agent …………………… Section 12 ……………….. Page 19
Bond and Insurance ……………………… Section 13 ……………….. Page 20
Enforcement ……………………… Section 14 ……………….. Page 20
Amendments ……………………… Section 15 ……………….. Page 21
Appeals ……………………… Section 16 ……………….. Page 23
Conflict and Severance ……………………… Section 17 ……………….. Page 23
Other Permits ……………………… Section 18 ……………….. Page 23
Application Fees ……………………… Section 19 ……………….. Page 23
Effective Date of Regulations ……………………… Section 20 ……………….. Page 24
Appendices
A ……………………………………….. Definition of Agriculture … Page 25
B ……………………………………….… Section 8-7d ……………… Page 26
C …………………………………………. .....Upland Review Guidelines .. ................. Page 28
D. …………………………………………. ..Ordinance Establishing Schedule of Fees Page 49
-1-
REVISIONS
These regulations have been revised to be consistent with all amendments to the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act through December 31, 2004. They contain all the changes the DEP has made to the
model as noted in their Legislation and Regulations Advisories up to and including their 2004 Legislation
and Regulations Advisory dated November 29, 2004.
Items which have been revised are underlined. Specifically, revisions to the “Rev. March 1997” Model
include the following:
Section 2.1
-Bog- definition amended
-Designated Agent- definition deleted
-Discharge- definition amended
-Disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse- definition deleted
-Essential to the farming operation- definition amended to remove the word “existing”
-Farming- definition amended, reference to Appendix A
-License- new definition to reflect statutory definition
-Marshes- definition amended
-Material- definition amended to reflect statutory definition
-Nurseries- definition amended
-Permit- definition deleted, reference to License
-Person- definition amended to reflect statutory definition
-Regulated Activity- definition has a reference to Appendix B
-Regulated Area- definition deleted
-Remove- definition amended to reflect statutory definition
-Significant impact- definition amended
-Swamps- definition amended
-Wetlands- definition amended to reflect statutory definition
Section 3
-Title amended to read “Inventory of Wetlands and Watercourses”
Section 3.1
-Regulated area changed to wetlands and watercourses
Section 3.2
-Amended to allow any person rather than any owner to propose map amendments
Section 3.3
-Amended so reference to any person is now in section 3.2
-Amended to delete reference to designated agent
Section 3.4
-New section applies to all map amendments
Section 4.1a
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.1b
-2-
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.1c
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.1d
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.1e
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.2
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.2 a
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.2 b
-Amended to reflect statutory language
Section 4.3
-Amended to add authority of duly authorized agent
Section 4.4
-Amended to reflect statutory authority
Section 5
-Amended to make clear the program areas that are regulated exclusively by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection, title of section amended.
Section 5.1
-Deleted and replaced with language of previous section 5.2
Section 5.2
-Deleted and replaced with language of previous section 5.3
Section 5.3
-Deleted and replaced with language of previous section 5.4
Section 5.4
-Deleted and replaced with language of previous section 5.1f
Section 7.5a
-Amended for clarification
Section 7.5f
-Amended to include statutory language
Section 7.5j
-Amended for clarification
-3-
Section 7.6
-Amended for clarification
Section 7.6e
-Amended to include statutory language
Section 8.1
-Amended to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 8.2
-Deleted to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 8.3
-Renumbered to section 8.2
-Amended to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 8.4
-Renumbered to section 8.3
Section 8.5
-Amended to reflect amendments to the Act
-Renumbered to section 8.4
Section 8.6
-Renumbered to section 8.5
Section 8.7
-Renumbered to section 8.6
Section 8.8
-Renumbered to section 8.7
Section 9.1
-Amended to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 9.3
-Deleted as not required by the Act
Section 9.4
-Deleted as not required by the Act
Section 10.1b
-Deleted as not allowed unless application is subject to a public hearing
Section 10.1c
-Renumbered to section 10.1b
Section 10.1d
-Renumbered to section 10.1c
Section 10.1e
-Renumbered to section 10.1d
-4-
-New section 10.1e added to address applications subject to public hearing
Section 10.5
-Deleted and replaced with new language to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 10.6
-New section added to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 10.7
-New section that contains the language of the former section 10.5
-Amended for clarification
Section 11.3
-Amended for clarification
Section 11.2
-Amended to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 12.1
-Amended for clarification
Section 13.1
-Amended to require a bond as a permit condition
Section 13.2
-Amended for clarification
Section 14.1
-Amended to delete reference to the authority to inspect property
Section 14.2
-Amended to allow inspections of permitted actions with consent of owner
Section 14.3
-New section to allow inspections of actions not permitted or expired permit
Section 14.4
-New section that contains the language of former section 14.3
-Designated agent changed to duly authorized agent
-Subsection b changed to c and limited only for action of Agency
-Subsection c deleted
Section 14.5
-New section that contains the language of former section 14.4
Section 15.7
-Amended to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 15.8
-Amended to reflect amendments to the Act
Section 19
-5-
-Various amendments to fee schedule including change to the title of the section and addition of a
Complex Application Fee
Section 20 and 21
-This section, formerly titled Records Retention and Disposition, has been deleted from the model. The
Office of the Public Records Administrator of the Connecticut State Library is responsible for providing
record management guidelines for municipal government offices. You can contact the Connecticut State
Library at (860) 757-6540 and ask for Eunice G. DiBella, the Public Records Administrator. Information
is also available on their web site www.cslib.org. Because of this change, section 21 of the model is
renumbered to be section 20 titled “Effective Date of Regulations”.
The following sections were revised to reflect the name change from the Conservation Commission to the
Inland Wetlands Agency that became effective July 1, 2008.
Sections 1.3, 2.1, 6.1, 8.1.
Section 9.2
-Added public notice requirement for abutters within 200'.
Section 10.1
-Changed the reference to Conservation Commission to the Commission for the Conservation of Natural
Resources, the Health Officer to Ledge Light Health District and the New London County Soil and Water
Conservation District to the Eastern Connecticut Conservation District.
-6-
Section 1
Title and Authority
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and
irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed.
The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply
of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to
the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal,
aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in
danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of
material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all
of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated
activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and
ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the
environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and
benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the
wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses,
disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety
of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens
of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the
inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and
improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local
authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other
beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats
thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of
wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other
public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the
dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly
process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the
need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the
state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and
enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the
Town of East Lyme."
1.3 The East Lyme Inland Wetland Agency (name changed from Conservation Commission effective
July 1, 2008) of the Town of East Lyme was established in accordance with an ordinance adopted
June 20, 1966, and shall implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the
Ordinance Concerning Inland Wetlands and Watercourses in the Town of East Lyme.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with
the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue with
terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the
Town of East Lyme pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
-7-
Section 2
Definitions
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Agency" means the Inland Wetlands Agency of the Town of East Lyme.
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits,
poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a two
inch diameter at breast height.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the commissioner of the State of
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow
may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual
hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into waters of the state whether
or not such substance causes pollution.
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary and
indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut
General Statutes. (see Appendix A)
“Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering
principles.
“License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of
permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive.
"Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing
environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and
sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from
wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment
maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of
wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and
wildlife will not be adversely affected.
-8-
"Marshes" are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the
dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the
ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are
common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to
soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, sand, refuse or waste.
"Municipality" means the Town of East Lyme.
"Nurseries" means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or experimentation.
"Permit" see license
"Permittee" means the person to whom a license has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations,
governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of
any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein
by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with
any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any
filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
“Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be
derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is
prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative
is imprudent.
"Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving
removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such
wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in section 4 of these
regulations. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating,
constructing, depositing or removing of material and discharging storm water on the land within
100 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland or watercourse is a regulated
activity. The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area or
in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area is likely to impact or affect wetlands or
watercourses and is a regulated activity.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, bulldoze,
dragline or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological
properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity
or taste.
"Significant impact" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following activities
which may have a major effect:
-9-
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a
substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses outside
the area for which the activity is proposed.
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural
dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or
watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding;
supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or
perform other functions.
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity,
siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or
groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse.
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland
or watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such
areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the federal
Office of Personnel Management.
"Swamps" are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs.
"Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more
frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of East Lyme.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute
or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs,
and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the
occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of
recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer
than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which
consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and
floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of
the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil
moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
-10-
Section 3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
3.1 The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, East
Lyme, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the
general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of
the Town Clerk or the Agency. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses
shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and
location of watercourses. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery,
resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining
the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map
change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which
support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map
amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to aerial photography, remote sensing
imagery, resource mapping or other available information. The Agency may require such person
to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with section 15 of these
regulations.
3.3 The Agency shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. The Agency
may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available.
3.4 All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these
regulations.
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Nonregulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and watercourses, as of
right:
a. grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres
or less essential to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority
of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse
restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this subdivision shall not
be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to
the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow, filling or reclamation
of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the
expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar
material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. a residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a subdivision lot,
provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal
planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation
of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1,
1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of
right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987;
c. boat anchorage or mooring;
-11-
d. uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property
defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted
anywhere in the municipality provided that in any town where there are no zoning regulations
establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest minimum lot site shall be two acres.
Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but
shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a
wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in chapter
102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to
the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies
except as provided in sections 22a-401and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes and;
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any
municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General
Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is
zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this
subdivision, “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris
whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as nonregulated uses in wetlands and
watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or
watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or
pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife; and
b. outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study,
hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping,
hunting, fishing and shellfishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting,
clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not specifically
permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall
require a permit from the Agency in accordance with section 6 of these regulations, or for certain
regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from the duly authorized agent
in accordance with section 12 of these regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use or a
nonregulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use, notify
the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to
enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated
use of a wetland or watercourse. The Agency shall rule that the proposed operation and use or
portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation and use or that the proposed operation and
use is a regulated activity and a permit is required.
Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated
activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, agency or
-12-
instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education,
pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal
wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities
authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required
to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said
dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the
discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to
section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Section 6
Regulated Activities to be Licensed
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such
activity from the East Lyme Inland Wetlands Agency of the Town of East Lyme.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior
authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject
to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in section 14 of these regulations and
any other remedies as provided by law.
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1 Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct
such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall
contain the information described in this section and any other information the Agency may
reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the offices of the East Lyme Town
Clerk or the Agency.
7.2 If an application to the Town of East Lyme Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning
Commission for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or
watercourse, the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable,
of the Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in
accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with such planning,
zoning, or planning and zoning commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed
determination thereon by the Agency.
-13-
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a proposed activity
involves a significant impact activity.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a. the applicant’s name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone numbers; if the
applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation the managing member’s or
responsible corporate officer’s name, address, and telephone number;
b. the owner’s name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of the land
owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is
proposed;
c. the applicant’s interest in the land;
d. the geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a
description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and
watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed,
soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may
be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including,
but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order
of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses
and why the alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall
be diagramed on a site plan or drawing;
g. a site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in relation to
wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities associated with, or
reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the
proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or watercourses;
h. names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
i. statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in
the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or
through inaccurate or misleading information;
j. authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land, at
reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
k. a completed DEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information provided
by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in
accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
l. any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant
is proposing; and
m. Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in section 19 of
these regulations.
7.6 At the discretion of the Agency or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a significant
impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity,
including but not limited to the following , is required:
a. site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show
existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours,
boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses,
-14-
and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional
engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by such other
qualified person;
b. engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed
activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses
and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative
Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be
delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s field delineation shall be
depicted on the site plans;
d. a description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses
involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities
and wetland functions;
e. a description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application and
each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither
feasible nor prudent;
f. analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed
activity.
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500
feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining
municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or
drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Eleven (11) copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete
application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Agency.
7.9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in
accordance with section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration
date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the
information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application;
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the
schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or
completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting
wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued;
-15-
e. the Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew
such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond
the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public
interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity;
7.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder unless the
Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit
application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for
which the permit was issued provided a) no permit issued during the time period from July 1, 2006 to
July 1, 2009, inclusive, shall be valid for more than eleven years; and b) no permit issued prior to July
1, 2006 or after July 1, 2009 may be valid for more than ten years.
7.11 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or preservation
restriction, the following shall apply:
a. For purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated
in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but
not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such
land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open
condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
b. For purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated
in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other
instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state
or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is
to preserve historically significant structures or sites.
c. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or
for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter the footprint of such
existing building, relating to property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a
preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided
written notice of such application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding
such restriction, including, but not limited to, any state agency that holds such restriction, not
later than sixty days prior to the filling of the permit application.
d. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.11c, the applicant may submit a letter from the
holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application is
in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to the East Lyme Inland
Wetlands Agency of the Town of East Lyme.
8.2 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d(f), notify the
clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request
or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
-16-
a. any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within five hundred feet of
the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within
the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow
through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining
municipality; or
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within
seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an
inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company
as defined in section 25-32a, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the
water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format prescribed by said
commissioner, provided such water company or said commissioner has filed a map showing the
boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the application is
made and with the inland wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed no later than seven days after the date
of the application. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health, through a
representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of
such notice shall be provided to the Agency.
8.4 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of submission to the
Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such
submission, whichever is sooner.
8.5 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as
the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the
time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations.
8.6 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.7 Incomplete applications may be denied.
Section 9
Public Hearings
9.1 The inland wetlands agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the inland
wetlands agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands
or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or
older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a
hearing is filed with the inland wetlands agency not later than fourteen days after the date of
receipt of such application, or the inland wetlands agency finds that a public hearing regarding
such application would be in the public interest. The inland wetlands agency may issue a permit
without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this section is filed with the inland
wetlands agency on or before the fourteenth day after the date of receipt of the application. Such
-17-
hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of such application. All
applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At
such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days,
the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days
before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where
the affected wetland and watercourse is located. In addition to notice of public hearing by
publication, public notice shall be made as follows:
1. Notification of adjacent property owners: Each application upon which a public hearing
is held shall include a list, prepared by the applicant, of the names and addresses of all properties
200 feet or less distant therefrom, all as shown on the most recent records on file in the town of
East Lyme's Tax Assessor's Office. The applicant shall mail notification of said pending
application to the owners of each property as indicated on the last completed grand list as of the
date such notice is mailed not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than two (2) days before the
date set for the public hearing by transmitting the text of the public hearing notice as provided by
the Agency. Evidence of such mailing, in the form of the US Post Office Certificates of Mailing,
shall be submitted for inclusion in the record of the hearing.
Section 10
Considerations for Decision
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation
b. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the
Town of East Lyme:
1. Commission for the Conservation of Natural Resources
2. Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commissions
3. Building Official
4. Director of Public Works or Town Engineer
5. Ledge Light Health District
c. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the New London County
Soil and Water Conservation District, the Southeastern Regional Planning Agency or other
regional organizations (i.e. Council of Elected Officials); agencies in adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations
which may undertake additional studies or investigations.
d. Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in subdivision 10.1b
and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the
Agency.
e. For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and
testimony.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing
and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts
and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses;
-18-
b. the applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed
regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses.
c. the relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated
activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term
productivity of such wetlands or watercourses.
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused
by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would
foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation
measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity
including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the
following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse
resources;
e. the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use
of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity; and
f. impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for
which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to,
the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity
and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses.
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the Agency
that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit
shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent
alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency shall consider the facts and
circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this section. The finding and the reasons therefore
shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible
and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on
wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of
alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be construed to
shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present
alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal
life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in
which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated
activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic,
plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of
such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing
record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to subsection
7.11c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the inland wetlands
agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding
-19-
that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not
grant the permit approval.
-20-
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of subsections
7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations, (1) the party holding the conservation or preservation restriction,
other than a state agency that holds such restriction, may, not later than fifteen days after receipt of
actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules
and regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit
approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction; or (2) the
state agency that holds such restriction may, not later than thirty days after receipt of actual notice of
permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of
such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetland agency shall immediately reverse such permit
approval if the commissioner of the state agency that holds such restriction certifies that the land use
authorized in such permit violates the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
10.10 Nothing in subsections 7.11c or 711d of these regulations shall be construed to prohibit the filing of a
permit application or to require such written notice when the activity that is the subject of such permit
application will occur on a portion of property that is not restricted under the terms of such
conservation or preservation restriction.
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations, may,
in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon
other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out
the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any
reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would
(a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a public
hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard and
may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35)
days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35) days
after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on
applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant
may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this subsection, provided the
total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may
withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period specified in
this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the
application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be withdrawn by the
applicant or denied by the Agency.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within
fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the
-21-
Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies.
In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen-day period, the applicant
may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which requires a
zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under
sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Agency shall file a copy of
the decision and report on the application with the Town of East Lyme Planning, Zoning, or
Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Agency prior to July 1, 2006 or after July 1, 2009 for the development of
land for which an approval is required under section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General
Statutes shall be valid for five years provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within
which any regulated activity shall be conducted. Any permit issued by the Agency prior to July 1,
2006 or after July 1, 2009 for any other activity shall be valid for not less than two years and not
more than five years. Any permit issued by the Agency during the time period from July 1, 2006 to
July 1, 2009, inclusive, shall expire not less than six years after the date of such approval.
11.7 No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of
the Agency.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these regulations, the Agency
may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if
such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the
permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future
rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of East Lyme, and convey no rights in real
estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public
and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the
subject land or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the Agency’s permit also involves an activity which requires
zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under sections
8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland
permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management
practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm
water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent
pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency.
-22-
Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
12 .1 The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a license
for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that the
conduct of such activity would result in no greater that a minimal impact on any wetlands or
watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut
General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Agency
and shall contain the information listed under Section 7.5 of these regulations and any other
information the Agency may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and
processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may
approve or extend such an activity at any time.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such
approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person
may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within fifteen days after the publication
date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled
meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Agency
or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the
Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject
the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of
these regulations.
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13.1 The Agency may require as a permit condition the filing of a bond with such surety in such
amount and in a form approved by the Agency.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with the provisions of these regulations
and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices
of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for
the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Agency or
its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under section 10.2
of these regulations.
14.2 The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated
activities for which permits have been issued with the consent of the property owner or the
authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit.
14.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or its agent
may make regular inspections at reasonable hours with the consent of the property owner or the
authorized agent of the property owner.
-23-
14.4 If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any
activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the Agency or
its duly authorized agent may:
a. issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting
such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to
correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order
the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show
cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts
presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the
person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in
effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision
in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be
effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or
withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or
bar an action pursuant to section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility
or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and
prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without
limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the
individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the
unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the
necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result
in issuance of the order provided in section 14.3.a or other enforcement proceedings as
provided by law.
14.5 The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied with
the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work
as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any
permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The
Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in
compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The
permittee shall be notified of the Agency’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by
certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice
of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of East Lyme
may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the
Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes
available.
15.2 An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland
wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required
thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including changes to setbacks
-24-
and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and any appeal from the decision of
such Agency with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the
grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of
this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment or change of
boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to
make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of East Lyme Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be
amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy
of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations
or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public
hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
East Lyme, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following information:
a. the petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. the address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. the petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition
d. map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing
and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail
together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations; and
e. the reasons for the requested action.
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, East
Lyme, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof
may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote
sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the
Agency. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the
subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer
or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition shall include:
a. the name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s)
agent or other representative;
b. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such
documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting the
location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations
set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d. map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed
wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified
individual.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
-25-
municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals
of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last
not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and
documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
15.8 The agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition. The
hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The agency shall act
upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such
hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be
represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any
period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for
longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the agency to act within
any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to
constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
Section 16
Appeals
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section
22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection.
Section 17
Conflict and Severance
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the
most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of
any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations
shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part
or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the
provisions of the Act shall govern.
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other
assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of East Lyme, the State of
Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
-26-
Section 19
Fees
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by
certified check or money order payable to the Town of East Lyme at the time the application is
filed with the Agency.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee is
paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency pursuant to subsection 19.7 of
these regulations.
19.3 The application fee is not refundable.
19.4 Definitions. As used in this section:
"Residential Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for permanent housing or
being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
"Commercial uses" means activities carried out on property developed for industry, commerce,
trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be occupied for such purposes, for profit or
nonprofit.
"Other uses" means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses.
19.5 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be in accordance with Town Ordinance (refer to appendix
D)
19.6 Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of East Lyme are
exempt from all fee requirements.
19.7 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the
fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Agency
should consider in its determination under this subsection. The Agency may waive all or part of
the application fee if the Agency determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment
or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be deterred from
initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the application fee, or
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for
reviewing and processing the application.
c. The applicant has shown good cause.
The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
Section 20
Effective Date of Regulations
20.1 These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a
notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of East Lyme.
-27-
APPENDIX A
Connecticut General Statute section 1-1(q)
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include cultivation
of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including
the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of livestock, including horses, bees,
poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other
molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation, management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a
farm and its buildings, tools and equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris
left by storm, as an incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or
maple sugar, or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming
operations or the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or
maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes; handling,
planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or delivering to storage or to
market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale any agricultural or horticultural
commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in the case of fruits and vegetables, as an
incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for market or for direct sale. The term “farm”
includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses,
hoophouses and other temporary structures or other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an
incident to ordinary farming operations, the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term
“aquaculture” means the farming of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of
protein food, including fish, oysters, clams, mussels and other mulluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised
and public underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority
under chapter 124.
APPENDIX B
Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d
-28-
Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining municipality. (a) In all
matters wherein a formal petition, application, request or appeal must be submitted to a zoning
commission, planning and zoning commission or zoning board of appeals under this chapter, a planning
commission under chapter 126 or an inland wetlands agency under chapter 440 and a hearing is required
or otherwise held on such petition, application, request or appeal, such hearing shall commence within
sixty-five days after receipt of such petition, application, request or appeal and shall be completed within
thirty-five days after such hearing commences, unless a shorter period of time is required under this
chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a
general circulation in such municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least
twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or less than ten days and
the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In addition to such notice, such
commission, board or agency may, by regulation, provide for notice to persons who own or occupy land
that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing. All applications and maps and documents
relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear
and be heard and may be represented by agent or by attorney. All decisions on such matters shall be
rendered within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of time is
required under this chapter, chapter 126 or chapter 440. The petitioner or applicant may consent to one or
more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods
shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition, application, request or appeal.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the approval of a site
plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the zoning regulations for any
building, use or structure, a decision on an application for approval of such site plan shall be rendered
within sixty-five days after receipt of such site plan. Whenever a decision is to be made on an application
for subdivision approval under chapter 126 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered
within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever a decision is to be made on an inland
wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440 on which no hearing is held, such decision shall
be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. The applicant may consent to one or
more extensions of such period, provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not
exceed sixty-five days or may withdraw such plan or application.
(c) For purposes of subsection (a) or (b) of this section and section 7-246a, the date of receipt of a
petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of such
commission, board or agency, immediately following the day of submission to such commission, board or
agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such
submission, whichever is sooner. If the commission, board or agency does not maintain an office with
regular office hours, the office of the clerk of the municipality shall act as the agent of such commission,
board or agency for the receipt of any petition, application, request or appeal.
(d) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action initiated by any
zoning or planning and zoning commission regarding adoption or change of any zoning regulation or
boundary.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by a zoning commission or
planning and zoning commission established pursuant to this section would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth
day after a decision by the inland wetlands agency, the time period for a decision shall be extended to
thirty-five days after the decision of such agency. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed
to apply to any extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner.
-29-
(f) The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission, zoning board of
appeals or inland wetlands agency shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of
any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which: (1) Any
portion of the property affected by a decision of such commission, board or agency is within five hundred
feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed
project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (3) a
significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and
significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or (4) water
runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the
adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be
mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining
municipality may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application,
petition, appeal, request or plan.
APPENDIX C
Guidelines, Upland Review Area Regulations
Connecticut’s Inland Wetlands & Watercourses Act
-49-
Appendix D - ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR CONSERVATION,
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSIONS
1.1 Application Fee **
1.1.1 Residential Uses ...............................................$150.00 Plus *$50.00/LOT
Plus Fee from Schedule A
1.1.2 Commercial Uses .............................................$400.00
Plus Fee from Schedule A
1.1.3 All Other Uses..................................................$200.00
Plus Fee from Schedule A
*Each lot with regulated activities
**$30 fee required by C.G.S 22a-27j will be added to the base fees.
1.2 Approval by Duly Authorized Agent ** .........................$100.00
1.3 Appeal of Duly Authorized Agent Decision....................$300.00
1.4 Significant Activity Fee ................................................$300.00
1.5 Public Hearing Fee
1.5.1 Single Residential .............................................$200.00
1.5.2 Commercial/Industrial/Multi-Family..................$450.00
1.6 Complex Application Fee ..............................................Actual Cost
The Inland Wetlands Agency may charge an additional fee sufficient to cover the cost of
reviewing and acting on complex applications. Such fee may include, but not be limited to, the
cost of retaining experts, to advise, analyze, review, and report on issues requiring such experts.
The Agency or the duly authorized agent shall estimate the complex application fee, which shall
be paid pursuant to section 19.1 of these regulations within 10 days of the applicant’s receipt or
notice of such estimate. Any portion of the complex application fee in excess of the actual cost
shall be refunded to the applicant no later than 30 days after publication of the agency’s decision.
1.7 Permitted and Nonregulated Uses :
1.7.1 Permitted Uses as of Right ...............................$0.00
1.7.2 Nonregulated ...................................................$0.00
1.8 Regulation Amendment Petitions...................................$500.00
(Does not include Notices or Regulation Advisories from DEP)
1.8.1 Map Amendment Petitions ................................$500.00
Plus Fee from Schedule B
1.9 Modification of Previous Approval: ...............................$100.00
1.10 Renewal of Previous Approval ......................................$100.00
1.11 Monitoring Compliance Fee ..........................................$100.00
1.12 SCHEDULE A. For the purpose of calculating the permit application fee, the area in schedule A
is the total area of wetlands and watercourses and the upland review area upon which a regulated
activity is proposed.
SQUARE FEET of AREA
1.12.1. Less than 1,000 .............................................................$0.00
1.12.2. 1,000 to 5,000 ...............................................................$250.00
1.12.3. More than 5,000 ............................................................$750.00
-50-
1.13 SCHEDULE B. For the purpose of calculating the map amendment petition fee, linear feet in
schedule B is the total length of wetlands and watercourses boundary subject to the proposed
boundary change.
LINEAR FEET
1.13.1. Less than 500................................................................$0.00
1.13.2 500 to 1,000 .................................................................$250.00
1.13.3 More than 1,000 ............................................................$750.00
-51-
REVISION RECORD
Revision # Section(s) Description Reason Date of Approval
1 7.10, 11.6 Application Requirements;
Considerations for Decision
Public Act 09-181 April 11, 2011
2 7.11, 10.8,
10.9, 10.10
Application Requirements;
Considerations for Decision
Public Act 05-124
and Public Act 10-85
April 11, 2011


 
 
 
 
 




 


