Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Power of RTM to enact ordinances — See
Charter, § 4.1.
Adoption of ordinances — See Charter § 4.5.
Referenda on ordinances — See Charter, Art.
XIII.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted as part of Ch. 1 of the Code of the Town of Fairfield 1968]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the Town, the
following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless
they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body or the
context clearly requires otherwise:
BOND — When a bond is required, an undertaking, in writing, shall be
sufficient.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last day is
Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
COUNTY — The County of Fairfield, in the State of Connecticut.
GENDER — Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter.
GENERAL STATUTES, or G.S. — The revision of 1958 of the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut and all amendments thereto.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers unless otherwise specifically provided.
MONTH — A calendar month.
NUMBER — A word importing the plural number only may extend and be
applied to several persons or things, and a word importing the singular
number may apply to one person or thing.
OATH — Includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and, in such cases, the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole
or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Extends and shall be applied to associations, firms, partnerships
and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street, usually lying on either side thereof,
between the curb and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
STREET — Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto, and all other public
thoroughfares in the Town and means all that part thereof from property
line to property line of the premises abutting thereon.
STATE — The State of Connecticut.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
TOWN — The Town of Fairfield in the County of Fairfield, in the State of
Connecticut.
WRITTEN OR IN WRITING — Includes any representation of words, letters
or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-2. General penalty.
A. Whenever, in this Code or in any other ordinance, rule or regulation
promulgated by any officer or agency of the Town under authority vested
in him or it by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or declared to be
unlawful or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act
is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor
either by this Code or state law, the violation of any such provision of this
Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $25.
B. Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, rule or
regulation of the Town continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 6-27-1983]
§ 1-3. Adoption.
The compilation of the Charter, Town ordinances and rules and regulations
of the Town codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections
in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof is hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as and to be called the "Code of the Town of
Fairfield, Connecticut."
§ 1-4. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
A. All ordinances of the Town of Fairfield heretofore enacted and in force
and effect on the date of adoption of this article and not contained
in the Code of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut, or which have been
heretofore enacted and are inconsistent with any provisions of any
ordinance contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective
date of this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or altering the Charter
or any special act pertinent to the Town of Fairfield or any rule or
regulation promulgated by any agency, board or commission of the Town
of Fairfield.
§ 1-5. Matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-4
of this article shall not affect the following ordinances, regulations, rights
and obligations, which are expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance or regulation adopted subsequent to May 24, 1982.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Fairfield prior to the effective date of
this article, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability.
C. Any obligation or liability by reason of any offense or act committed
or done before the effective date of this article in violation of any
legislative provision of the Town of Fairfield, or any penalty, punishment
or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town.
E. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or
any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this article brought
pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Fairfield.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Fairfield providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing of
grade, permitting of encroachment, changing of name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road,
highway, park or other public place within the Town of Fairfield, or any
portion thereof.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5
G. Any ordinance or resolution of the Town of Fairfield appropriating money
or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of
Fairfield or other instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision
plats.
K. Any ordinance omitted from the Code by mistake or error.
§ 1-6. When Code effective.
All provisions contained in the compilation provided for herein and known
as the "Code of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut," shall be in full force and
effect on and after the effective date of this article.
§ 1-7. Nomenclature, technical and other minor changes.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Town of Fairfield
for adoption as part of the Code of the Town of Fairfield, certain
grammatical changes, changes in nomenclature and/or technical or
minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the
intention of the Representative Town Meeting of the Town of Fairfield
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code of the Town
of Fairfield, Connecticut, as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously amended to read as such.
B. In printing and publishing the Code of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut,
certain changes in the order of things, titling and indexing and certain
changes in the number of provisions, certain grammatical changes,
changes in spelling, punctuation, etc., were made for the purposes of
organization, style and consistency to make the Code more usable. Such
changes are in no way intended to change the meaning of any legislation
in anyway nor to supersede the powers of the authority that promulgated
such legislation should such authority be other than the Representative
Town Meeting.
§ 1-8. Certified copy on file.
A copy of the Code of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut, in loose-leaf form,
has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Fairfield and
shall remain there for use and examination by the public during all business
hours until final action is taken on this article; and if this article shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk of the Town of
Fairfield by impressing thereon the Seal of said Town, and such certified
copy, as from time to time amended and recertified as hereinafter provided,
shall remain on file in the office of the Town Clerk, to be made available
during business hours to persons desiring to examine the same.
§ 1-9. Amendments and additions.
§ 1-5 FAIRFIELD CODE § 1-9
1:6
A. Any and all amendments or supplements to the legislation in the Code
of the Town of Fairfield, or repeal thereof in whole or in part, adopted
pursuant to applicable state law subsequent to the aforesaid date of May
24, 1982, shall, upon the adoption of said change, become a part of the
Code of the Town of Fairfield under the numbering system established
by the Code, notwithstanding that such legislation may be adopted with
another numbering system. In addition, any legislation of the Town,
whether adopted prior to or after the effective date of this article,
that the Representative Town Meeting determines is appropriate for
inclusion in the Code established by this article may be included in
the Code under the numbering system established by the Code,
notwithstanding that such legislation was adopted without reference to
the Code under a different numbering system.
B. All changes in the Code as aforesaid shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code, so that reference to the Code of the Town of Fairfield,
Connecticut, shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Any such additions, amendments, supplements or
repeals as adopted shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf, book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-10. Code book to be kept up to date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk or such other person authorized and
directed by the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date, in loose-leaf form, a copy
of the book containing the Code of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut. Said
up-to-date copy of the Code shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk
of the Town of Fairfield and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public and shall be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during business hours. All changes in said Code shall be included in
the Code by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed
as supplements to said Code, at which time such supplements shall, upon
certification by the Town Clerk, be inserted therein.
§ 1-11. Publication and distribution.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to have printed and distributed
copies of the Code of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut, together with
amendments and supplements thereto, from time to time, to comply with
Connecticut General Statutes, Sec. 7-148a, as amended.
§ 1-12. Abridgment of powers.
Nothing contained herein shall abridge the legal authority of any board,
commission or agency of the Town of Fairfield to make, publish, adopt,
repeal, change or amend its rules, regulations or bylaws in accordance with
law.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-14. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this article is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Town of Fairfield, or to
alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause
the law of the Town of Fairfield to be misrepresented thereby. A violation of
this section shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not to exceed
$100.
§ 1-16. When ordinance effective.
This article shall be effective 14 days after its adoption.
§ 1-17. Inclusion in Code.
This article shall, upon adoption, be included in the Code as Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code, §§ 1-3 through 1-17.
§ 1-13 FAIRFIELD CODE § 1-17
1:8
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plan and Zoning Commission — See Charter,
§ 8.5.
Purchasing Agent — See Charter, § 9.9.
Parks and Recreation Commission — See
Charter, § 10.10.
Flood and Erosion Control Board — See
Charter, § 10.12.
Purchasing Authority — See Charter, § 12.8.
§ 1-17 ADMINISTRATION § 1-17
4:9

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 4-1. (Reserved)1
§ 4-2. (Reserved)2
§ 4-3. Liability for damages by policemen.
The town agrees, to the extent and under the conditions provided in the
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-465, to pay on behalf of any duly
appointed policeman of the town all sums which he shall become obligated
to pay by reason of liability imposed upon him by law for damages to person
or property caused by him in the performance of his duties.
§ 4-4. (Reserved)3
1. Editor's Note: Former § 4-1, appointment of alternate members of Plan and Zoning
Commission, terms, has been superseded by § 8.5 of the Charter, of this Code.
2. Editor's Note: Former § 4-2, Election of Justices of the Peace, has been superseded by § 7.2
of the Charter, of this Code.
3. Editor's Note: Former § 4-4, Designation of sewer authority, was repealed 9-28-1998. See
§ 10.13 of the Charter. Original Sec. 2-4.1, Tax abatement for church housing, which
immediately followed this section and which was added 9-23-1974, was removed from this
chapter and inserted as Art. I of Ch. 95, Taxation.
§ 4-1 ADMINISTRATION § 4-4
4:11

ARTICLE II
Disposal of Surplus Property
§ 4-5. Personal property.
A. Whenever any town officer, board or commission determines that any
article of personal property under its jurisdiction is no longer useful for
its purposes and should be disposed of, it shall notify the Purchasing
Authority and shall furnish the Purchasing Authority with a description
of such property. The Purchasing Authority shall thereupon notify each
other town officer, board or commission of the availability of such
property.
B. If some other officer, board or commission shall, within 10 days after
such notice, advise the Purchasing Authority that such property, or any
of it, will be useful for its purposes, the Purchasing Authority shall notify
the Board of Finance, and such transfer of the property shall be made as
shall be approved by the Board of Finance.
C. If no officer, board or commission shall, within 10 days after such notice,
advise the Purchasing Authority that any of such property will be useful
for its purposes or if no transfer of such property shall be approved by
the Board of Finance, the Purchasing Authority shall proceed to dispose
of such property by sale or, if a sale be not feasible, by any other means
which it shall deem reasonable.
D. Before selling any of such property, the Purchasing Authority shall
determine its value, and, if such value is more than $100, the Purchasing
Authority shall advertise for bids and shall sell such property to the
highest bidder.
§ 4-6. (Reserved)4
§ 4-7. Conveyances and bills of sale.
Any instrument conveying any real property under the authority of this
article shall be executed and delivered in the name of the town by not less
than two of the Selectmen and the Tax Assessor. Any bill of sale of personal
property transferred under the authority of this article shall be executed
and delivered in the name of the town by both members of the Purchasing
Authority.
4. Editor's Note: Former § 4-6, Real property, was repealed 8-25-1986. See Ch. 35, Real
Property Management.
§ 4-5 ADMINISTRATION § 4-7
4:13

ARTICLE III
Regional Planning
§ 4-8. Adoption of state law; Regional Planning Agency.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-31a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the town hereby adopts Section 8-31a et seq. of the Connecticut
General Statutes and joins in the creation of a Regional Planning Agency
for the Bridgeport region as defined by the Connecticut Development
Commission under the provisions of Section 32-7 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 4-9. Representatives.
A. The town, having a population of 30,489 according to the federal census
of 1950, shall have three representatives on the agency.
B. Pursuant to Section 8-31a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Planning Commission of the town duly constituted pursuant to the
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes is hereby authorized to
appoint to the Regional Planning Agency one elector of the town for a
term of two years.
C. The Selectmen are hereby authorized to appoint to the agency two
electors of the town in the following manner: one representative to
serve one year and one representative to serve two years. Thereafter,
all appointments shall be made for a period of two years. Appointees
under this section shall continue to serve after expiration of their terms
until their successors are appointed and take office. Appointees may be
reappointed for successive terms. Terms of office of initial appointees
shall commence upon establishment of the Regional Planning Agency.
§ 4-10. Absence from meetings.
Any representative who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings
of the Regional Planning Agency and any intervening duly called special
meetings thereof shall be considered to have resigned from the Regional
Planning Agency, and the vacancy shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen
or the Planning Commission, until the term expires, except that the
requirements of this section may be waived where illness or other
extenuating circumstances make it impossible for a representative to meet
the attendance requirements of this section.
§ 4-8 ADMINISTRATION § 4-10
4:15

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
§ 4-11. (Reserved)
§ 4-12. (Reserved)
§ 4-13. (Reserved)
§ 4-11 ADMINISTRATION § 4-13
4:17

ARTICLE V
Assessment of Benefits by Plan and Zoning Commission
§ 4-14. Time limit for payment.
Whenever the Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall make any
assessment of benefits under the provisions of Section 8-29 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, such assessment shall be due and payable at
such time as may be fixed by the Commission, provided that no assessment
shall become due until the work for which such assessment was levied has
been completed. The Commission shall give notice of the date when such
assessments are due and payable by publication at least twice within a
period of 15 days in a newspaper having a circulation in the town, listing
the streets, the names of the property owners and the amounts of the
assessments and by mailing a notice of such assessment to each record
owner of land affected thereby. Such notice shall state the date when such
assessments are due and payable, which date shall be more than 30 and
fewer than 60 days after the date of the first such publication.
§ 4-15. Payment in installments.
The Plan and Zoning Commission may provide for the payment of such
assessments in such number of substantially equal annual installments, not
exceeding 10, as it shall determine, and may provide for interest charges
on any deferred payments. Any person who may have elected to pay his
assessment in more than one installment may make payment at any time in
full of the whole or such part of such assessment as still remains unpaid.
§ 4-16. Penalty for delinquent payments.
Any assessment of benefits not paid within 30 days of the due date shall
thereupon be delinquent and shall be subject to interest from the due
date at the same interest rate and in the same manner as provided by
the Connecticut General Statutes in the case of delinquent taxes, provided
that, in the case of an assessment payable in installments, interest shall
be computed on the entire unpaid balance of such assessment from the
due date of the last installment which was paid, or from the due date of
the assessment if no previous installment has been paid. Each addition
of interest shall become and be collectible as a part of such assessment.
Whenever any installment of an assessment becomes delinquent, any
remaining unpaid installments of such assessment shall also become
delinquent, provided that if all past due installments, together with interest
and any other charges, have been paid in full, remaining installments
may be paid without additional penalty, except for subsequent default, in
accordance with the original installment schedule.
§ 4-14 ADMINISTRATION § 4-16
4:19

ARTICLE VI
Parks and Recreation Commission.5
§ 4-17. Commission to have exclusive control.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have exclusive management
and control of all public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools and public
baths, recreational areas, public gardens and public cemeteries in the town,
except such areas and facilities as may be under the control of the Board of
Education.
§ 4-18. Establishment of rules and regulations.
The Parks and Recreation Commission may establish and, from time to
time, amended or repeal reasonable regulations relating to the use of
any property under its management and control. No such regulations or
amendment thereof shall be effective until notice of the adoption of such
regulation or, amendment shall have been published in a newspaper having
a circulation in the town. Copies of all regulations of the Parks and
Recreation Commission shall be kept on file in the office of the Parks and
Recreation Commission and shall be available for public inspection.
§ 4-19. Compliance with regulations; violations and penalties.
A. No person shall use any of the properties which are under the
management and control of the Parks and Recreation Commission except
in accordance with the regulations of the Parks and Recreation
Commission.
B. Any person who violates any of the rules or regulations of the Parks and
Recreation Commission in regard to beaches, marinas, parks, play lots
and open space areas owned and operated by the Town of Fairfield may
be subject to a fine of not more than $100. [Added 12-17-1979]
5. Editor's Note: See § 10.1A(7) of the Charter.
§ 4-17 ADMINISTRATION § 4-19
4:21

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)6
§ 4-20. (Reserved)
§ 4-21. (Reserved)
§ 4-22. (Reserved)
§ 4-23. (Reserved)
6. Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Conflicts of Interest, was repealed 9-28-1998. See § 11.2 of
the Charter.
§ 4-20 ADMINISTRATION § 4-23
4:23

ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)7
§ 4-24. (Reserved)
§ 4-25. (Reserved)
§ 4-26. (Reserved)
7. Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, Conservation Commission, was repealed 9-28-1998. See
§ 10.3 of the Charter.
§ 4-24 ADMINISTRATION § 4-26
4:25
Chapter 6
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COMMITTEE
§ 6-1. Establishment; members; terms; annual report.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint an Affordable Housing Committee
consisting of seven members to serve terms of four years; provided,
however, that the initial appointees shall have staggered terms so that three
members shall serve for two years and the remaining members shall serve
for four years. No more than four members of the Committee shall be
members of the same political party. A report shall be made to the RTM
annually.
§ 6-2. Powers and duties.
A. The Affordable Housing Committee shall:
(1) Study the need for affordable housing within the Town;
(2) Make an inventory of sites within the Town which may be suitable for
affordable housing;
(3) Track the availability of such sites; and
(4) Study sources of funding for affordable housing.
B. The Affordable Housing Committee may:
(1) Consult such other Town bodies and hold such public hearings as it
deems necessary to assist it in conducting its studies and making its
recommendations;
(2) Advise the First Selectman and Land Acquisition Commission of site
acquisition opportunities; and
(3) Make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen, Board of
Finance, if required, and Representative Town Meeting, regarding
the acquisition, creation or preservation of affordable housing,
including both Town and other funding sources.
Chapter 7
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable Housing Committee — See Ch. 6.
§ 7-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(2)(K), the Town of Fairfield does hereby create
a special fund to provide affordable housing for the Town of Fairfield. The
Fund shall be known as the "Affordable Housing Trust Fund," hereinafter
the "fund." Such fund shall not lapse at the end of the municipal fiscal year.
§ 7-2. Sources of funding; investments; limitations on use of fund.
§ 4-26 FAIRFIELD CODE § 7-2
4:26
A. In addition to such sums as may be directly appropriated by the Town
for deposit into said fund (if any), the Town is authorized to and shall
deposit all other monies received by it for the purposes of affordable
housing, from whatever source such monies are received (the "sources").
The sources may include, but are not limited to, Building Department
fees, inclusionary zoning fees, monetary gifts, grants, loans, and monies
received from state and federal agencies.
B. Said fund shall be in the custody of the Town of Fairfield. All or any part
of the monies in said fund may be invested in any securities in which
public funds may be lawfully invested. All income derived from such
investment shall be placed into the fund and become a part thereof. The
monies so invested shall at all times be subject to withdrawal for use as
hereinafter set forth.
C. No sums contained in said fund, including interest and dividends earned,
shall be transferred to any other account within the Town budget.
However, in the event that work is performed by departments of the
Town of Fairfield pursuant to this chapter, the cost of said work may be
reimbursed from the fund under § 7-3B. No expenditures shall be made
from said fund except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
No expenditures shall be made from the fund in excess of the available
balance in the fund.
§ 7-3. Expenditures from fund.
A. The continuation of the fund shall be perpetual, notwithstanding that
from time to time said fund may be unfunded.
B. Expenditures shall be made from the fund only in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements:
(1) Said expenditures shall be made exclusively for the costs associated
with the investigation, appraisal, acquisition, constructing,
rehabilitating, repairing, administration, fees and maintenance costs
relating to parcels of land, both improved and unimproved, or
development rights, easements, deed restrictions, options, interests
or rights therein, the use of which shall be limited to retention or
designation of parcels for their long-term use in providing affordable
housing within the meaning of C.G.S. § 8-30g.
(2) Recommendations for any and all proposed expenditures from the
fund shall be submitted to the Affordable Housing Committee (AHC)
and the Director of Community and Economic Development for
approval. Recommendations from AHC and the Director of
Community and Economic Development for expenditures from the
fund shall be submitted, including the sum to be expended, to the
Fairfield Board of Selectmen for the approval of the Board of
Selectmen.
(3) The AHC will provide an annual report of the amount in the Housing
Trust Fund and the expenditures to members of the Representative
Town Meeting at their January meeting.
Chapter 8
§ 7-2 BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS § 7-3
8:27
BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Assessment Appeals — See Charter,
§ 8.4.
§ 8-1. Appointment of additional members.
A. Upon the request of the Chairman of the Board of Assessment Appeals
(hereafter in this section "Chairman") made no later than three months
prior to the time assessment appeal hearings are to be held in an
assessment year in which a revaluation becomes effective, the
assessment year prior to such year of revaluation or the assessment
year after such year of revaluation, the RTM will appoint the number of
additional members to the Board of Assessment Appeals requested by
the Chairman.
B. The Chairman shall request the number of additional members the
Chairman anticipates will be needed to hear all appeals for the year
requested, but such number shall not be greater than four.
C. Such appointments shall be effective only for the hearing and decision
period in the year for which they are made.
D. The Chairman and the Board of Selectmen may recommend persons to
fill such temporary positions, but the RTM shall not be bound by such
recommendations.
E. The provisions of Subsection A notwithstanding, in the year of enactment
of this section, the Chairman may request the appointment of additional
members immediately after enactment, such appointments to become
effective at the expiration of the referendum period.
Chapter 11
CITATIONS HEARINGS
§ 11-1. Purpose.
The intention of this chapter is to provide a hearing procedure for review of
citations within the Town of Fairfield.
§ 11-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITATION — Any citation issued by a police officer, special police officer,
or administrative official of the Town of Fairfield for violation of Town
ordinances or regulations.
CITATION HEARING OFFICER — An elector of the Town of Fairfield, other
than policemen or persons who issue citations or work for the Town of
§ 7-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 11-2
11:28
Fairfield, appointed by the First Selectman to conduct the hearings
authorized by Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-152c.
TERM OF OFFICE — The term shall be at the discretion of the First
Selectman.
§ 11-3. Hearing procedure.
A. The Superior Court shall be authorized to enforce the assessments and
judgments provided for under this section.
B. Notice; hearing; fines.
(1) The Town of Fairfield may, at any time within 12 months from the
expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines,
penalties, costs or fees for any citations issued for an alleged
violation under any ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 7-148 or
Sections 22a-226d, send notice to the person, by first class mail.
Such notice shall inform the person cited of the allegations against
such person and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees
due; that such person may contest liability before a citation hearing
officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within 10
days of the date thereof; that if there is no such demand for a
hearing, an assessment and judgment shall be entered against such
person, and that such judgment may issue without further notice.
(2) If the person who is sent notice pursuant to Subsection B(1) wishes
to admit liability for any alleged violation, the person may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person, by mail to an official designated
by the Town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding,
civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other
person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or
mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date of
the first notice provided for in Subsection B(1) shall be deemed
to have admitted liability, and the Town official designated as the
enforcement officer for violations of the type specified in the citation
shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer
as such person did not choose to contest the violation citation. The
hearing officer shall thereupon cause to have entered and assessed
the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable
ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in Subsection
B(4) of this section.
(3) Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of
the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held
not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the
mailing of notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant, upon
good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested party
for postponement of continuance. An original or certified copy of
the initial notice of violation issued by a policeman or other issuing
official shall be filed and retained by the Town, be deemed a business
record within the scope of Section 52-180 and be evidence of the
facts contained therein. The presence of the policeman or issuing
official shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A
§ 11-2 CITATIONS HEARINGS § 11-3
11:29
person wishing to contest such liability shall appear at the hearing
and may present evidence to that effect. A designated Town official,
other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the
Town. If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter
an assessment by default against such person upon finding of proper
notice and liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances. The
hearing officer may accept from such person copies of police reports,
investigating and citation reports and other official documents by
mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of such person
is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the
order and form and with such methods of proof as the hearing officer
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility
of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be
given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce
the decision at the end of the hearing. Upon determination that the
person is not liable, the hearing officer shall dismiss the matter and
enter such determination in writing accordingly. Upon determination
that the person is liable for the violation, the hearing officer shall
forthwith cause to have entered and assessed the fines, penalties,
costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable
ordinances of the Town.
(4) If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more
than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of
assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for the geographical
area in which the Town is located, together with an entry fee of
$8. The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a
record of assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments
against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of
assessment The Clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such
record of assessment and court costs of $8, against such person
in favor of the Town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered
as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a
levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice
to such person.
§ 11-4. Judicial review.
A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
chapter is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by
filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with the entry fee in an
amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Section
52-259, in the Superior Court for the geographical area in which the Town
is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with
the rules of the Judges of the Superior Court.
Chapter 12
§ 11-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 11-4
11:30
CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 4.
§ 11-4 CITATIONS HEARINGS § 11-4
11:31

ARTICLE I
Municipal Union Labor Contracts
[Adopted 8-31-2011]
§ 12-1. Amendment approval; financial impact on Town; exceptions.
The First Selectman shall not execute any alteration or amendment to any
municipal union labor contract by way of a side letter or any other document
in any way which would bind the Town to a significant expenditure or
impose a significant financial impact upon the Town without the approval
of the Representative Town Meeting. A "significant expenditure" and a
"significant financial impact" are deemed to be an expenditure which would
obligate the Town to the payment of $10,000 or more per year. The
foregoing restriction shall not apply to the following labor proceedings:
interest arbitrations; grievances; unfair labor practices; or municipal
prohibited practices.
§ 12-1 CITATIONS HEARINGS § 12-1
11:33
Chapter 16
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 16-1. Statutory authority, establishment.
The provisions of Section 7-136 of the Connecticut General Statutes be
and they hereby are accepted by establishing an Economic Development
Commission for the promotion and development of the economic resources
of the Town of Fairfield.
§ 16-2. Membership. [Amended 12-16-1985]
The Commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the First
Selectman to serve five-year terms, provided that the initial terms shall be
so fixed that the term of at least one member shall expire each year.
§ 16-3. Authority to appoint additional members.
The First Selectman shall have the authority to appoint three additional
members ex officio without vote.
Chapter 19
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elected officials and elections — See Charter,
Art. II.
§ 19-1. Establishment of voting districts. [Amended 4-26-1993;
3-24-2003; 2-3-2015]
There are hereby established and created in the Town 10 voting districts.
A. First District: RTM District 1 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield, State
of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of Fairfield,
CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department December 23,
2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Sturges Highway with Hulls
Farm Road and the town line with Westport; thence running
northwesterly along the town line of Westport to the center line of the
Aspetuck River as shown on said map; thence running northeasterly
along the center line of the Aspetuck River to the intersection of the
town line of Easton; thence running easterly and northeasterly along the
town line with Easton to the center-line intersection with Morehouse
Highway; thence running southeasterly, southerly, northeasterly and
southerly again along the town line of Easton to the center-line
§ 12-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 19-1
16:34
intersection of Congress Street as shown on said map; thence running
southwesterly along the center line of Congress Street to the center-line
intersections of Congress Street and Morehouse Drive; thence running
southeasterly along the center line of Morehouse Drive to the centerline
intersection of the Merritt Parkway (CT Route 15); thence running
southwesterly along said center line of Merritt Parkway (CT Route 15)
to the center-line intersection of Merritt Parkway (CT Route 15) and the
northbound exit ramp number 44; thence running easterly along said
exit ramp number 44, to the center-line intersection of Congress Street;
thence running southwest along the center line of Congress Street to
the center-line intersections of Congress Street and Joan Drive; thence
running southeasterly along the center line of Joan Drive to the center
line of Galloping Hill Road; thence running westerly and southerly along
said center line of Galloping Hill Road to the center-line intersection of
Brookside Drive; thence running southwesterly along the center line of
Brookside Drive to the center-line intersection of Hill Farm Road; thence
running southwesterly along the center line of Hill Farm Road to the
center-line intersection of Bronson Road; thence running northwesterly
along said center line of Bronson Road to the center-line intersections of
Bronson Road and Hulls Farm Road; thence running westerly along said
center line of Hulls Farm Road to the point and place of beginning.
B. Second District: RTM District 2 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield,
State of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of
Fairfield, CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department
December 23, 2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Park Avenue with the Mill
River, said center line also being the town line intersection of Fairfield
and Easton; thence running southerly along the center line of Park
Avenue, also being bound easterly by Town of Easton, Town of Trumbull
and City of Bridgeport, in part by each, to the center-line intersection
of Valley Road; thence running westerly and southerly along said center
line of Valley Road to the center-line intersection of Sky Top Drive;
thence running westerly along the center line of Sky Top Drive to
the center-line intersection of Crest Terrace North; thence running
northerly along the center line of Crest Terrace North to the center-line
intersection of Casmir Drive; thence running westerly along the center
line of Casmir Drive to the center-line intersection of Church Hill Road;
thence running northerly along the center line of Church Hill Road to the
center-line intersection of Easton Turnpike; thence running northerly
along the center line of Easton Turnpike to the center-line intersection
of Wheeler Park Avenue; thence running southwesterly along the center
line of Wheeler Park Avenue to the center-line intersection of Beaver
Brook Lane; thence running southerly along the center line of Beaver
Brook Lane to the center-line intersection of Putting Green Road; thence
running southwesterly along Putting Green Road to the center-line
intersection of Harvester Road; thence running southerly along the
center line of Harvester Road to the center-line intersection of Lloyd
Drive; thence running westerly and southwesterly along Lloyd Drive to
§ 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 19-1
16:35
the center-line intersection of Lloyd Place; thence running southwesterly
along the center line of Lloyd Place to the center-line intersection of
Adley Road; thence running southwesterly along the center line of Adley
Road to the center-line intersection of Morehouse Highway; thence
running northwesterly along the center line of Morehouse Highway
to the center-line intersection of the Mill River; thence running
southwesterly and southerly along the center line of the Mill River
to the center-line intersection of Samp Mortar Drive; thence running
northeasterly along the center line of Samp Mortar Drive to Black
Rock Turnpike (CT Route 58); thence running southeasterly along Black
Rock Turnpike (CT Route 58) to the center-line intersection of Stillson
Road; thence running southwesterly along the center line of Stillson
Road to the center-line intersection of Pansy Road; thence running
northwesterly along the center line of Pansy Road to the center-line
intersection of Valley View Place; thence running westerly along the
center line of Valley View Place to the center-line intersection of Valley
View Road; thence running northerly along the center line of Valley View
Road to the center-line intersection of Ridgedale Road; thence running
southwesterly along the center line of Ridgedale Road to the centerline
intersection of North Benson Road; thence running southeasterly
and southerly along the center line of North Benson Road to the centerline
intersection of Orchard Hill Drive; thence running westerly along
the center line of Orchard Hill Drive to the center-line intersection of
Orchard Hill Lane; thence running northwesterly along the center line of
Orchard Hill Lane to a point where the extended center line of Orchard
Hill Lane intersects the southerly property line of number 455 Orchard
Hill Lane (land now or formerly Charlene Parrish and Mara Gottlieb);
thence running westerly along said property line to the easterly property
line of number 437 Orchard Hill Lane (land now or formerly Stephen
and Jill Ward); thence running northerly, southwesterly and southerly
along said property of number 437 Orchard Hill Lane to a point on
the southerly property line of number 40 Ferguson Drive (land now
or formerly Patricia Nivakoff); thence running southwesterly along said
property line of 40 Ferguson Drive to a point where the extension of
said property line intersects with the center line of Ferguson Drive;
thence running westerly along the center line of Ferguson Drive to the
center-line intersection of Mill Plain Road; thence running northerly
along the center line of Mill Plain Road to the center-line intersection
of Brookside Drive; thence running northeasterly along the center line
of Brookside Drive to the center-line intersection of Galloping Hill Road;
thence running northwesterly and northeasterly along the center line of
Galloping Hill Road to the center-line intersection of Joan Drive; thence
running northerly along the center line of Joan Drive to the center-line
intersection of Congress Street; thence running northeasterly along the
center line of Congress Street to center-line intersection of north bound
exit ramp number 44 of the Merritt Parkway (CT Route 15); thence
running westerly along the center line of north bound exit ramp number
44 of the Merritt Parkway (CT Route 15) to the center line of the Merritt
Parkway (CT Route 15); thence running northeasterly along the center
§ 19-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 19-1
16:36
line of the Merritt Parkway (CT Route 15) to the center-line intersection
of Morehouse Highway; thence running northwesterly along the center
line of Morehouse Highway to the center-line intersection of Congress
Street; thence running northeasterly along the center line of Congress
Street to the center-line intersection of the Mill River; thence running
along the center line of the Mill River, also being bound by the Town of
Easton, to the point and place of beginning.
C. Third District: RTM District 3 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield, State
of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of Fairfield,
CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department December 23,
2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Morehouse Highway with
the Mill River, said center line also being the intersection point of
RTM Districts 2 and 3; thence running southerly along the center line
of Morehouse Highway to the center-line intersection of Adley Road;
thence running northeasterly to the center-line intersection of Saddle
View Road; thence running southeasterly along the center line of Saddle
View road to a point where the projected northeasterly property line
of number 120 Saddle View Road (land now or formerly Debra and
German Cruz) intersects with the center line of Saddle View Road;
thence running northeasterly along said property line of number 120
Saddle View Road (land now or formerly Debra and German Cruz) to
land of number 25 Lloyd Drive (land now or formerly Bruno S. Checca);
thence running southerly along land of number 25 Lloyd Drive (land now
or formerly Bruno S. Checca) to land of number 9 Lloyd Drive (land now
or formerly Scott and Michele Farley), said land of number 25 Lloyd
Drive (land now or formerly Bruno S. Checca) being in RTM District
4; thence running easterly along the property line of number 25 Lloyd
Drive (land now or formerly Bruno S. Checca) and number 9 Lloyd Drive
(land now or formerly Scott and Michele Farley) to a point where the
projected extension of said property line intersects with Lloyd Drive;
thence running southeasterly along the center line of Lloyd Drive to the
center-line intersection of Grandview Road; thence running southerly
along the center line of Grandview Road to the center-line intersection of
Davis Road; thence running westerly and southerly along the center line
of Davis Road to the center-line intersection of Godfrey Road; thence
running westerly along the center line of Godfrey Road to the centerline
intersection of Morehouse Highway; thence running southerly along
Morehouse Highway to the center-line intersection of Wildwood Road;
thence running westerly along the center line of Wildwood Road to the
center-line intersection of Home Fair Drive; thence running southerly
along the center line of Home Fair Drive to the center-line intersection
of Fairfield Woods Road; thence running easterly along the center line of
Fairfield Woods Road to the center-line intersection of Burroughs Road;
thence running southeasterly and southerly along the center line of
Burroughs Road to the center-line intersection of Warde Terrace; thence
running easterly, southeasterly and southwesterly along the center line
of Warde Terrace to the center-line intersection of Miro Street; thence
§ 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 19-1
16:37
running southeasterly along the center line of Miro Street to the centerline
intersection of Beacon View Drive; thence running southwesterly
and southeasterly along the center line of Beacon View Drive to the
center-line intersection of Pine Tree Lane; thence running southwesterly
along the center line of Pine Tree Lane to the center-line intersection
of Field Crest Drive; thence running southeasterly along the center
line of Field Crest Drive to the center-line intersection of Whitewood
Drive; thence running southwesterly along the center line of Whitewood
Drive to the center-line intersection of Black Rock Turnpike (CT Route
58); thence running southeasterly along the center line of Black Rock
Turnpike (CT Route 58) to a point where the extension of the northerly
property line of number 1511 Black Rock Turnpike (land now or formerly
PEF @ AWA Trust) intersects with the center line of Black Rock
Turnpike; thence running southwesterly along the northerly property
line of said number 1511 Black Rock Turnpike to the easterly property
line of number 350 Oakwood Drive (Vernie Taylor and Wendy Simmons);
thence running southerly along said property line of number 350
Oakwood Drive (Vernie Taylor and Wendy Simmons) to a point where
said property line intersects with the extension of the cul de sac of
Oakwood Drive; thence running southwesterly, southerly and
southwesterly again along the center line of Oakwood Drive to the
center-line intersection of High Street; thence running southeasterly
along High Street to the center-line intersection of Meadowcroft Road;
thence running southwesterly along the center line of Meadowcroft
Road to the center-line intersection of Marsh Drive; thence running
southwesterly along Marsh Drive to the center-line intersection of
Sigwin Drive; thence running southeasterly along the center line of
Sigwin Drive to the center-line intersection of Jennings Road; thence
running southwesterly along the center line of Jennings Road to the
center-line intersection of Osborne Hill Road; thence running
southwesterly along the center line of Osborne Hill Road to the centerline
intersection of North Benson Road; thence running northerly along
the center line of North Benson Road to a point where the extension
of the property line of number 1173 North Benson Road (land now or
formerly Fairfield University) intersects with the center line of North
Benson Road; thence running southwesterly along land of 1173 North
Benson Road (land now or formerly Fairfield University) to a point
where the extension of said property line intersects with the center
line of Round Hill Road; thence running northwesterly to the centerline
intersection of College Park Drive; thence running northeasterly
along the center line of College Park Drive to the center-line intersection
of Carroll Road; thence running northwesterly and westerly along the
center line of Carroll Road to the center-line intersection of Mill Plain
Road; thence running northerly along the center line of Mill Plain Road
to the center-line intersection of Ross Hill Road; thence running easterly
and northeasterly along the center line of Ross Hill Road to the centerline
intersection of Orchard Hill Lane; thence running southerly along
the center line of Orchard Hill Lane to the center-line intersection
of Orchard Hill Drive; thence running easterly along the center line
§ 19-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 19-1
16:38
of Orchard Hill Drive to the center-line intersection of North Benson
Road; thence running northerly, northeasterly and northwesterly along
the center line of North Benson Road to the center-line intersection
of Ridgedale Road; thence running northeasterly along the center line
of Ridgedale Road to the center-line intersection of Valley View Road;
thence running southerly along the center line of Valley View Road to
the center-line intersection of Valley View Place; thence running easterly
along Valley View Place to the center-line intersection of Pansy Road;
thence running southerly along the center line of Pansy Road to the
center-line intersection of Stillson Road; thence running northeasterly
along the center line of Stillson Road to the center-line intersection of
Black Rock Turnpike (CT Route 58); thence running northwesterly and
northerly along the center line of Black Rock Turnpike (CT Route 58)
to the center-line intersection of Samp Mortar Drive; thence running
southwesterly along the center line of Samp Mortar Drive to the centerline
intersection of the Mill River; thence running northerly along the
center of the Mill River to the point and place of beginning.
D. Fourth District: RTM District 4 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield,
State of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of
Fairfield, CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department
December 23, 2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Park Avenue and Valley
Road; thence running southeasterly and southerly along the center line
of Park Avenue to the center-line intersection of Brooklawn Avenue;
thence running southerly along the center line of Brooklawn Avenue
to the center-line intersection of Brooklawn Terrace; thence running
southeasterly along the center line of Brooklawn Terrace to the centerline
intersection of Philemon Street; thence running southeasterly along
the center line of Philemon Street to the center-line intersection of
Marne Avenue; thence running southwesterly along the center line of
Marne Avenue to the center-line intersection of Stratfield Road; thence
running northwesterly along the center line of Stratfield Road to the
center-line intersection of Church Hill Road; thence running northerly
along the center line of Church Hill Road to the center-line intersection
of Lola Street; thence running westerly along the center line of Lola
Street to the center-line intersection of Stratfield Road; thence running
southerly along the center line of Stratfield Road to the center-line
intersection of Fairfield Woods Road; thence running southwesterly
along the center line of Fairfield Woods Road to the center-line
intersection of Home Fair Drive; thence running northwesterly along
the center line of Home Fair Drive to the center-line intersection of
Wildwood Road; thence running easterly along the center line of
Wildwood Road to the center-line intersection of Morehouse Highway;
thence running northwesterly along the center line of Morehouse
Highway to the center-line intersection of Godfrey Road; thence running
northeasterly along the center line of Godfrey Road to the center-line
intersection of Davis Road; thence running northwesterly and easterly
along the center line of Davis Road to the center-line intersection of
§ 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 19-1
16:39
Grandview Road; thence running northwesterly along the center line of
Grandview Road to the center-line intersection of Lloyd Drive; thence
running northwesterly along the center line of Lloyd Drive to a point
where the extension of the northerly property line of number 9 Lloyd
Drive (land now or formerly Scott and Michele Farley) intersects with
the center line of Lloyd Drive; thence running southwesterly along land
of number 9 Lloyd Drive (land now or formerly Scott and Michele Farley)
to land of number 120 Saddle View Road (land now or formerly Debra
and German Cruz), said land of 9 Lloyd Drive (land now or formerly
Scott and Michele Farley) being in RTM District 3; thence running
northwesterly and southwesterly along the easterly and northerly
property line land of number 120 Saddle View Road (land now or
formerly Debra and German Cruz) to a point where the extension of said
property line intersects with the center line of Saddle View Road; thence
running northwesterly along the center line of Saddle View Road to
the center-line intersection of Adley Road; thence running northeasterly
along the center line of Adley Road to the center-line intersection of
Lloyd Place; thence running northeasterly along the center line of Lloyd
Place to the center-line intersection of Lloyd Drive; thence running
northerly and northeasterly along the center line of Lloyd Drive to the
center-line intersection of Harvester Road; thence running northerly
along the center line of Harvester Road to the center-line intersection
of Putting Green Road; thence running northeasterly along the center
line of Putting Green Road to the center-line intersection of Beaver
Brook Lane; thence running northerly along the center line of Beaver
Brook Lane to the center-line intersection of Wheeler Park Avenue;
thence running easterly along Wheeler Park Avenue to the center-line
intersection of Easton Turnpike; thence running southerly along the
center line of Easton Turnpike to the center-line intersection of Church
Hill Road; thence running southerly along the center line of Church Hill
Road to the center-line intersection of Casmir Drive; thence running
easterly along the center line of Casmir Drive to the center-line
intersection of Crest Terrace North; thence running southerly along the
center line of Crest Terrace North to the center-line intersection of Sky
Top Drive; thence running northeasterly along the center line of Sky
Top Drive to the center-line intersection of Valley Road; thence running
northwesterly and northeasterly along the center line of Valley Road to
the point and place of beginning.
E. Fifth District: RTM District 5 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield, State
of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of Fairfield,
CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department December 23,
2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Brooklawn Terrace and
Brooklawn Avenue, and the town line with the City Of Bridgeport; thence
running southerly and southeasterly along the town line with the City Of
Bridgeport to the center-line intersection of Brooklawn Avenue and the
Rooster River; thence running southwesterly along the center line of the
Rooster River to the center-line intersection of Tunxis Hill Cutoff; thence
§ 19-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 19-1
16:40
running westerly along the center line of Tunxis Hill Cutoff to the centerline
intersection of Whitewood Drive; thence running northeasterly
along the center line of Whitewood Drive to the center-line intersection
of Fieldcrest Road; thence running northwesterly along the center line
of Fieldcrest Road to the center-line intersection of Pine Tree Lane;
thence running northeasterly along the center line of Pine Tree Lane
to the center-line intersection of Beacon View Drive; thence running
northwesterly and northerly along the center line of Beacon View Drive
to the center-line intersection of Miro Street; thence running
northwesterly along the center line of Miro Street to the center-line
intersection of Warde Terrace; thence running easterly, northerly and
westerly along the center line of Warde Terrace to the center-line
intersection of Burroughs Road; thence running along the center line of
Burroughs Road to the center-line intersection of Fairfield Woods Road;
thence running easterly along the center line of Fairfield Woods Road to
the center-line intersection of Stratfield Road; thence running northerly
along the center line of Stratfield Road to the center-line intersection
of Lola Street; thence running northeasterly along the center line of
Lola Street to the center-line intersection of Church Hill Road; thence
running southerly along the center line of Church Hill Road to the
center-line intersection of Stratfield Road; thence running southerly
along the center line of Stratfield Road to the center-line intersection
of Marne Avenue; thence running northeasterly along the center line
of Marne Avenue to the center-line intersection of Philemon Street;
thence running northwesterly along the center line of Philemon Street to
the center-line intersection of Brooklawn Terrace; thence northeasterly
along the center line of Brooklawn Terrace to the point and place of
beginning.
F. Sixth District: RTM District 6 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield, State
of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of Fairfield,
CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department December 23,
2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Tunxis Hill cutoff with Ash
Creek, thence running southwesterly along the center line of Ash Creek,
also being the town line with Bridgeport, to the center line of the
Post Road; thence running southwesterly along the center line of the
Post Road to the intersection of Grasmere Avenue; thence running
northwesterly along the center line of Grasmere Avenue to the
intersection of Longview Avenue, thence running southwesterly along
the center line of Longview Avenue to the center-line intersection of
Kings Highway; thence running northerly along the center line of Kings
Highway to the center-line intersection of Grasmere Avenue; thence
running northwesterly along the center line of Grasmere Avenue to
the center-line intersection of Crestwood Road and Holland Hill Road;
thence running northerly along Holland Hill Road to the center-line
intersection of New England Avenue; thence running southeasterly
along the center line of New England Avenue to the center-line
intersection of Rodgers Road; thence running northeasterly along the
§ 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 19-1
16:41
center line of Rodgers Road to the center-line intersection of Sunset
Avenue; thence running northwesterly along the center line of Sunset
Avenue to the center-line intersection of High Street; thence running
northeasterly along the center line of High Street to the center line
of Reynolds Drive; thence running westerly along said center line of
Reynolds Drive to the westerly property line of 74 Reynolds Drive (land
now or formerly John A. and Madeline M. Martinksy) extension
intersection, thence running northerly along the said property line of
74 Reynolds Drive; to the intersection of 769 Jennings Road (land now
or formerly Collette M. Grise) property line; thence running northerly
along said westerly property line of 769 Jennings Road to the center
line of Jennings Road; thence running along said center line of Jennings
Road; to the center-line intersection of Milandale Road; thence running
northwesterly along the center line of Milandale Road to the centerline
intersection of Rosedale Street; thence running northeasterly along
the center line of Rosedale Street to the center-line intersection of
High Street; thence running northwesterly along the center line of High
Street to the center-line intersection of Country Road; thence running
northeasterly, northerly and westerly along the center line of Country
Road to the center-line intersection of High Street; thence running
northwesterly along said center line of High Street to the center-line
intersection of Oakwood Drive; thence running northeasterly and
northwesterly along said center line of Oakwood Drive to a point
extended from the easterly property corner of 350 Oakwood Drive (land
now or formerly Vernie J. Taylor and Wendy Simmons); thence running
northerly along said property line of 350 Oakwood Drive; to the
intersection of 1523 Black Rock Turnpike (land now or formerly Jill
Puzzio and Susan Gail Delvecchio) and 1511 Black Rock Turnpike (land
now or formerly PEF @ AWA ASO Trust, G/Molinaro Trustee) property
line, thence running northeasterly along said property line of 1523
and 1511 Black Rock Turnpike; to the center-line intersection of Black
Rock Turnpike; thence running northwesterly along said center line of
Black Rock Turnpike to the center-line intersection of Tunxis Hill Cutoff,
thence running easterly along the said center line of Tunxis Hill Cutoff
to the point and place of beginning.
G. Seventh District: RTM District 7 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield,
State of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of
Fairfield, CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department
December 23, 2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Post Road and Ash Creek;
thence running southerly along the center line of Ash Creek, also being
the town line with Bridgeport, to the South Benson Marina property
at the southeasterly corner; thence running along water's edge at the
docks and intersecting the center line of Turney Road; thence running
northwesterly along the said center line of Turney Road to the centerline
intersection of Riverside Drive; thence running southwesterly along
the said center line of Riverside Drive to the center-line intersection
of South Benson Road; thence running northwesterly along the said
§ 19-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 19-1
16:42
center line of South Benson Road to the center-line intersection of North
Benson Road; thence running northerly along said center line of North
Benson Road to the center-line intersection of Barlow Road; thence
running southwesterly along said center line of Barlow Road to the
center-line intersection of Round Hill Road; thence running northerly
along said center line of Round Hill Road to the a point where the
extension of the northerly property line of number 1173 North Benson
Road (land now or formerly Fairfield University) intersects with the
center line of Round Hill Road; thence running northeasterly along
said property line to a point where the extension of said property line
intersects with the center line of North Benson Road; thence running
southerly along said center line of North Benson Road to the centerline
intersection of Osborne Hill Road; thence running easterly along
said center line of Osborne Hill Road to the center-line intersection
of Jennings Road; thence running easterly along said center line of
Jennings Road to the center-line intersection of Sigwin Drive; thence
running northerly along said center line of Sigwin Drive to the centerline
intersection of Marsh Drive; thence running northeasterly along
said center line of Marsh Drive to the center-line intersection of
Meadowcroft Road; thence running northeasterly along said center line
of Meadowcroft Road to the center-line intersection of High Street;
thence running northerly along said center line of High Street to the
center-line intersection of Country Road; thence running northerly,
southerly, and westerly along said center line of Country Road to the
center-line intersection of High Street; thence running southerly along
the said center line of High Street to the center-line intersection of
Rosedale Street; thence running westerly along said center line of
Rosedale Street to the center-line intersection of Milandale Road; thence
running southerly along said center line of Milandale Road to the centerline
intersection of Jennings Road; thence running southwesterly along
said center line of Jennings Road to the center-line intersection of the
westerly property extension of 769 Jennings Road (land now or formerly
Collette M. Grise); thence running southerly along said property line
of 769 Jennings Road to the intersection of property line 74 Reynolds
Drive (land now or formerly John A. and Madeline M. Martinksy); thence
running southerly along said property line of 74 Reynolds Drive to the
center-line intersection of Reynolds Drive; thence running easterly along
said center line of Reynolds Drive to the center-line intersection of
High Street; thence running southerly along said center line of High
Street to the center-line intersection of Sunset Avenue; thence running
southeasterly along said center line of Sunset Avenue to the centerline
intersection of Rodgers Road; thence running southwesterly along
said center line of Rodgers Road to the center-line intersection of New
England Avenue; thence running northwesterly along said center line
of New England Avenue to the center-line intersection of Holland Hill
Road; thence running southwesterly along said center line of Holland
Hill Road to the center-line intersection of Grasmere Avenue; thence
running southerly along said center line of Grasmere Avenue to the
center-line intersection of Kings Highway; thence running southwesterly
§ 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 19-1
16:43
along said center line of Kings Highway to the center-line intersection of
Longview Avenue; thence running northeasterly along said center line
of Longview Avenue to the center-line intersection of Grasmere Avenue;
thence running southeasterly along said center line of Grasmere Avenue
to the center-line intersection of Post Road; thence running
northeasterly along the center line of Post Road to the point and place
of beginning.
H. Eighth District: RTM District 8 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield,
State of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of
Fairfield, CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department
December 23, 2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of the Post Road and North
Benson Road, thence running westerly along the said center line of
the Post Road to the center-line intersection of Mill Hill Road; thence
running northerly along said center line of Mill Hill Road to the centerline
intersection of I-95; thence running easterly along said center line
of I-95 to the center-line intersection of Bronson Road; thence running
northerly along the said center line of Bronson Road to the centerline
intersection of Mill Hill Terrace; thence running northwesterly and
westerly along said center line of Mill Hill Terrace to the center-line
intersection of Mill Hill Road; thence running northerly and
northwesterly along said center line of Mill Hill Road to the centerline
intersection of Cedar Road; thence running northeasterly along said
center line of Cedar Road to a point where the extension of the southerly
property line of number 1899 Bronson Road (land now or formerly
Fairfield County Bank Corporation) intersects with the center line of
Cedar Road, thence running northwesterly, and northeasterly along said
property line, to the a point where the property line extended intersects
the center line of Bronson Road; thence running northwesterly along
the said center line of Bronson Road to the center-line intersection of
Hill Farm Road; thence running northeasterly along said center line of
Hill Farm Road to the center-line intersection of Brookside Drive; thence
running easterly along the said center line of Brookside Drive to the
center-line intersection of Mill Plain Road; thence running southerly
along said center line of Mill Plain Road to the center-line intersection
of Ferguson Drive; thence running easterly along said center line of
Ferguson Drive to a point where the extension of the southerly property
line of number 40 Ferguson Drive (land now or formerly Patricia
Nivakoff) intersects with the center line of Ferguson Drive; thence
running northeasterly along said property line to the southwesterly
property corner of number 437 Orchard Hill Lane (land now or formerly
Stephen and Jill Ward); thence running northerly, northeasterly and
southerly along property line of said 437 Orchard Hill Lane (land now
or formerly Stephen and Jill Ward) to a point where said property line
intersects with the property line of number 455 Orchard Hill Lane (land
now or formerly Charlene Parrish and Mara Gottlieb); thence running
easterly along said property of number 455 Orchard Hill Lane (land now
or formerly Charlene Parrish and Mara Gottlieb) to a point where the
§ 19-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 19-1
16:44
extension of the center line of Orchard Hill Lane intersects with said
property line of number 455 Orchard Hill Lane (land now or formerly
Charlene Parrish and Mara Gottlieb); thence running southerly along
said center line of Orchard Hill Lane to the center-line intersection
of Ross Hill Road; thence running westerly along said center line of
Ross Hill Road to the center-line intersection of Mill Plain Road; thence
running southerly along said center line of Mill Plain Road to the centerline
intersection of Carroll Road; thence running easterly and southerly
along said center line of Carroll Road to the center-line intersection of
College Park Drive; thence running southwesterly along said center line
of College Park Drive to the center-line intersection of Round Hill Road;
thence running southerly along said center line of Round Hill Road to
the center-line intersection of Barlow Road; thence running easterly
along said center line of Barlow Road to the center-line intersection of
North Benson Road; thence running southerly along said center line of
North Benson Road to the point and place of beginning.
I. Ninth District: RTM District 9 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield,
State of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of
Fairfield, CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department
December 23, 2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of Post Road (US Route 1)
and South Benson Road; thence running southeasterly along the center
line of South Benson Road to the center-line intersection of Riverside
Drive; thence running northeasterly along said center line of Riverside
Drive, to the center-line intersection of Turney Road; thence running
southeasterly along the center line of Turney Road through South
Benson Marina and Boat Basin to the high tide line of Long Island Sound
at the end of the South Benson Marina fishing Pier; thence running
southwesterly and westerly along the high tide line of Long Island
Sound to the intersection of Pine Creek; thence running northeasterly,
northerly and northeasterly again along the center line of Pine Creek
to northerly property corner of number 335 Old Dam Road (land now
or formerly Michael Murphy); thence running northwesterly along said
property line to a point where said property line intersects with the
center line of the paved portion of a right of way known as Old Dam
Road; thence running northerly and northeasterly along the center line
of the paved portion of the right of way known as Old Dam Road to
a point where said right of way intersects with the westerly property
line of number 599 Old Dam Road (land now or formerly Jennifer and
Mario Loya); thence running northwesterly along said right of way to the
center-line intersection Old Dam Road; thence running southwesterly
and westerly along the center line of Old Dam Road to the center-line
intersection of South Pine Creek Road; thence running northerly along
South Pine Creek Road to the center-line intersection of Oldfield Road;
thence running easterly along the center line of Oldfield Road to the
center-line intersection of Gould Avenue; thence running northeasterly
along the center line of Gould Avenue to the center-line intersection of
Ruane Street; thence running northerly along the center line of Ruane
§ 19-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 19-1
16:45
Street to the center line of Post Road (US Route 1); thence running
easterly and northeasterly along the center line of Post Road (US Route
1) to the point and place of beginning.
J. Tenth District: RTM District 10 Town of Fairfield, County of Fairfield,
State of Connecticut as shown on a certain map entitled "Town of
Fairfield, CT RTM Districts Prepared by Engineering Department
December 23, 2014"; being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the center-line intersection of the Sasco River and Hulls
Farm Road; thence running northeasterly and easterly along the center
line of Hulls Farm Road to the center-line intersection of Bronson Road;
thence running southeasterly along the center line of Bronson Road to a
point where the extension of the westerly property line of number 1899
Bronson Road (land now or formerly Fairfield County Bank Corporation)
intersects with the center line of Bronson Road; thence running
southerly, southeasterly, southwesterly and southeasterly again along
the property line of number 1899 Bronson Road (land now or formerly
Fairfield County Bank Corporation) to a point where the extension of
the southerly property line of number 1899 Bronson Road (land now or
formerly Fairfield County Bank Corporation) intersects with the center
line of Cedar Road, said property of number 1899 Bronson Road (land
now or formerly Fairfield County Bank Corporation) being in RTM
District 8; thence running westerly along the center line of Cedar Road
to the center-line intersection of Mill Hill Road; thence running
southerly and easterly along the center line of Mill Hill Road to the
center-line intersection of Mill Hill Terrace; thence running
northeasterly and southerly to the center-line intersection of Bronson
Road; thence running southerly to the center-line intersection of
Interstate 95; thence running westerly along the center line of Interstate
95 to the center-line intersection of Mill Hill Road; thence running
southerly along the center line of Mill Hill Road to the center-line
intersection of Post Road (US Route 1); thence running easterly along
the center line of Post Road (US Route 1) to the center-line intersection
of Ruane Street; thence running southerly along the center line of Ruane
Street to the center-line intersection of Gould Avenue; thence running
southwesterly along the center line of Gould Avenue to the centerline
intersection of Oldfield Road; thence running westerly along the
center line of Oldfield Road to the center-line intersection of South
Pine Creek Road; thence running southerly along the center line of
South Pine Creek Road to the center-line intersection of Old Dam Road;
thence running easterly, northeasterly and easterly again to a point
where the paved portion of the right of way known as Old Dam Road
intersects with the westerly property line of 599 Old Dam Road (land
now or formerly Jennifer and Mario Loya); thence running southwesterly
along the center line of the paved portion of a right of way known
as Old Dam Road to a point where said right of way intersects with
the northerly property line of number 335 Old Dam Road (land now or
formerly Michael P. Murphy); thence running southeasterly along land
of number 335 Old Dam Road (land now or formerly Michael P. Murphy)
§ 19-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 19-1
16:46
to the center line of Pine Creek; thence running southeasterly and
northwesterly along the center line of Pine Creek to the mean high water
line of Long Island Sound; thence running westerly along the mean
high water line of Long Island Sound to the center-line intersection of
the Sasco Creek, also being the town line of Westport; thence running
northerly along the center line of the Sasco Creek and Town of Westport
to the point and place of beginning.
K. There shall be four members of the Representative Town Meeting
elected from each voting district.
§ 19-2. Boundaries; copy of map on file. [Amended 10-29-1973;
4-26-1982; 4-26-1993; 2-3-2015]
All lines are shown on a map entitled "Town of Fairfield, CT RTM Districts
Prepared by Engineering Department December 23, 2014," which map is to
be filed with the records of the Town in the Town Clerk's office and a copy
to be filed with the Registrars of Voters.
§ 19-3. Hours of voting. [Amended 10-29-1973]
The hours of voting in all Town elections shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
§ 19-4. Voting machines. [Amended 2-3-2015]
At any election or primary which, as a result of the assembly, senatorial,
or congressional district lines in effect, there is a voting district or part
of a voting district which differs geographically from the district lines
as constituted in a municipal election year, the Registrars of Voters may
provide for separate voting tabulators in another voting district or part of a
voting district for use by such electors.
§ 19-5. Establishment of board for admission of electors.
There is hereby established a board for admission of electors for the Town,
consisting of the Town Clerk and the registrars of voters.
§ 19-6. Authorization to hold sessions.
The Selectmen and the Town Clerk are hereby authorized to hold such
sessions as in their judgment are advisable and necessary to examine the
qualifications of the electors and to admit the elector's oath to those who
shall be found qualified.
Chapter 20
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 19-1 EMINENT DOMAIN § 20-1
20:47
§ 20-1. Taking of residential property for economic development
prohibited.
No owner-occupied residential real property consisting of four or fewer
dwelling units may be acquired by eminent domain by the Town of Fairfield
for economic development purposes pursuant to Chapters 130 or 132 of
the Connecticut General Statutes if the resulting project will be owned or
independently controlled by a private or nongovernmental entity.
§ 20-2. Exceptions.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the use of eminent
domain powers for public purposes, including, but not limited to, the
construction of schools, public buildings, sewers, highways, public roads,
sidewalks, rights-of-way, flood, shore and erosion control purposes or for
any other transaction where the property rights acquired will be held or
controlled by the Town of Fairfield, the State of Connecticut or the federal
government.
§ 20-3. Conflict with other laws.
This chapter shall not conflict with any subsequently enacted state or
federal law on this subject matter.
Chapter 21
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Standards of Conduct — See Charter, Art. XI.
§ 21-1. Obligations of members of boards, commissions and
committees.
Except as otherwise provided by the Code of the Town of Fairfield, at the
first regular meeting of every board, commission or committee, on or after
December 1, 2004, and not less than annually thereafter, the chairman
of each such board, commission or committee, or their designee, shall
advise its members of his/her obligations to ethics, conduct, freedom of
information and conflicts of interest.
§ 21-2. Standards of conduct.
All newly elected or appointed members of all boards, commission,
committees and the RTM, elected or appointed after January 1, 2005, shall
be provided with written copies of the Standards of Conduct set forth in
Article XI of the Charter of the Town of Fairfield by the chairman of each
such board, commission, committee or his/her designee.
§ 20-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 21-3
21:48
§ 21-3. Obligations of directors, superintendents and managers.
In January of 2005 and not less than annually thereafter, the First
Selectman or his designee shall advise the directors, superintendents, and
managers of all Town departments, in writing, of their obligation to ethics,
conduct, freedom of information and conflicts of interest.
§ 21-4. Effect on Charter provisions.
This section shall not be interpreted to alter, amend and/or modify in any
way any existing provisions of the Charter of the Town of Fairfield.
Chapter 22
FAIR TV
§ 22-1. Program established; intent.
There is hereby established a program for the recording (video and audio),
production, editing, live broadcast, re-broadcast and Internet streaming
of the Town of Fairfield public, education and government meetings. The
program shall provide the residents of the Town of Fairfield the ability to
view government and education meetings as prescribed herein.
§ 22-2. Authority.
The FairTV Commission shall have the responsibility and shall oversee the
implementation of this chapter.
§ 22-3. Primary content.
FairTV shall record, broadcast, re-broadcast and Internet-stream, gavel-togavel,
regularly scheduled meetings of the Town of Fairfield's:
A. Representative Town Meeting.
B. Board of Education.
C. Board of Selectmen.
D. Board of Finance.
E. Town Plan and Zoning Commission.
§ 22-4. Secondary content.
The FairTV Commission may authorize additional coverage of Fairfield Town
government and the Fairfield public schools, herein defined as gavel-to
gavel meetings of Town bodies not part of the primary content schedule,
and events related to Town government or the public schools, such as
ceremonies, nonpartisan public meetings, parades and athletic
competitions.
§ 21-3 ETHICS § 22-5
21:49
§ 22-5. Secondary content limited.
The primary content shall be completely assigned, scheduled and
appropriately funded prior to the authorization of any secondary content
coverage. The Commission shall not authorize the production of any other
content or accept outside-produced content for broadcast.
§ 22-6. Special meeting programming.
Coverage of special meetings of primary content government and
educational activities shall be at the discretion of the FairTV Commission,
provided that primary content coverage shall not be affected.
§ 22-7. Emergency programming.
The FairTV Commission shall provide for the immediate broadcast and
release of emergency bulletins properly decreed by the Public Safety
authorities of the Town of Fairfield through prior mutual agreement with
those authorities. These bulletins are to be in written form in order to be
delivered over the system's broadcast emergency subchannels.
§ 22-8. Commission created; membership; compensation.
A. There shall be a FairTV Commission that shall consist of five members
who must be electors and residents of the Town of Fairfield. No more
than two members shall be members of the same political party. These
members shall be recommended by unanimous consent of the Board of
Selectmen and shall be appointed to the FairTV Commission by majority
consent of the RTM.
B. No member of the FairTV Commission shall receive compensation for
service.
§ 22-9. Commission term of office; removal; officers.
A. The term of all members shall run for three years, except that the initial
terms shall be staggered as follows: one initial term of at least one year,
two initial terms of at least, but no more than, two years, two initial
terms of at least, but no more than, three years so that the terms of not
more than two members shall terminate in any single year.
B. If a member resigns or is removed for any reason before his or her
term expires, a replacement shall be appointed within two months of
termination in accordance with § 74-9A to complete that term. A
Commission member may be removed by a vote of the Board of
Selectmen for good cause, upon request of the Commission. Failure to
attend four consecutive meetings without good reason shall constitute
good cause for removal.
C. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary. The Commission may form subcommittees to address specific
duties of the Commission.
D. A quorum at any such meetings shall consist of a majority of the voting
membership.
§ 22-5 FAIRFIELD CODE § 22-10
21:50
§ 22-10. Commission jurisdiction.
A. The FairTV Commission shall oversee the operations of the FairTV
Broadcast System for the express purpose of recording (video and
audio), producing, editing, live broadcast, re-broadcast and Internet
streaming of the Town of Fairfield education and government meetings.
B. The Commission shall serve as the sole policy-making authority
regarding broadcast content, acting strictly, however, within the
broadcast standards established herein, §§ 74-3 through 74-8. These
standards may only be revised by ordinance of the Town of Fairfield.
C. The Commission shall act as the oversight and selection authority for
any and all employees, contractors, vendors and volunteers needed to
operate the FairTV Broadcast System in a manner consistent with
requirements of fairness expressed in the Town Charter in Article XI,
§ 11.4, and in consultation with the Town Human Resources Department
and Town Purchasing Department.
D. The Commission shall adopt such policies as it deems appropriate to
assure procedures for the orderly and prompt performance of the
Commission's duties and the system's continued efficient operation.
§ 22-11. Professional services.
The Commission shall develop criteria for all contracts and/or agreements
for professional services in furtherance of the purposes for which the
Commission was created, including for the delivery of services it requires,
in consultation with the Town Human Resources Department and/or the
Town Purchasing Department.
§ 22-12. Commission powers and duties.
The purpose of the FairTV Commission shall be to oversee the FairTV
Broadcast System. The system includes FairTV Education, FairTV
Government and FairTV on Demand.
A. The Commission shall adopt policies and procedures that shall:
(1) Provide for efficient, cost effective broadcast operations.
(2) Deliver broadcast content of the legislative, educational, executive,
financial and land use meetings of the Town of Fairfield.
(3) Regulate broadcast system operations and standards within the
limits of §§ 74-3 to 74-8.
(4) Acquire, provide and maintain equipment necessary for the timely
execution of the Commission's duties.
B. The Commission shall be responsible for the custodial oversight of all
such equipment and shall adopt policies for the proper preservation and
care of such equipment.
C. Members shall serve as the Town of Fairfield and the Fairfield Board
of Education representatives to the Cable Advisory Council of Area 2
(CAC2).
§ 22-13. Budget appropriations and funding.
A. Effective with the adoption of this chapter by the RTM and the
appointment and installation of members to the FairTV Commission,
§ 22-10 ETHICS § 22-13
21:51
funds appropriated, encumbered and/or designated for the operations
of FairTV in the current fiscal year held in the Information Technology
Department budget shall henceforth be expended at the direction of the
FairTV Commission.
B. The FairTV Commission shall prepare, present and oversee budget
requests and appropriations for the system in accordance with Town of
Fairfield budget procedures.
C. The FairTV Commission shall author annual grant requests to the Cable
Advisory Council of Area 2 and the grant process post-award report.
D. The FairTV Commission shall author grant requests to any other video
service providers for the Town of Fairfield as needed.
Chapter 24
HARBOR MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Southport Historic District — See Ch. 26.
Beaches — See Ch. 50.
Boats, crafts and vessels — See Ch. 54.
§ 24-1. Purposes.
A. The Town of Fairfield desires to manage Southport Harbor and its
environs in the most effective manner and to plan for safe and beneficial
use and enjoyment of the harbor.
B. The Town desires to conserve and protect the natural environmental and
historic resources of Southport Harbor and its environs for the benefit of
current and future generations.
C. The Town believes that the most responsible way to ensure safe and
beneficial use of the harbor and the protection of harbor resources is
through implementation of a Town plan for management of Southport
Harbor and establishment of Town regulations for use and protection of
the harbor.
D. The Representative Town Meeting hereby enacts these regulations, as
herein set forth, for the use and enjoyment of Southport Harbor and
its environs which shall be known as Fairfield's "Harbor Management
Area."
§ 24-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABODE — The principal, non-water-dependent use of a structure or
vessel as a dwelling or home.
ANCHORING — To secure a vessel temporarily to the bottom of a water
body by dropping an anchor or anchors from a vessel.
§ 22-13 FAIRFIELD CODE § 24-2
21:52
CHANNEL — A water area specifically reserved for unobstructed
movement of vessels, designated as such in the Management Plan for
Southport Harbor and marked in-water by aids to navigation.
DEPUTY HARBORMASTER — The Deputy Harbormaster of Southport
Harbor who may be appointed by the Governor of Connecticut in
accordance with Sections 15-1 through 15-10 of the Connecticut General
Statutes and who shall carry out his or her duties under the direction of
the Harbormaster.
EMERGENCY — A condition of imminent or proximate danger to life or
property that requires immediate action.
FAIRWAY — Any designated and/or maintained water area reserved
for unobstructed movement of vessels and designated as such in the
Management Plan for Southport Harbor.
FEDERAL NAVIGATION PROJECT — Designated channel and anchorage
areas in Southport Harbor as well as the harbor breakwater and dike
authorized by Acts of Congress, constructed by the federal government
and maintained by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
FLOATING HOME — Any structure constructed on a raft, barge or hull,
moored or docked and that is used primarily for single- or multiple-family
habitation or that is used for the domicile of any individual(s).
HARBOR MANAGEMENT AREA — All navigable waters and intertidal
areas as defined in § 24-7 of this chapter as subject to the regulations
contained in this chapter and to the jurisdiction of the Harbor
Management Commission.
HARBOR MANAGEMENT COMMISSION — The duly appointed body
of the Town of Fairfield with responsibilities for implementing the
Management Plan for Southport Harbor and with additional powers
and duties authorized by Sections 22a-113k through 22a-113t of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
HARBOR MANAGEMENT CONSISTENCY REVIEW — The process
defined in § 24-14 of this chapter whereby the Harbor Management
Commission shall review the consistency of proposed actions with the
Management Plan for Southport Harbor.
HARBOR MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE — This chapter establishing
regulations for the use of Fairfield's Harbor Management Area.
HARBORMASTER — The Southport Harbormaster appointed by the
Governor of Connecticut in accordance with Section 15-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, and who shall advise the Harbor
Management Commission with respect to matters concerning the waters
under the jurisdiction of the Harbor Management Commission and have
special responsibilities for implementing the Management Plan for
Southport Harbor.
HAZARD TO NAVIGATION — Any obstruction, usually sunken, that
presents a sufficient danger to navigation so as to require expeditious,
§ 24-2 ETHICS § 24-2
21:53
affirmative action such as marking, removal or redefinition of a
designated waterway to provide for navigational safety.
MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SOUTHPORT HARBOR — A plan for the
balanced use of the Harbor Management Area for recreational and other
purposes and for the protection of environmental resources as prepared
by the Harbor Management Commission, adopted by the Representative
Town Meeting and approved by the Connecticut Departments of
Environmental Protection and Transportation in accordance with
Sections 22a-113k through 22a-113t of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
MARINE FACILITY — Any facility (including but not limited to docks,
floats, piers, ramps, hoists, parking areas, concessions and service
facilities), either publicly or privately owned, intended primarily to be
used by or for the service of vessels and located within the Harbor
Management Area.
MEAN HIGH WATERLINE — The line along the shoreline representing
the average height of the maximum elevation reached by each rising tide
over a nineteen-year period immediately preceding the current year.
MOOR — To secure a vessel to the bottom of a water body by the use of
mooring tackle.
MOORING — The place where or the object to which a vessel can
be made fast by means of mooring tackle so designed that, when the
attachment of such tackle to the vessel is terminated, some portion of
the tackle remains below the surface of the water and is not under the
control of the vessel or its operator.
MOORING TACKLE — The hardware (e.g., chain, line, anchor, buoys and
other equipment) used to secure a vessel at a mooring location.
OBSTRUCTION TO NAVIGATION — Anything that restricts, endangers
or interferes with navigation.
PERSON — Those, including individuals, corporations, societies,
associations and partnerships, using the facilities and areas within the
Harbor Management Area and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — Any Class A inboard vessel which has an
internal combustion engine powering a water-jet pump as its primary
source of motor propulsion and which is designed to be operated by a
person sitting, standing or kneeling.
STATE — The State of Connecticut.
TRANSIENT — A person traveling to the Harbor Management Area by
boat and staying for a temporary period of time.
VESSEL — As defined by state statute, every description of watercraft,
other than a seaplane on water, used or capable of being used as a means
of transportation on water.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 24-2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 24-3
21:54
§ 24-3. General provisions.
A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Harbor
Management Ordinance."
B. The provisions of this chapter and any rules and procedures adopted
pursuant thereto shall be applicable and shall govern the use of the
Fairfield Harbor Management Area as defined in this chapter.
C. If any provision of this chapter is held invalid or inoperative, the
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
D. The Harbormaster and any police officer of the Town of Fairfield shall
have full authority to enforce this chapter and cite any alleged violators
of this chapter.
E. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Harbor Management
Commission or its agent(s) made pursuant to the powers granted in this
chapter may appeal such decisions, in writing, within fifteen (15) days to
the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal shall specifically state the nature of
the ruling and the reasons why the appellant is aggrieved thereby. The
Board of Selectmen shall act on such appeal within thirty (30) days.
F. Nothing herein contained shall bar or prevent the Harbormaster or any
of his deputies from performing those duties which have been assigned
to him in accordance with the General Statutes of the state.
§ 24-4. Commission created; membership; compensation.
A. There shall be a Harbor Management Commission which shall consist
of seven members who must be electors and residents of the Town of
Fairfield. No more than four of the members shall be members of the
same political party. These members shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen and subject to legislative ratification. Appointments will
be made from a list of persons recommended because of their interest
in harbor activities by existing local commissions, Town staff or local
residents. In addition, there shall be appointed two alternate members
to serve in place of absent regular members, if necessary. The
Harbormaster shall serve as an ex officio member of the Commission
without vote.
B. No member of the Harbor Management Commission shall receive
compensation for service, but he may be reimbursed for any necessary
expenses. The Harbormaster or Deputy Harbormaster may receive
compensation for any prescribed duties.
§ 24-5. Term of office; removal; officers.
A. The term of all members shall run for four years.
B. Alternate members shall be appointed for two years. If a member resigns
or is removed for any reason before his or her term expires, a
replacement shall be appointed within two months of termination by
the First Selectman in accordance with § 24-4 to complete that term.
A Commission member may be removed by the Board of Selectmen
for good cause upon request of the Commission. Failure to attend four
consecutive meetings without good reason shall constitute good cause
for removal.
§ 24-3 ETHICS § 24-5
21:55
C. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary. The Commission may form subcommittees to address specific
duties of the Commission.
§ 24-6. Management Plan for Southport Harbor; effective date.
Pursuant to Section 22a-113m of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Management Plan for Southport Harbor, dated March 1995, prepared by
the Fairfield Harbor Management Commission, reviewed by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers and approved by the State Commissioners
of Environmental Protection and Transportation, is adopted by the
Representative Town Meeting to be effective as of October 9, 1995.
§ 24-7. Jurisdiction; Fairfield Harbor Management Area.
For the purpose of this chapter and to define the jurisdiction of the Harbor
Management Commission, the Fairfield Harbor Management Area is
defined to include Southport Harbor and adjacent areas, including:
A. Southport Inner Harbor, which includes the area below the mean high
waterline in the Mill River from the Tide Mill Dam (also called the Mill
Pond Dam) at the head of navigation and extending southwest to the
southern end of the breakwater at the entrance into Long Island Sound.
B. Southport Outer Harbor, which includes the area bounded on the north
by Southport Beach, the entrance to the Inner Harbor and Sasco Hill
Beach; on the east by a line running southeast from Kensie Point through
Sunken Island, then running south to bell R 22, then running northwest
to the Westport boundary at the approximately five-foot deep waters of
Long Island Sound, then running along the Westport boundary to Sasco
Brook and including the Southport Light and nine-foot buoyed channel.
C. The Sasco Brook area, which includes the area below the mean high
waterline in Sasco Brook from the bridge at U.S. Highway No. 1 south,
and east of the Fairfield/Westport boundary line in said brook, to the
waters of Long Island Sound.
§ 24-8. Powers and duties.
The Fairfield Harbor Management Commission shall have all of the powers
and duties granted to municipal harbor management commissions by
Sections 22a-113k through 22a-113t of the Connecticut General Statutes
and by this chapter. The Harbor Management Commission shall implement
the Management Plan for Southport Harbor as adopted by the
Representative Town Meeting, approved by the State of Connecticut in
accordance with Sections 22a-113m through 22a-113o of the Connecticut
General Statutes. The Commission may hire staff and consultants to assist
with any subsequent powers, duties and responsibilities pursuant to the
plan. The Commission shall provide for the annual review of the Harbor
Management Plan and shall make any additions and/or modifications to the
plan that may be deemed appropriate subject to the process set forth in
Sections 22a-113m through 22a-113o of the Connecticut General Statutes
§ 24-5 FAIRFIELD CODE § 24-8
21:56
or other subsequent harbor management legislation enacted by the General
Assembly. In addition, the Commission shall:
A. Recommend ordinances for adoption by the Representative Town
Meeting to implement the Management Plan for Southport Harbor and
which may specify fines for violation of those ordinances in accordance
with Section 22a-ll3m of the Connecticut General Statutes.
B. Prepare an operating budget of the Commission using funds from
sources which may include but are not limited to local appropriations,
mooring fees, violation fines or a Harbor Management Account
established by Town ordinance.
C. Review for consistency with the Management Plan for Southport Harbor
any public notice of an application for a local, state or federal permit
for any activity affecting the real property on, in or contiguous to the
Commission's jurisdiction as described in § 24-7 of this chapter and to
respond in a timely fashion with recommendations to the regulating
agencies.
D. Conduct or cause to be conducted studies of the conditions and
operations in and adjacent to the Harbor Management Area as defined
in § 24-7 of this chapter and present to the Board of Selectmen proposals
for efficient operations in the Harbor Management Area.
E. Adopt rules and procedures for implementing specific portions of the
Management Plan for Southport Harbor and this chapter as it shall deem
necessary in the following manner:
(1) Prior to adopting any such rules and procedures, the Commission
shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of considering their
adoption. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing, which
notice shall include the title and summary of the rules and
procedures proposed, shall be published in a local newspaper having
substantial circulation in the Town of Fairfield at least five days, but
not more than 15 days, prior to the date of said hearing.
(2) Following said public hearing, the Commission shall act upon said
rules and procedures and may make such changes or alterations in
the form or content of the proposed rules and procedures as seen
appropriate or necessary as a result of the public hearing held in
connection therewith. Such changes, additions or alterations shall
not require further public notice.
(3) Such rules and procedures, if adopted by the Commission, shall
become effective after publication once in a local newspaper having
substantial circulation in the Town of Fairfield.
F. To assist the Harbor Management Commission and the Harbormaster
in their duties hereunder, the Harbor Management Commission, with
the advice of the Harbormaster, may appoint a special agent(s) who will
serve at the pleasure of the Harbor Management Commission.
§ 24-9. Harbor Management Account.
A Harbor Management Account is hereby created within the Town of
Fairfield General Fund to receive and expend moneys for harbor
management purposes as determined by the Harbor Management
Commission. All revenues generated by mooring permits shall be deposited
§ 24-8 ETHICS § 24-9
21:57
into this account. Other funds generated or allocated specifically for harbor
management purposes shall also be deposited in this account. Funds shall
be disbursed for purposes directly associated with the management and
improvement of the Harbor Management Area and implementation of the
Management Plan for Southport Harbor. Moneys from this account may be
allocated to the Harbormaster and any agent(s) of the Harbor Management
Commission for the purpose of implementing and enforcing the provisions
of the Management Plan for Southport Harbor and/or this chapter. Moneys
from the Harbor Management Account may also be used to compensate
any contractors hired to perform work as may be deemed necessary by the
Harbor Management Commission.
§ 24-10. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed $100.
Each day in violation shall be considered a separate repeat offense and
subject to separate citations. A fine not to exceed $100 may be imposed
for each repeat offense. The provisions of this section are in addition
to and do not supersede any penalties resulting from simultaneous
violations of state or federal laws.
B. Repeated violations of the provisions of this chapter relating to mooring
permits in the Harbor Management Area as set forth in § 24-12 of this
chapter may, after due notice, result in revocation of the mooring permit.
§ 24-11. Use of the Harbor Management Area.
A. Liability. Persons using any public facility and water area within the
Harbor Management Area shall assume all risk of personal injury and
damage or loss to their property. The Town of Fairfield assumes no
responsibility for losses due to accident, fire, theft, vandalism or acts of
God.
B. Maintenance of marine facilities. Each operator of a waterfront facility,
each waterfront property owner and any other user of the Harbor
Management Area is responsible for maintaining his or her property and
operation in a safe, clean and attractive condition.
C. Reckless operation of vessels prohibited. The operation of any vessel
in any manner that unsafely interferes with the free and proper use of
the Harbor Management Area or endangers the users of the Harbor
Management Area or any property on, in or contiguous to the Harbor
Management Area is hereby prohibited.
D. Vessel speed.
(1) The operation of any vessel, including personal watercraft, within
the Harbor Management Area in excess of established speed limits
or in the inner harbor in a manner to create an excessive wake shall
be in violation of this chapter.
(2) The speed of all vessels in the Southport Inner Harbor as defined in
this chapter shall be limited to six miles per hour or to a speed that
will not cause an excessive wake, whichever is the lesser speed.
(3) Any person operating a vessel within the Harbor Management Area
at such a speed as to cause a wake shall be held responsible for any
damage caused by that wake.
§ 24-9 FAIRFIELD CODE § 24-11
21:58
E. Damage to harbor facilities or other property. It shall be unlawful to
willfully or carelessly destroy, damage, disturb, deface or interfere with
any public or privately owned facility or property in the Harbor
Management Area.
F. Obstruction of facilities.
(1) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person willfully to
prevent any other person from the lawful use of any assigned or
public mooring, anchorage, pier, dock, boat launch or other marine
facility.
(2) No vessel shall be moored or anchored so as to interfere with
the free and unobstructed use of any channel, fairway or berthing
space.
(3) Anchoring in the Federal Navigation Project except for vessel-based
fishing (including shellfishing) or for emergency or inspection
purposes with specific authorization from the Harbormaster is
prohibited.
G. Waterskiing. Waterskiing is prohibited in the inner harbor and in the
Federal Navigation Channel in the outer harbor.
H. Personal watercraft. Use of personal watercraft within the Federal
Navigation Project except as necessary to reach personal watercraft
activity areas is prohibited.
I. Swimming and underwater diving. Swimming is prohibited in the inner
harbor. Underwater diving is prohibited in the inner harbor except for
emergency, maintenance or inspection purposes.
J. Fishing. Fishing in the Harbor Management Area shall not impede
navigation. Vessel-based fishing within designated channels, fairways or
anchorage areas in a manner that provides a hazard to navigation is
prohibited.
K. Board sailing. Board sailing within the Federal Navigation Project in a
manner that creates a hazard to navigation is prohibited.
L. Use of vessels as abodes. Floating homes are prohibited from berthing
or mooring in the Harbor Management Area. The use of any vessel in the
Harbor Management Area as an abode or floating home is prohibited.
Sleeping aboard transient vessels is permitted for a maximum period of
three days unless such period is extended by special permission of the
Harbormaster.
M. Identification of vessels. All vessels (except transient vessels and
tenders used to reach larger vessels) moored or tied up to wharves,
piers or docks in the Harbor Management Area shall maintain the
following identification:
(1) A federal or Connecticut state registry number or Connecticut use
decal registration as reported to the Harbormaster.
(2) A boat name as reported to the Harbormaster.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the owner.
§ 24-12. Mooring and anchoring vessels. [Amended 4-28-2008]
A. In accordance with state law and the Management Plan for Southport
Harbor and in order to provide for adequate access for vessels, for the
safety of persons and property, for the protection of natural and historic
§ 24-11 ETHICS § 24-12
21:59
resources and for the optimum use of the Harbor Management Area,
no vessel shall be moored in the Harbor Management Area without a
current and valid permit from the Harbormaster.
B. It shall be a violation for any person, association, corporation or group to
moor any vessel or place any mooring in the Harbor Management Area
without a current and valid permit from the Harbormaster.
C. Any person, association, corporation or group receiving a permit for a
mooring location in the Harbor Management Area shall pay an annual
mooring permit fee not to exceed the maximum fee authorized by
Section 22a-113s of the Connecticut General Statutes and, in addition,
shall pay an annual mooring maintenance charge in an amount to be
determined by the Harbor Management Commission from time to time
under the procedures for notice and hearing established in § 24-8E.
[Amended 11-24-2008]
D. The mooring and anchoring of all vessels in the Harbor Management
Area shall be in accordance with rules and procedures adopted by the
Harbor Management Commission.
E. In allocating mooring locations in accordance with rules and procedures
adopted by the Harbor Management Commission, the Harbormaster
shall not discriminate on the basis of town of residence. Any interested
person, association, corporation or group may apply for mooring space
in the Harbor Management Area by completing in full the application
provided for that purpose and submitting the completed application
and all required documents and fees to the Harbormaster. A single list
of current mooring assignments and a single list of all those waiting
for a mooring permit/location in the Harbor Management Area shall
be maintained by the Harbor Management Commission and the
Harbormaster.
F. No provision contained in this chapter or in any rules and procedures
adopted by the Harbor Management Commission shall limit the
authority of the Southport Harbormaster to station and remove vessels
as provided in Sections 15-8 and 15-9 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 24-13. Marine sanitation.
A. The provisions of Section 22a-250 of the Connecticut General Statutes
shall be strictly enforced with respect to the discharge of refuse, and no
person shall place, throw, deposit or discharge or cause to be placed,
thrown, deposited or discharged into the Harbor Management Area any
litter or other materials, including but not limited to any refuse or waste
matter, sewage, petroleum products or by-products, paint, varnish, dead
animals or debris of any kind.
B. The owner, lessee, agent, manager or person in charge of any waterfront
development or facility adjacent to the Harbor Management Area shall
at all times maintain the premises under his charge in a clean, sanitary
condition, free from malodorous materials and accumulations of
garbage, refuse, debris and other waste materials.
§ 24-12 FAIRFIELD CODE § 24-14
21:60
§ 24-14. Consultation and coordination with other Town
commissions and departments.
A. A Town Harbor Management Consistency Review process shall be
carried out by the Harbor Management Commission to ensure effective
implementation of the Management Plan for Southport Harbor and to
provide coordinated, efficient and comprehensive review of proposed
projects and activities affecting the Harbor Management Area.
B. The Harbor Management Commission shall review, for consistency with
the Management Plan for Southport Harbor, specific development and
use proposals (see Subsection C below) affecting the Harbor
Management Area as submitted to or proposed by all other Town
commissions and departments, including:
(1) The Town Plan and Zoning Commission.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) The Water Pollution Control Authority.
(4) The Department of Public Works.
(5) The Park Commission.
(6) The Shellfish Commission.
(7) The Conservation Commission.
(8) The Historic District Commission.
C. The Harbor Management Commission shall review for consistency with
the Management Plan for Southport Harbor:
(1) All development proposals subject to the Town's Coastal Site Plan
Review process and affecting the real property on, in or contiguous
to Harbor Management Area, with the exception of one- or twofamily
dwellings.
(2) All proposed uses or activities occurring below the mean high
waterline.
(3) All proposed revisions and amendments to Town plans, rules and
regulations affecting real property on, in or contiguous to the Harbor
Management Area.
D. All Town commissions and departments proposing or reviewing
proposals affecting the Harbor Management Area shall notify the Harbor
Management Commission of any proposals subject to the Harbor
Management Consistency Review process at least 35 days prior to the
commencement of any hearings thereon or, where no hearing is held, at
least 35 days prior to the taking of any final action on the proposal.
E. The Harbor Management Commission shall determine the consistency
of proposals with the Management Plan for Southport Harbor and make
recommendations to the appropriate Town commission or department
having authority to act on the proposal within 35 days of receipt of
the proposal from the referring agency. If no comment regarding the
consistency of the proposed project is made by the Commission within
35 days, the proposal shall be assumed to be consistent with the Harbor
Management Plan. The Town agency authorized to act on the proposal
shall consider the recommendations of the Harbor Management
Commission. In accordance with Section 22a-113p of the Connecticut
General Statutes, a two-thirds vote of all members of the agency having
authority to act on the proposal shall be required to approve a proposal
§ 24-14 ETHICS § 24-14
21:61
that has not received a favorable recommendation from the Harbor
Management Commission, provided that the provisions of this section
shall not be deemed to alter the authority of the agency having primary
jurisdiction over the proposal to deny, modify or condition the proposal.
F. Nothing contained within this chapter shall abridge the legal authority
of any board, commission or agency of the Town of Fairfield to make,
publish, adopt, repeal, change or amend its rules, regulations or bylaws
in accordance with law.
Chapter 26
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District Commission — See Charter,
§ 10.14.
Harbor Management Area — See Ch. 24,
§ 24-14B.
Real property management — See Ch. 35.
§ 26-1. Old Post Road Historic District.
An historic district is hereby established in the Town, the boundaries of
which are shown on the map entitled "Historic District, Fairfield,
Connecticut," which map is filed in the office of the Town Clerk, and which
district is more particularly bounded and described as follows:
A. Beginning at a point of intersection of the center line of Turney Creek
and the southerly street line of the Old Post Road; thence southerly along
the center line of Turney Creek for a distance of one hundred forty feet,
more or less, to a point of intersection with a line which is parallel to and
one hundred twenty-five feet southerly of the southerly street line of the
Old Post Road; thence westerly along a line which is parallel to and one
hundred twenty-five feet southerly of the southerly street line of the Old
Post Road for a distance of four hundred ten feet, more or less, to a point
of intersection with the westerly property line of land now or formerly of
David and Jean H. Whitney; thence southerly along the westerly property
line of land now or formerly of David and Jean H. Whitney for a distance
of seventy-five feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with a line
which is parallel to and two hundred feet southerly of the southerly
street line of the Old Post Road; thence westerly along a line which is
parallel to and two hundred feet southerly of the southerly street line
of the Old Post Road for a distance of one hundred feet, more or less,
to a point of intersection with the easterly property line of land now
or formerly of Lawrence and Doris N. Hemmendinger; thence northerly
along the westerly property line of land now or formerly of Lawrence
and Doris N. Hemmendinger and Ernest M. and Hedwig D. Rappolt for a
distance of seventy-five feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with
a line which is parallel to and one hundred twenty-five feet southerly
of the southerly street line of the Old Post Road; thence westerly along
§ 24-14 FAIRFIELD CODE § 26-1
26:62
a line which is parallel to and one hundred twenty-five feet southerly
of the southerly street line of the Old Post Road for a distance of one
thousand sixty feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with the
westerly street line of South Benson Road; thence southerly along the
westerly street line of South Benson Road for a distance of twenty-five
feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with a line which is parallel
to and two hundred feet southerly of the southerly street line of the
Old Post Road; thence westerly along a line which is parallel to and two
hundred feet southerly of the southerly street line of the Old Post Road
for a distance of one hundred thirty feet, more or less, to a point of
intersection with the easterly property line of land now or formerly of
Robert G. and Jean D. Lee; thence southerly along the easterly property
line of land now or formerly of Robert G. and Jean D. Lee for a distance
of fifty feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with a line which is
parallel to and two hundred fifty feet southerly of the southerly street
line of the Old Post Road; thence westerly along a line which is parallel
to and two hundred fifty feet southerly of the southerly street line of
the Old Post Road for a distance of three hundred feet, more or less,
to a point of intersection with the easterly property line of land now or
formerly of Joseph A. and Susan G. Racioppi; thence northerly along the
easterly property line of land now or formerly of Joseph A. and Susan
G. Racioppi and Agnes G. Fairfield for a distance of fifty feet, more or
less, to a point of intersection with a line which is parallel to and two
hundred feet southerly of the southerly street line of the Old Post Road;
thence westerly along a line which is parallel to and two hundred feet
southerly of the southerly street line of the Old Post Road for a distance
of four hundred seventy feet, more or less, to a point of intersection
with a line which is parallel to and two hundred feet easterly of the
easterly street line of Beach Road; thence southerly along a line which
is parallel to and two hundred feet easterly of the easterly street line of
Beach Road for a distance of six hundred fifty feet, more or less, to a
point of intersection with the northerly street line of Sunnieholm Drive;
thence westerly along the northerly street line of Sunnieholm Drive for
a distance of two hundred seventy feet, more or less, and extending to a
point of intersection with the westerly street line of Beach Road; thence
southerly along the westerly street line of Beach Road for a distance of
four hundred seventy feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with
the northerly property line of land now or formerly of Edward A. Wenzel;
thence westerly along the northerly property line of land now or formerly
of Edward A. Wenzel, Town of Fairfield and Sybil B. McLaughlin, for a
distance of one thousand one hundred seventy feet, more or less, to a
point of intersection with the easterly street line of Penfield Road; thence
northerly along the easterly street line of Penfield Road for a distance
of eight hundred ten feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with a
line which is parallel to and two hundred feet southerly of the southerly
street line of the Old Post Road; thence westerly along a line which is
parallel to and two hundred feet southerly of the southerly street line
of the Old Post Road for a distance of six hundred seventy feet, more
or less, to a point of intersection with the easterly property line of land
§ 26-1 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 26-1
26:63
now or formerly of Donal M. and Eleanor D. Collimore; thence northerly
along the easterly property line of land now or formerly of Donal M. and
Eleanor D. Collimore for a distance of two hundred seventy feet, more
or less, and extending to a point of intersection with the northerly street
line of the Old Post Road; thence westerly along the northerly street line
of the Old Post Road for a distance of one hundred ninety feet, more or
less, to a point of intersection with a line which is parallel to and two
hundred feet westerly of the easterly street line of the Old Post Road;
thence northerly along a line which is parallel to and two hundred feet
westerly of the easterly street line of the Old Post Road for a distance
of eight hundred thirty feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with
the westerly extension of the southerly property line of land now or
formerly of the City Trust Company; thence easterly along the extension
of and the southerly property line of land now or formerly of the City
Trust Company for a distance of two hundred feet, more or less, to a
point of intersection with the westerly street line of the Old Post Road;
thence southerly along the westerly street line of the Old Post Road for
a distance of sixty feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with the
westerly extension of the southerly property line of land of the Town;
thence easterly along the extension of and the southerly property line
of land of the Town for a distance of two hundred seventy feet, more or
less, to a point of intersection with a line which is parallel to and two
hundred feet easterly of the easterly street line of the Old Post Road;
thence southerly along a line which is parallel to and two hundred feet
easterly of the Old Post Road for a distance of five hundred seventy feet,
more or less, to a point of intersection with a line which is parallel to and
two hundred feet northerly of the northerly street line of the Old Post
Road; thence easterly along a line which is parallel to and two hundred
feet northerly of the northerly street line of the Old Post Road for a
distance of one thousand one hundred fifty feet, more or less, to a point
of intersection with the westerly property line of land now or formerly
of the First Church Congregational in Fairfield; thence southerly along
the westerly property line of land now or formerly of the First Church
Congregational in Fairfield for a distance of fifty feet, more or less, to
a point of intersection with a line which is parallel to and one hundred
fifty feet northerly of the northerly street line of the Old Post Road;
thence easterly along a line which is parallel to and one hundred fifty
feet northerly of the northerly street line of the Old Post Road for a
distance of two hundred forty feet, more or less, to a point of intersection
with the easterly street line of Beach Road; thence northerly along the
easterly street line of Beach Road for a distance of fifty feet, more or
less, to a point of intersection with a line which is parallel to and two
hundred feet northerly of the northerly street line of the Old Post Road;
thence easterly along a line which is parallel to and two hundred feet
northerly of the northerly street line of the Old Post Road for a distance
of one thousand one hundred feet, more or less, to a point of intersection
with the westerly street line of South Benson Road; thence southerly
along the westerly street line of South Benson Road for a distance of one
hundred ten feet; more or less, to a point of intersection with a line which
§ 26-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 26-1
26:64
is parallel to and one hundred twenty-five feet northerly of the northerly
street line of the Old Post Road; thence easterly along a line which is
parallel to and one hundred twenty-five feet northerly of the northerly
street line of the Old Post Road for a distance of one thousand three
hundred twenty feet, more or less, to a point of intersection with the
westerly street line of the Post Road (U.S. Route No. 1); thence southerly
along the westerly street line of the Post Road (U.S. Route No. 1) for a
distance of one hundred ninety feet, more or less, and extending to the
point of beginning.
§ 26-2. Greenfield Hill Historic District.
An historic district is hereby established in Greenfield Hill to be known as
the "Greenfield Hill Historic District," the boundaries of which are shown
on a map entitled, "Historic District, Greenfield Hill, Town of Fairfield," and
which map is filed in the office of the Town Clerk. Such district being more
particularly bounded and described as follows:
A. The village green and the adjacent properties on Meeting House Lane,
Hillside Road and Old Academy Road, the Greenfield Hill Congregational
Church and Church House, and extending southerly along both sides of
Bronson Road to and including the old cemetery, and southerly along both
sides of Hillside Road to a point below Verna Hill Road, including therein
the following parcels of property as recorded in the Town Assessor's office:
Map No. Parcel No.
171 28-32, inclusive
173 17-19, inclusive
173 28, 29
173 35-37, inclusive
173 43, 44
173 54-56, inclusive
173 60-85, inclusive
223 1, 10, 11
§ 26-3. Southport Historic District. [Amended 1-23-1995]
A. An historic district is hereby established in Southport to be known as the
"Southport Historic District," the boundaries of which are shown on a map
entitled, "Southport Historic District, Town of Fairfield," which map is filed in
the office of the Town Clerk. Such district being more particularly bounded and
described as follows:
(1) The Southport Historic District is generally bounded on the north by the
southerly line of the New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad Company, on
the south by the Mill River and Southport Harbor, on the west by Old South
Road, including both sides, and on the east by Rose Hill Road, including both
sides, Church Street and the west side of Prospect Lane. The east extension
boundary crosses Prospect Lane in a northerly direction to the northwest
corner of Lot 55 (Map 241). At said point the boundary runs around the north,
§ 26-1 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 26-3
26:65
east and south property lines of said lot and returns across Prospect Lane to the
existing Southport Historic District boundary, then returns along said boundary
in a northwesterly direction to the point of beginning. Said district includes
therein the following parcels of property as recorded in the Town Assessor's
office:
Map No. Tax Parcel No.
241 1-27, inclusive
241 34-53, inclusive
241 55
241 72-76, inclusive
241 79-87, inclusive
241 93, except that portion thereof used for commercial
purposes
241 94-151
241 156-157
241 165-168, inclusive
241 186-201, inclusive
241 201A-202A
241 202-205, inclusive
241 210-213, inclusive
241 214, that portion fronting on Pequot Avenue to a
depth of 200 feet
231 418-427, inclusive
231 441
231 453-455, inclusive
B. Spruce Street Extension. The existing Southport Historic District established in
Southport, known as the "Southport Historic District," the boundaries of which
are shown on a map entitled, "Southport Historic District, Town of Fairfield,"
shall be amended to include an extension. Upon adoption of this ordinance, a
map entitled "Southport Historic District, Town of Fairfield, Amended 2007,"
shall be filed in the office of the Fairfield Town Clerk, which will include the
extension bounded and described as follows: [Added 10-22-2007]
(1) The existing northern boundary of the Southport Historic District shall be
amended and generally bounded to include both sides of Spruce Street, to No.
100 on the east side and to Rennell Drive on the west and that portion of the
railroad easement that connects with the existing historic district and includes
the railroad stations on both sides of the tracks.
(2) Said extension includes therein the following parcels of property as recorded in
the Assessor's Office:
§ 26-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 26-3
26:66
Map No. Tax Parcel No.
241 181
241 221-226, inclusive
243 25-27, inclusive
243 39-41, inclusive
§ 26-4. (Reserved)8
§ 26-5. (Reserved)
§ 26-6. (Reserved)
§ 26-7. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Historic District Commission shall adopt regulations and rules of
procedure and shall be subject to all of the requirements imposed by the
state statutes and the Charter regarding the administration and operation
of the Commission.
§ 26-7.1. Historic properties designation. [Added 7-26-1999]
The Historic District Commission is authorized to study and make
recommendations to the Representative Town Meeting to establish
additional historic properties from time to time as the Historic District
Commission sees fit to make such studies and recommendations. Only those
properties authorized in writing by the owner or owners of record shall be
recommended by the Historic District Commission and designated by the
Representative Town Meeting as historic properties.
§ 26-8. Construal.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve any property owner of
complying with the requirements of any other state statutes, this Code or
municipal ordinances or regulations affecting the uses of land within the
Town.
8. Editor's Note: Former §§ 26-4 through 26-6, concerning the Historic Commission, were
repealed 9-28-1998. See § 10.14 of the Charter.
§ 26-3 HISTORIC DISTRICTS § 26-8
26:67
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 32
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disposal of surplus property — See Ch. 4, Art.
II.
Board of Education property — See Ch. 52.
§ 35-1. Applicability; findings; compliance with statutory provisions.
A. This chapter concerns the acquisition and disposition of real property,
including but not limited to buildings and improvements located thereon
and Board of Education leases and rentals of duration equal to or greater
than 12 months.
B. Because of the unique nature of acquiring real property, the
Representative Town Meeting finds that sealed bidding is deemed to
be impractical and not in the best interest of the Town. However, a
waiver, submitted by either the First Selectman or the Superintendent of
Schools, as appropriate, and with the concurrence of six members of the
Board of Finance, must be filed in the office of the purchasing authority
within five days following Representative Town Meeting approval of:
(1) The acquisition of property.
(2) Franchises, concessions and licenses involving anticipated gross
receipts in excess of $10,000.
(3) Leases involving rent in excess of $5,000 in any fiscal year.
C. Conveyance of open space designated land by the Town to a
nongovernmental body shall comply with Connecticut General Statute,
Section 7-131i.
§ 35-2. Executive and legislative approval.
The First Selectman shall, unless excepted herein, act as the chief
negotiator on behalf of the Town of Fairfield for the acquisition or the
disposition of real property. The Board of Selectmen shall act as the
approving executive body, unless excepted herein. The Representative Town
Meeting shall act as the approving legislative body, unless herein.
§ 26-8 FAIRFIELD CODE § 35-3
28:68
§ 35-3. Intermediary approval.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to eliminate formal submission to
the Historic District Commission for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission for an acceptance or rejection report,
the Board of Finance as the initial appropriations body in appropriate
circumstances or the Board of Finance as the concurring body in the case
of waivers.
§ 35-4. Acquisitions.
This section applies to the Town's acquisition of real property as stipulated
below:
A. If the acquisition is an outright purchase, the First Selectman may
negotiate on behalf of the Town, subject to further approvals, as
identified in this chapter, up to and including the fair market value of
the property. Once a negotiated agreement is entered into, the First
Selectman shall seek executive body approval from the Board of
Selectmen, initiate referral to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission
and seek fiscal approval from the Board of Finance, if necessary, and
legislative approval from the Representative Town Meeting. [NOTE: See
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 8-24.]
B. The Conservation Commission may, with the approval of the
Representative Town Meeting, acquire, through a purchase or a gift,
land appropriate for development and conservation of natural resources,
including water resources. In this instance, the First Selectman shall
serve as the Town's negotiator for compensation up to and including
the fair market value. [NOTE: See Connecticut General Statutes, Section
7-131a, Subsection (b).]
C. The First Selectman may negotiate for property that does not meet all
applicable state and Town zoning, building and fire codes, provided that
each discrepancy is noticed, in writing, to all other applicable approving
bodies.
D. The First Selectman may also negotiate for property that is undergoing
formal condemnation proceedings per the State of Connecticut Basic
Building Code and other relevant statutes.9
E. Inasmuch as fair market value may not accurately reflect the true value
or worth of real property to the Town, fair market value and desirability
may be modified by any one or more of the following criteria: [Added
10-27-1997]
(1) Price, if offered at a specific price.
(2) Location, with an emphasis on property located within current
boundaries of existing Town-owned property, adjacent to existing
Town-owned property, in proximity to existing Town-owned property
or property located in developed neighborhoods that have minimal
access to recreation or natural habitat parcels.
(3) Size, with an emphasis on larger parcels which may provide a
continuity of natural habitats and with a de-emphasis on smaller
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 56, Buildings, Art. II, State Basic Building Code.
§ 35-3 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 35-4
35:69
parcels which may impose a significant maintenance burden while
producing only a minimal benefit.
(4) Conservation and aesthetic value, including whether a parcel is
a critical habitat; harbors endangered, threatened or protected
species; harbors plant or animal communities not already found
in existing Town-owned property; enhances or protects natural
resources, including tidal wetlands and riparian habitats adjacent
to watercourses; contains significant natural features, such as
ridgelines, ravines and water bodies; or includes historical, cultural
or archaeological resources.
(5) Recreation value, both active and passive.
(6) Development potential for Town-owned buildings or Town sponsored
developments.
§ 35-5. Conveyances or dispositions; leases and rentals.
This section applies to the Town's disposition, leasing and rental of real
property as stipulated below:
A. The First Selectman may, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen,
referral to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission and subsequent
approval of the Representative Town Meeting, and after advertisements
in trade journals or newspapers with circulation in Fairfield, dispose of
unneeded real property at fair market value. [NOTE: See Connecticut
General Statutes, Section 8-24.]
B. The First Selectman may, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen,
referral to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission and subsequent
approval of the Representative Town Meeting, abandon or discontinue
paper streets and private ways to adjacent property owners at no
transfer cost to the recipient. [NOTE: See Connecticut General Statutes,
Sections 8-24 and 13a-49.]
C. The First Selectman may, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen,
referral to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, the Board of Finance,
if necessary, and subsequent approval of the Representative Town
Meeting, acquire and dispose of separate properties in the same
negotiation with a single party at fair market value. [NOTE: See
Connecticut General Statutes, Section 8-24.]
D. Demolition.
(1) The First Selectman, after approval of the Board of Selectmen and
the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, may order the demolition
of Town-owned buildings and structures of fewer than 5,000 square
feet, except if they are wholly or partially within an historic district.
[NOTE: See Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-147d.]
(2) If a building or structure is within an historic district, additional
Historic District Commission and Representative Town Meeting
approval shall be required. [NOTE: See Connecticut General
Statutes, Section 7-147d.]
(3) If building or structure is equal to or greater than 5,000 square
feet, additional Board of Finance and Representative Town Meeting
approvals shall be required.
§ 35-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 35-5
35:70
E. The First Selectman may negotiate with the State of Connecticut
concerning condemnation proceedings brought by the state against the
Town.
F. The First Selectman may, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen,
referral to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, if there is to be a
change of use, and subsequent approval of the Representative Town
Meeting, negotiate property leases of three years or longer at fair
market value as determined by the prevailing rates in the community for
comparable property. [NOTE: See Connecticut General Statutes, Section
8-24.]
G. The First Selectman may lease property to Townspeople for a term
of fewer than three years at a fair market value as determined by
local prevailing rates. Leases shall provide that the First Selectman
will give not fewer than a ninety-day notice to the lessee if the Town
wishes to remove the property from its rental inventory or alter the
rental rate after expiration of the lease term. The First Selectman shall
provide a written annual report of all short-term leases at the December
Representative Town Meeting.
H. The First Selectman may, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen,
lease property to charitable or veterans' organizations for nominal
consideration.
§ 35-6. Board of Education leases and rentals.
This section applies to the Board of Education's administered property for
leases and rentals as stipulated below:
A. The Board of Education may, with approval of the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission and the Representative Town Meeting, negotiate leases for
unneeded property for a term in excess of 12 months at fair market value
as determined by the prevailing rates in the community for comparable
property. [NOTE: See Connecticut General Statutes, Section 8-24.]
B. All net proceeds after allowance for apportioned operating costs
resulting from rentals subject to Subsection A shall be the property of
the Town and shall be deposited in the Town's general fund.
C. The Board of Education may take and receive, after referral to the Town
Plan and Zoning Commission but subject to Board of Finance approval
and necessary appropriation and to Representative Town Meeting
approval and payment to the owner of just compensation, land which has
been fixed upon as a school building site by the act of eminent domain.
[NOTE: See Connecticut General Statutes, Sections 8-24 and 10-241a.]
D. The Board of Education may not negotiate use of property that does not
substantially meet all applicable state and Town zoning, building and fire
codes or regulations as of the time of original occupancy or the most
recent renovation.
§ 35-7. Exceptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to any operations of the Housing Authority.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any operations of the Parking Authority.
C. This chapter shall not apply to any operations of the Public Recreational
Facilities Authority if and when the Representative Town Meeting
§ 35-5 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 35-7
35:71
creates such an authority by ordinance. [NOTE: See Connecticut
General Statutes, Section 7-130a through 7-130w.]
D. This chapter shall not apply to any operations of a quasi-public, quasimunicipal
or public nonmunicipal authority or corporation that may be
set up for the express purpose of administering a particular facility that
receives temporary or permanent financial support from an agency of
the state or the federal government.
E. This chapter shall not apply to rentals of eight months' duration or less,
including but not limited to boat storage, locker and cabana rental,
reasonable charges for recreational facilities upon land acquired with a
state grant, food concessions involving anticipated gross receipts of less
than $10,000 and nonprofit athletic facilities.
F. This chapter does not apply to Board of Education leases of 12 months
or fewer.
G. This chapter has no jurisdiction over Park-Commission-managed and -
controlled land as said Commission is authorized to enter into leases of
any land under its control for the purpose of providing food, beverages
and services to the public at Town parks and beaches upon such terms
and conditions as the Commission may deem desirable, provided that no
lease of any such land shall be for a period of more than five years unless
otherwise approved by the Representative Town Meeting. [NOTE: See
Representative Town Meeting action of February 20, 1950.]
H. This chapter shall not apply to the acquisition of real property by the
Town through the foreclosure of tax or other liens in favor of the Town
or otherwise acquired in satisfaction of debts.
I. This chapter does not apply to property easements requested or
received by the Town.
J. This chapter does not apply to the leasing of offshore shellfish grounds
under the administration of the Fairfield Shellfish Commission.10
[Added 3-23-1987]
§ 35-8. Exclusivity of leases. [Amended 6-27-199511; 10-26-1998]
A lessee of Town-owned property may not sublet the property or assign
the lease without the prior approval of the Board of Selectman and the
Representative Town Meeting.
§ 35-9. Powers of other agencies.
Nothing contained within this chapter shall abridge the legal authority
of any board, commission or agency of the Town of Fairfield to make,
publish, adopt, repeal, change or amend its rules, regulations or bylaws in
accordance with law.
§ 35-10. Land Acquisition Commission. [Added 10-27-1997]
A. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Land Acquisition Commission
consisting of seven members and two alternates to serve terms of four
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 39, Shellfish Commission.
11.Editor's Note: This legislation was subject to referendum. No valid petition was filed.
§ 35-7 FAIRFIELD CODE § 35-10
35:72
years; provided, however, that at the time of first appointment, three
such members and one alternate shall be appointed for a period of
two years only. No more than four members and one alternate shall be
members of the same political party. An alternate shall sit as a member of
the Land Acquisition Commission whenever a regular member is absent
or disqualified. [Amended 1-26-1998]
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Land Acquisition Commission shall:
(a) Expeditiously review and advise the First Selectman regarding
proposed expenditures of the Land Acquisition Fund;
(b) Develop a comprehensive plan for acquisition of 70 acres of open
space for each 1,000 inhabitants of the Town;
(c) Analyze all real property owned by the Town;
(d) Create an inventory of undeveloped real property within the
Town boundaries; and
(e) Review requests for land acquisition by other Town
governmental bodies.
(2) The Land Acquisition Commission may:
(a) Advise the First Selectman and other Town officials regarding
the purchase, sale or donation of real property and related
matters;
(b) Solicit informally the acquisition of parcels of real property by
purchase or donation;
(c) Retain real estate professionals to appraise parcels under
consideration; and
(d) Undertake other actions which may reasonably enhance the
Town's ability to acquire open space.
(3) Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Land Acquisition
Commission from holding closed executive sessions pursuant to and
within the purview of the Connecticut Freedom of Information Act.12
§ 35-11. Land Acquisition Fund. [Added 10-27-1997]
A. Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 7-131r, the Town hereby
establishes a Land Acquisition Fund to be used for the sole purpose
of acquiring Town-owned property and property rights. The Land
Acquisition Fund:
(1) May accept donations from public and private individuals and
entities.
(2) Shall accept contributions required by the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission, the Conservation Commission and the Inland Wetlands
Agency as a condition for approval of applications before such
Commissions or Agency.
(3) May receive funds through an appropriation in the annual budget as
allowed by Connecticut General Statues § 7-131r.
(4) As may be appropriated, receive up to 10% of the unspent balance in
the Town budget for each fiscal year at the end of each such year as
determined by the Chief Fiscal Officer, commencing with the fiscal
12.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-210 et seq.
§ 35-10 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 35-11
35:73
year ending June 30, 1997, through the fiscal year ending June 30,
2002.
B. Moneys paid to the Land Acquisition Fund and interest earned thereon
shall be used solely by the Town for the acquisition of real property,
including development rights and conservation easements by the Town,
provided that all such expenditures shall be approved by all necessary
Town boards and commissions and the Representative Town Meeting.
The criteria for purchasing such property shall include, but not be
limited to, the criteria specified in § 35-4E of this Code and information
developed pursuant to § 35-10B.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent or limit the Town from the purchase of real
property through other channels, including, but not limited to, bonding.
§ 35-12. Designation of use of acquired land. [Added 10-25-1999]
A. Legislative findings. The RTM finds that there is no clear process in state
statutes, the Town Charter or the Town Code for designating property
as to use upon acquisition, determining administrative responsibility for
such property and changing such use designation and administration, as
necessary, in the future. Therefore, the RTM desires to establish such a
process.
B. Definition. For purposes of this § 35-12, "open space" means land which
may be used for any of the following purposes:
(1) Recreation, including, but not limited to, children's play, such as
playgrounds, ice skating and sledding; land sports, such as baseball,
football, soccer, tennis, track, golf and climbing; water sports, such
as fishing, boating, swimming and waterskiing; and passive
recreation, such as strolling, hiking, horseback riding, sitting,
sunbathing, picnicking and nature study.
(2) Conservation, including, but not limited to, natural and scenic
resources, wildlife habitat, water supply and other natural
resources; the protection of soil from erosion; the conservation of
historic areas; and the conservation of people and man-made
structures from the dangers of floods.
(3) Preservation of community character, including, but not limited to,
the protection and enhancement of the desirable physical and visual
character of the Town and preservation of appropriate lands from
future development.
C. Designation of use.
(1) Property acquired before June 22, 1998. Any property acquired
before June 22, 1998, which carries a designation as to use on the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission Map of the Town of Fairfield
Public Lands shall continue to have the use designation shown on
such map.
(2) Property acquired after June 22, 1998, and before enactment of
§ 35-12. All properties acquired by the Town through purchase or
donation after June 22, 1998, and before enactment of this § 35-12
shall be designated "open space," as defined herein, unless
otherwise required by state or federal law, any valid municipal law,
a valid rule or regulation of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission
§ 35-11 FAIRFIELD CODE § 35-12
35:74
or by a valid deed restriction on use of the property. Such property
shall be administered by the commission or department specified at
the time of acquisition, but if no specific designation was made, such
property shall be administered by the Conservation Commission.
(3) Property acquired from and after enactment of § 35-12. All property
acquired by purchase or donation after the enactment § 35-12 shall
be designated as directed by the RTM in the resolution authorizing
the acquisition of such property, consistent with any requirements
of state or federal law, any valid municipal law, a valid rule or
regulation of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission or any valid
deed restriction regarding the use of the property. If no other
designation is made, the property shall be designated "open space,"
as defined in Subsection B, and shall be administered, subject to
other designation by the RTM, by the Conservation Commission.
D. Change in use. If the use or administration of any Town property,
including open space, as defined in Subsection B is proposed to be
changed, such change shall be conditioned upon the approval of the
RTM. The RTM may request the recommendation of the board or
commission administering the property before approving the change.
Chapter 36
REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional planning — See Ch. 4, Art. III.
§ 35-12 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 35-12
35:75

ARTICLE I
Greater Bridgeport Regional Council of Elected Officials
[Adopted 3-22-2010]
§ 36-1. Purpose.
The Town of Fairfield recognizes that formation of a regional council of
elected officials will improve the continued operation of the Greater
Bridgeport Regional Planning Agency (the "Agency") as the designated
regional planning organization for the Greater Bridgeport planning region
by providing a policy board to guide the Agency regarding the study of
issues of mutual concern to two or more members.
§ 36-2. Authorization to form and join.
In accordance with the provisions of Sections 4-124c through 4-124h,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the Town of
Fairfield hereby agrees to form and join a regional organization known
as the "Greater Bridgeport Regional Council of Elected Officials" as the
designated policy board to guide the Agency.
§ 36-1 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 36-2
35:77
Chapter 37
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police and Fire Retirement Board — See
Charter, § 10.7.
§ 36-2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 36-2
35:78
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Administration of System
[Adopted as Ch. 16 of the Code of the Town of Fairfield 1968]
§ 37-1. Definitions. [Amended 1-25-1971]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANNUAL BASE SALARY — The highest regular salary or wage paid to
the member in the Town's fiscal year, not including overtime pay, bonuses,
allowances, grants or other similar benefits.[Amended 4-27-1987]
BOARD — The Employees' Retirement Board.
CONTINUOUS SERVICE — Service during which time an employee was
not absent from the payroll of the Town for longer than one month at
any one time, except on recommendation of the chief executive, or in the
case of an employee of the Board of Education, on recommendation of the
Superintendent of Schools. Absence on account of service in the Armed
Forces of the United States in time of war or under any universal military
training law of the United States or any state, territory or district thereof
shall not be regarded as an interruption of continuous service, provided that
the employee returns to the service of the Town within one year after the
termination of his active military service.
DISABLED — A member shall be unable to continue any employment for the
Town. 13
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee of the Town who works at least 20
hours per week in positions not seasonal or temporary.
MEMBER — All full-time employees of the Town and the Board of Education,
except:[Amended 4-27-1987; 10-26-2015]
PENSION BASE SALARY — Effective January 1, 1971, the fixed amount of
$7,800.[Amended 4-27-1987]
SYSTEM or RETIREMENT SYSTEM — The Town of Fairfield Employee
Retirement System, which shall not include any of the retirement savings
plans referred to in Article IV of this Chapter 37.[Amended 10-26-2015]
A. Regular members of the Police and Fire Departments;
B. Certified employees of the Board of Education; and
All other employees of the Town and the Board of Education who are
excluded from membership pursuant to § 37-3C.
C.
13.Editor's Note: The definition of “final average salary,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-27-1987.
§ 37-1 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-2
35:79
§ 37-2. Establishment.
The Town hereby establishes an employee retirement system for the benefit
of such full-time Town employees as hereinafter defined. The system shall
be administered by the Employees' Retirement Board, and it shall provide
such benefits under the terms and conditions hereinafter more specifically
set forth.
§ 37-3. Obtaining membership. [Amended 4-27-1987; 10-26-2015]
A. Any full-time employee of the Town on March 15, 1966, could have
become a member of the retirement system by filing written application
with the Employees' Retirement Board by April 14, 1966.
B. Any person who becomes a full-time employee after March 15, 1966,
and before November 1, 2015, shall become a member of the retirement
system if he qualifies in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Retirement Board.
C. All employees of the Town or Board of Education hired on or after
November 1, 2015, shall participate in a retirement savings plan, such
as a 401(a) type pension plan, with no eligibility or vesting rights in
the Town's existing retirement system, unless the person is a full-time
employee who is a member of a collective bargaining unit and the
collective bargaining agreement in effect and covering such person
provides that such person is eligible to participate in the retirement
system.
§ 37-4. Composition of fund.
The fund of the retirement system shall consist of the following:
A. The Town shall be liable to the Employees' Retirement Board for a
sum sufficient to cover the cost of paying future benefits to members
for services rendered by them prior to July 1, 1966. Such sum, to be
determined by the Employees' Retirement Board on sound actuarial
principles, shall be paid by the Town in equal annual installments over
a period of 30 years. In addition, the Town shall pay to the Employees'
Retirement Board such amounts as may be determined by the Board on
an annual basis which shall be needed to provide future pensions on
account of service by employees subsequent to July 1, 1966.
B. The rate of contribution by a member of the system shall be a percentage
of the member's annual base salary as determined by the rules and
regulations of the Retirement Board. Such contribution shall be
deducted from his salary or wage and forthwith paid over to the
Employees' Retirement Board. [Amended 4-27-1987]
§ 37-5. Termination of employment prior to retirement. [Amended
4-27-1987]
In the event of a termination of employment with the Town before
retirement, the Employees' Retirement Board shall pay over to the member
or his legal representative an amount equal to his contribution, together
with interest on that sum as determined by the Board. If the employee has
§ 37-2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 37-5
35:80
been a member of the retirement system for the required number of years in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Retirement Board, he may
elect to leave his contributions in the fund and receive deferred retirement
proceeds under the appropriate option.
§ 37-6. Benefits. [Amended 4-27-1987]
The Employees' Retirement Board shall pay to each member who qualifies
under the rules and regulations of the Retirement Board an amount
determined by the rules and regulations of the Retirement Board.
§ 37-7. Disability benefits.
A. The Employees' Retirement Board shall pay to a member who has been
retired due to a disability received solely and exclusively as a result
of an accident or injury incurred during the course of his employment
a benefit during the term of such disability which, together with any
awards or payments received under the provision of the Workers'
Compensation Act,14 shall equal 50% of the member's annual base salary
at the time of such injury. [Amended 4-27-1987]
B. The Employees' Retirement Board shall pay to a member who has been
retired due to a disability received from a cause other than as a result
of an injury incurred during the course of his employment a benefit
as determined in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Retirement Board. [Amended 4-27-1987]
C. The Employees' Retirement Board may require the member to submit to
such medical examinations from time to time as it may deem necessary
and proper; and, if the Board finds that the retirant is no longer disabled,
it may order him to return to his employment, and all benefits payable
hereunder shall cease.
D. In order to provide benefits in the nature of workers' compensation
benefits, the Police and Fire Retirement Board shall pay to a regular
member of the Police or Fire Department who has been retired due to an
injury or sickness incurred in the course of such member's employment
a benefit during the term of such injury or sickness as provided for
in any bargaining unit labor agreement in effect at the time of such
injury or sickness. Any provision of any bargaining unit labor agreement
providing for benefits described in this § 37-7D are hereby incorporated
by reference as part of the Town Code as if more fully state herein.
[Added 12-16-1996]
§ 37-8. Death benefits. [Amended 4-27-1987]
Upon the death of a member of the system due solely and exclusively as
a result of an accident occurring during the course of his employment,
the surviving spouse shall receive an annual benefit equal to 1/2 of the
member's annual base salary. Such benefit shall be paid until the death
or remarriage of such spouse; and, if such spouse dies or remarries, the
benefit shall be paid to or in behalf of any surviving children during their
14.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 31-275 et seq.
§ 37-5 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-8
35:81
minority and until the deceased member's youngest child reaches the age
of 18. If a member dies before retirement from any cause other than as a
result of an accident occurring in the course of his employment, his legal
representative shall receive his contribution plus interest, provided that if
the member was eligible to retire at the time of his death, his spouse can
elect to receive an annual benefit instead of the member's contributions in
an amount determined as though the member had retired one day before
the date of death and had elected the 50% joint-and-survivor option.
§ 37-9. Benefit payments. [Amended 4-27-1987]
Benefit payments (except those elected under options) shall be payable
monthly for the life of the retirant, commencing the first of the month
following retirement and shall be guaranteed for a period of five years. If
the member dies from causes not incurred in the course of his employment
before receiving five years of payment benefits, his legal representative
shall be entitled to receive any unpaid remainder in monthly payments.
§ 37-10. Payment options. [Amended 4-27-1987]
At the time of retirement, any member may elect to convert the benefits
otherwise payable to him into a pension of equivalent actuarial value,
computed on the basis of such mortality tables and interest rates as shall be
adopted by the Employees' Retirement Board in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Retirement Board.
§ 37-11. Employees' Retirement Board. [Amended 10-26-1970]
A. The Employees' Retirement Board shall consist of nine voting members,
who shall be the following: the First Selectman; three members, one of
whom shall be from and chosen by members of the Board of Education,
one of whom shall be from and chosen by the remaining employee
members in the system, and one of whom shall be from and chosen
by the administrative employees of the Town, such members to serve
for terms of two years; and five members shall be appointed by the
First Selectman, with the approval of the Representative Town Meeting.
Such members appointed by the First Selectman shall serve for terms of
five years, provided that each of said members currently serving on the
Employees' Retirement Board shall serve until the expiration of his term.
B. All action taken by the Employees' Retirement Board shall be by majority
vote.
C. Any vacancy existing on the Employees' Retirement Board, either as a
result of death, resignation or removal from the Town or Town employ,
shall be filled for the expiration in the same manner as the original
appointment or designation.
D. The Employees' Retirement Board members shall serve without
compensation and shall have charge of the general direction and
management of the fund. Any portion of the fund may be invested by one
or more trust companies or banks authorized to conduct a trust business
in the state or may be deposited in any savings bank or trust companies
or state or national banks in this state or may be used to purchase life
§ 37-8 FAIRFIELD CODE § 37-11
35:82
insurance or endowment policies or annuity contracts issued by a life
insurance company authorized to transact business in this state. From
the retirement fund, the Employees' Retirement Board members shall,
from time to time, appropriate and cause to be paid to the beneficiaries
of the fund such sums as may be needed for paying pensions herein
provided for. The Town shall furnish such clerical, legal, actuarial or
medical assistance as the Employees' Retirement Board members shall
consider necessary to carry out the purpose of this article, subject to
such appropriations as shall be made in the manner provided for other
Town appropriations. The fiscal officer shall act as executive secretary to
the Employees' Retirement Board members but shall have no vote as an
Employees' Retirement Board member.
§ 37-12. Pension restrictions.
No member shall have the right to pledge, assign, transfer or create any
charge or lien upon his pension, nor shall such pension be subject to any
process of attachment or garnishment, nor shall such pension be paid to
any person except such employee, his surviving spouse, beneficiary or legal
representative or such other person provided for in this article.
§ 37-13. Adoption of rules and regulations; copies available.
[Amended 4-27-1987]
The Employees' Retirement Board is authorized and directed to adopt such
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, for
the effective operation of the retirement system. Such rules and regulations
shall be applicable to all employees of the Town as of the effective date
of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the
Representative Town Meeting. If not rejected by the Representative Town
Meeting within 60 days of submission, such rules and regulations shall
be deemed adopted. Such rules and regulations may be amended in the
same manner. Any such rules or regulations adopted by the Employees'
Retirement Board shall be printed and made available to any member of the
retirement system on request.
§ 37-11 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-13
35:83

ARTICLE II
Other Post-Employment Benefits Trusts
[Adopted 6-23-2008; amended in its entirety 6-22-2009]
§ 37-14. Authority; establishment.
A. Police and Fire. Pursuant to the authority granted to the Representative
Town Meeting of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut in § 4.1 of the
Fairfield Town Charter and § 7-450(b) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, there shall be created and established for such Town the Other
Post-Employment Benefits Trust (the "OPEB Trust") to fund certain
retiree benefits pursuant to the terms of previously established plans for
the benefit of certain employees and retirees of the Town's Police and
Fire Departments, their spouses and dependents (the "OPEB System").
B. Town employees. Pursuant to the authority granted to the
Representative Town Meeting of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut in
§ 4.1 of the Fairfield Town Charter and § 7-450(b) of the Connecticut
General Statutes, there shall be created and established for such Town
the Town Employees Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust (the
"Employees' OPEB Trust") to fund certain retiree benefits pursuant to
the terms of plans previously established pursuant to collective
bargaining agreements for the benefit of certain Town employees and
retirees, their spouses and dependents (the "OPEB Employees' System").
§ 37-15. Establishment of Other Post-Employment Benefits Boards.
A. Police and Fire. Immediately upon the enactment of this article, the
Police and Fire Retirement Board shall constitute the Other Post-
Employment Benefits Board for the OPEB Trust, hereinafter referred to
as the "OPEB Board." The members of said OPEB Board shall receive no
compensation for serving and shall serve terms coextensive with their
respective terms as members of the Police and Fire Retirement Board.
B. Town employees. Immediately upon the enactment of this article, the
Employees' Retirement Board shall constitute the Other Post-
Employment Benefits Board for the OPEB Town Employees Trust,
hereinafter referred to as the "OPEB Town Employees Board." The
members of said OPEB Town Employees Board shall receive no
compensation for serving and shall serve terms coextensive with their
respective terms as members of the Employees' Retirement Board.
§ 37-16. Powers and duties of the OPEB Boards and the co-trustees
of OPEB Trusts.
Each of the OPEB Boards shall perform the duties set forth in the respective
OPEB Trust Agreements, as amended from time to time, relating to the
management of the assets held in the respective OPEB Trusts. The
Chairman of each of the OPEB Boards and the Town's Fiscal Officer, as cotrustees
of the respective OPEB Trusts, shall perform the duties set forth
in the respective OPEB Trust Agreements, as amended from time to time,
relating to the care and custody of all funds held in the respective OPEB
Trusts, and shall have the power, with the approval of each of the OPEB
§ 37-14 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-16
35:85
Boards, to invest such funds in securities legal for investment for such trust
funds.
§ 37-17. Liability of Town.
The Town shall be liable to each of the OPEB Boards to pay the full amount
of the actuarially required contribution to fund the post employment
benefits for the beneficiaries of the respective OPEB Trusts over a period of
four fiscal years commencing in Fiscal Year 2010.
§ 37-16 FAIRFIELD CODE § 37-17
35:86
ARTICLE III
Joint Retirement Investment Board
[Adopted 9-21-2009]
§ 37-18. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to Article III:
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST — The meaning given to it in § 37-24.
ERRORS AND OMISSIONS INSURANCE — Insurance protecting the
insured from negligent acts or negligent failures to act by professional
consultants and advisors.
FIDELITY BOND — A bond or other equivalent insurance obtained by a
fiduciary to protect the insured against theft or other wrongful use of the
funds for the benefit of a party other than the insured.
FUNDING AGENT — A bank, trust company, or other depository institution
acting as a custodian of one or more of the Funds in whole or in part.
FUND — Any of the following and "Funds" means two or more of them:
FUND and FUNDS — Also includes the Police and Fire Retirement Plan
Fund created under Section of 10.7 of the Town of Fairfield Charter and the
Police and Fire OPEB Trust Fund created under Chapter 37, Article II, so
long as the direction has been made pursuant to § 37-19B.
INVESTMENT ADVISOR — A corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, or limited liability partnership registered with the United States
Securities and Exchange Commission under the Investment Advisors Act of
1940 selected by the Investment Board after a request for qualifications
published by the Town Purchasing Authority.
INVESTMENT BOARD — The Joint Retirement Investment Board
established by § 37-19.
INVESTMENT MANAGER — A corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, or limited liability partnership, including banks or insurance
companies, selected by the Investment Board after consultation with the
Investment Advisor to invest the Funds.
INVESTMENT POLICY — The Investment Policy and Guidelines adopted by
the Investment Board pursuant to § 37-21D, as it may exist from time to
time.
OPEB — Other post-employment benefit.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The Town as administrator of the Employees'
Retirement System, the Police and Fire Retirement Plan, and the OPEBs.
Employees' Retirement System Trust Fund created under Chapter 37,
Article I.
A.
B. Employees' OPEB Trust Fund created under Chapter 37, Article II.
§ 37-18 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-19
35:87
§ 37-19. Establishment.
A. The Town hereby establishes the Joint Retirement Investment Board to
manage the Funds.
B. Upon the direction of the Town of Fairfield Police and Fire Retirement
Board, the Investment Board shall also manage their Funds.
§ 37-20. Membership, organization, and voting.
A. The Investment Board shall consist of the members of the Employees'
Retirement Board, acting as trustees of both Funds, and, so long as the
direction has been made pursuant to § 37-19B, the members of the Town
of Fairfield Police and Fire Retirement Board, acting as trustees of both
of their funds, as such Boards may be composed from time to time.
B. The Investment Board shall provide to each of its new members an
orientation as to the purpose, duties, methods and ethics of the
Investment Board, as well as to the investments and performance of
the Funds. The orientation shall be provided within 60 days after the
member's date of appointment.
C. The Investment Board shall appoint a Chair and Vice Chair from among
the Investment Board members. The term of office of the Chair and Vice
Chair shall be one year, renewable at the discretion of the Investment
Board.
D. The Town shall provide, at the Investment Board's expense, a secretary
who shall record the minutes of the regular meetings and any special
meetings of the Investment Board. The secretary shall maintain the
Investment Board's decisions, votes and actions. All such documents
shall be in the custody of the Town Clerk.
E. The Investment Board shall hold no fewer than four meetings per
calendar year. Special meetings may be called by the Chair, or at the
request of seven or more members, giving at least five days' notice of
the time and place of such special meeting to each Investment Board
member and the Town Clerk.
F. A quorum for any meeting of the Investment Board shall be a majority
of the members of the Investment Board, with the Chair or Vice Chair
being present. If the direction has been made pursuant to § 37-19B,
no quorum shall exist unless there are present at least three members
representing the Police and Fire Retirement Board and at least five
members representing the Employees' Retirement Board. The First
Selectman may qualify as a representative from either Board, but not
both, for purposes of constituting a quorum.
G. The decisions of the Investment Board shall be taken by majority vote of
the Investment Board members present at the meeting. Each member,
including the First Selectman, has only one vote.
H. The Investment Board may establish such subcommittees as it deems
advisable to conduct the business of the Investment Board.
§ 37-21. Powers and duties.
A. The Investment Board shall be the trustees of their respective Funds and
shall have full control and management of such Funds, with the power to
§ 37-19 FAIRFIELD CODE § 37-21
35:88
combine such Funds and to invest and reinvest the same in accordance
with the General Statutes respecting the investment of trust funds.
B. The Chief Fiscal Officer shall keep an accounting of the relative,
indivisible ownership of the Funds among the trusts that contributed to
the Funds.
C. The Investment Board shall discharge its duties solely in the interests
of the members and their beneficiaries and for the exclusive purpose of
providing benefits to the eligible members. The Investment Board shall
manage the Funds in accordance with the Investment Policy.
D. The Investment Board shall establish a statement of Investment Policy
and Guidelines that shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The Investment
Policy shall, at a minimum, set forth:
(1) The return and risk tolerance objectives of the Funds.
(2) Fund performance criteria.
(3) The eligible types of investments for the Funds.
(4) Target strategic asset ranges for the various types of investments.
(5) The credit and custodial risk policies for the Funds.
(6) Procedures for reducing investments in a type of investment when
the target allocation to that type has been exceeded.
(7) Acceptable types of insurance and ratings of insurers as provided in
§ 37-22A.
E. The Investment Policy shall be reviewed and either ratified or modified
at the first meeting of the Investment Board in each fiscal year, and at
such other times as deemed prudent by the Investment Board. Revision
dates shall be noted on the face of the Investment Policy. Any changes to
the asset allocation shall be deemed revisions and shall be noted in the
same manner as other revisions.
F. The Investment Board shall:
(1) Retain and monitor the performance of a qualified Investment
Advisor;
(2) Appoint the Funding Agent;
(3) Select Investment Managers; and
(4) Employ, as necessary, actuaries, attorneys, accountants and other
consultants, who shall not be fiduciaries merely as a result of their
employment hereunder.
G. In the event that the Investment Board's contractual relationship with
the Investment Advisor terminates, the Investment Board shall retain
a successor Investment Advisor in a reasonable period of time. Within
30 days after such termination, a request for qualifications shall be
published. The absence of an Investment Advisor shall not invalidate any
decision, contract or other matter pertaining to the Funds investment by
the Investment Board.
H. The Investment Board shall impose the following insurance
requirements:
(1) The Investment Advisor, Funding Agent and all Investment
Managers shall maintain errors and omissions insurance and fidelity
bonds and provide evidence to the Investment Board or, in the case
of the Investment Managers, to the Investment Advisor annually that
§ 37-21 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-21
35:89
such insurance and bonds are in effect and in compliance with the
Investment Policy.
(2) All other consultants shall maintain errors and omissions insurance
and provide evidence to the Investment Board annually that such
insurance is in effect and in compliance with the Investment Policy.
I. Expenses and fees properly incurred by the Investment Board in the
performance of its duties shall be paid from the Funds.
§ 37-22. Delegated powers.
A. The Investment Advisor shall:
(1) Recommend on all matters relating to the investment of the Funds;
(2) Advise the Investment Board on the development, review and
revision of the Investment Policy;
(3) Monitor the performance of the Investment Managers against
benchmarks, and recommend rebalancing of assets as necessary;
(4) Recommend issues relating to investment strategies, including the
hiring, retention or dismissal of Investment Managers;
(5) Provide advice and support on the selection and performance criteria
to be established for Investment Managers;
(6) Perform due diligence, and other procedures on each Investment
Manager;
(7) Obtain and review audited financial statements of all investments,
excluding separately managed accounts, on a timely basis;
(8) Obtain evidence of errors and omission insurance and fidelity bonds
for all Investment Managers; and
(9) Perform any other functions which are specifically allocated to it in
its agreement with the Investment Board.
B. The Funding Agent shall:
(1) Maintain custody of the Funds;
(2) Settle trades and receive and credit dividends, interest and other
income;
(3) Disburse benefits as instructed by the Plan Administrator or its
agent;
(4) Pay expenses as directed by the Investment Board; and
(5) Perform any other functions which are specifically allocated to it in
its agreement with the Investment Board.
§ 37-23. Reporting.
A. Within the first three months of each fiscal year, the Investment Board
shall present to the Representative Town Meeting an annual report on
the following:
(1) The current Investment Policy and any revisions made to it in the
prior year;
(2) The investment performance of the Funds in the prior year;
(3) All incurred expenses; and
(4) A summary report of any conflicts of interest reported in the prior
year.
§ 37-21 FAIRFIELD CODE § 37-23
35:90
B. The Investment Board shall submit to the Board of Selectmen and Board
of Finance a quarterly statement of fund performance. The statement
shall disclose:
(1) Balances of funds;
(2) Rates of return for the quarter presented;
(3) Increase and/or decrease of fund balances compared to the prior
quarter; and
(4) A description of the investments maintained and compliance with the
Investment Board's determined asset mix policy.
§ 37-24. Conflicts of interest.
A. No Investment Board member will engage in conduct, known as a
conflict of interest, which would cause him or her to use his or her
position and influence on the Investment Board for personal gain for the
benefit of others instead of the best interests of the members and/or
their beneficiaries.
B. Annually, each Investment Board member shall sign a statement that
either the member has no conflicts of interest or, if the member may have
a conflict, discloses the nature and details of any actual or perceived
conflicts of interest with respect to the member's role on the Investment
Board. In addition, disclosure shall be made to the Investment Board
as soon as practicable after the member discovers a conflict of interest.
Upon disclosure, the Investment Board shall inform the Board of
Selectman who shall then determine a suitable course of action.
C. Conflicts of interest shall not arise out of an Investment Board member's
(i) participation in the Employees' Retirement System or the Police and
Fire Retirement Fund, nor (ii) ownership of an investment also made by
the Investment Board, provided that such investment does not constitute
more than 5% of the net worth of such Investment Board member, nor
more than 5% of the ownership of such investment.
D. The failure of a person to comply with the procedures described in this
section will not of itself invalidate any decision, contract or other matter
pertaining to the Fund's investment.
§ 37-23 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-24
35:91

ARTICLE IV
Retirement Savings Plans Other Than Retirement System
[Adopted 10-26-2015]
§ 37-25. Retirement savings plans.
A. Separate from the retirement system of the Town established in this
Chapter 37, the Representative Town Meeting shall approve retirement
savings plans, including money purchase pension plans, for purposes of
providing eligible employees of the Town, including eligible employees
working for the Board of Education, with retirement savings plans other
than the retirement system that enable such eligible employees to
participate in such retirement savings plans that satisfy the
requirements of Section 401(a), Section 457, 403(b) or any other
applicable section of the Internal Revenue Code.
B. With respect to any retirement savings plan referenced in Subsection
A above approved by the Representative Town Meeting, the Board of
Selectmen shall have exclusive authority thereafter in all matters
pertaining to the administration, operation, oversight or management of
such plan, but such authority of the Board of Selectmen shall not include
the adoption, design (including but not limited to setting and approval
of Town contribution amounts), redesign, amendment (including
amendments that specify or vary the provisions of a plan that apply to
different individual employees, groups or categories of Town employees,
including those working for the Board of Education), or termination of
such plan. To the extent designated in the terms of such plan, the Board
of Selectmen or its designee shall also serve as the plan administrator
of the plan, with such responsibilities, as set forth in the plan document,
that are not inconsistent with the Board of Selectmen's authority as
specified in this Subsection B.
§ 37-25 REAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT § 37-25
35:93
Chapter 39
SHELLFISH COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Harbor Management Area — See Ch. 24,
§ 24-14B.
Leasing of offshore shellfish grounds — See
Ch. 35, § 35-7J.
§ 39-1. Establishment; membership; terms. [Amended 1-27-1997]
The Town of Fairfield establishes a Shellfish Commission as provided for in
Section 26-257a of the Connecticut General Statutes, consisting of seven
members who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and who shall
each serve for a five-year term or until their successors are appointed,
except that commencing with the 1996 year, two of the initial members shall
be appointed for terms to expire in November 1999, and two of the initial
members shall be appointed for terms to expire in November 2000; and
commencing with the 1997 year, two of the remaining initial members shall
be appointed for terms to expire in November 2001, and the one remaining
initial member shall be appointed for a term to expire in November 2002.
Chapter 39A
TOWN FACILITIES COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
§ 39A-1. Establishment; membership; terms.
A. There is hereby established a Town Facilities Commission (TFC) charged
with the implementation of building projects.
B. Members of the TFC shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, with
approval by the Representative Town Meeting. The TFC shall consist of
not more than nine persons and one alternate person who are electors
of the Town of Fairfield and have experience with building projects.
This shall include, but not be limited to, construction trades, general
contracting, construction management, architecture, engineering and
finance. Each nominee shall detail such pertinent experience for the
nomination process. The term of membership shall be three years. No
person shall be appointed for more than three successive full terms.
Terms shall run from July 1 to June 30, and members not replaced
shall continue to serve until a new member is appointed and qualifies.
Upon creation of this Commission, terms shall be staggered with two
members' terms expiring in each of the first two years and three
members' terms expiring in the third year. The First Selectman or his/
§ 37-25 FAIRFIELD CODE § 39A-1
39:94
her designee shall serve ex officio on the TFC. The alternate shall serve
in place of absent regular members. Upon approval of the amendment
which increases the Board from seven to nine members and one
alternate, one new member's term and the alternate's term will expire
in three years. The other new member's term will expire in two years.
Thereafter, all shall serve three-year terms. [Amended 4-23-2001]
§ 39A-2. Powers and duties.
A. Project assignments. The TFC may create project building (sub-
)committees (PBC's) of less than its full membership for the
implementation of individual building projects. One to three members of
a feasibility committee (having been previously appointed by the Board
of Selectmen) for a project shall be assigned to a PBC, by appointment
of the TFC. For Townprojects, the First Selectman may designate a
representative to such PBC. For Board of Education projects, the
Superintendent of Schools may designate a representative. The TFC may
request additional members of the PBC, which the Board of Selectmen
may appoint, subject to Representative Town Meeting approval. The
TFC may request the assistance of public officials or employees (such
as purchasing, legal, building or Fire Marshal staff) in carrying out its
duties.
B. Town Facilities Commission operations.
(1) The TFC may request annual funding for clerical or professional
services through the Townbudget process or at the point of funding a
building project. A budget line item shall appear in the Public Works
budget.
(2) The TFC shall meet at least monthly. The regular monthly meeting
schedule shall be provided to the Town Clerk immediately after
its December meeting. Any additional meetings shall be noticed in
accordance with the Freedom of Information Act.15 The TFC shall
make every effort to provide ample notice to the public of such
additional meetings.
(3) The TFC shall provide a standardized report (which shall include
all minutes from the previous month's meetings) to the Board of
Selectmen on a monthly basis, regarding the status of all building
projects. The Board of Finance, Representative Town Meeting and
Board of Education (on school projects) may also request updates
from the TFC.
(4) The TFC shall be available to Townand Board of Education staff as a
resource regarding facility planning, facility management and utility
conservation.
(5) Personal interest.
(a) A member of the TFC may not vote on or participate in the
discussion of a building project in his/her capacity as a member
of the TFC in the following circumstances:
[1] He/she is awarded a contract or his/her bid is selected to
provide services for the project.
[2] His/her company is awarded a contract or its bid is selected
to provide services for the project.
§ 39A-1 TOWN FACILITIES COMMISSION § 39A-2
39A:95
(b) Under no circumstance may a member discuss or vote on the
awarding of a contract or selection of a bid in which he/she has
a personal interest. Every member shall read the Town Charter,
Article XI, Standards of Conduct, and sign a statement that
he/she has read and understands the standards. [Amended
10-26-1998]
(6) The process to be followed on any building project shall be generally
in accordance with the flow chart as may be amended from time to
time by the Board of Selectmen.16
Chapter 40
TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Charter, § 9.15. Taxation — See Ch. 95.
15.Editor's Note: See C.G.S. § 1-210 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: The flow chart is located in the Townoffices.
§ 39A-2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 39A-2
40:96
ARTICLE I
Powers and Duties
[Adopted 3-23-1992]
§ 40-1. Collection of user charges.
The Tax Collector shall be designated the Collector of Water Pollution
Control Authority user charges in accordance with the provisions of the
General Statutes for the collection of property taxes.
§ 40-1 TAX COLLECTOR § 40-1
40:97
Chapter 40A
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 40A-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Adult-Oriented Establishments
Ordinance for the Town of Fairfield."
§ 40A-2. Policy statement.
The Representative Town Meeting of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut
(hereinafter the "RTM"), finds:
A. There are presently and may in the future be adult-oriented
establishments, as hereinafter defined, located in the Town of Fairfield,
which establishments require special supervision from the Town's public
safety agencies in order to protect and preserve the health, safety and
welfare of the patrons of such establishments, as well as the health,
safety and welfare of the Town's citizens.
B. Statistics and studies performed by a substantial number of cities and
Towns in the United States indicate that:
(1) Large numbers of persons, primarily male, frequent such adultoriented
establishments, especially those which provide closed
booths, cubicles, studios and rooms for the private viewing of socalled
"adult" motion pictures and/or videotapes and/or live
entertainment; and
(2) Such closed booths, cubicles, studios and rooms have been used by
patrons, clients or customers of such adult-oriented establishments
for the purpose of engaging in certain sexual acts; and
(3) Male and female prostitutes have been known to frequent such
establishments in order to provide sex for hire to the patrons, clients
or customers of such establishments within such booths, cubicles
and rooms; and
(4) Such establishments attract an undesirably large number of
transients as customers, leading to an increase in crime, particularly
prostitution, and an adverse effect particularly on residential
neighborhoods; and
(5) Doors, curtains, blinds and/or other closures installed in or on the
entrances and/or exits of such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms
which are closed while such booths, cubicles, studios and rooms are
in use encourage patrons using such booths, cubicles, studios and
rooms to engage in sexual acts therein with prostitutes and/or with
other persons, thereby promoting and encouraging prostitution and
the commission of sexual acts which cause blood, semen and urine
to be deposited on the floors and/or walls of such booths, cubicles,
studios and rooms, which deposits could prove detrimental to the
health and safety of other persons who may come into contact with
such deposits; and
(6) The reasonable regulation and supervision of such adult-oriented
establishments tends to discourage such sexual acts and
§ 40-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 40A-2
40A:98
prostitution, and thereby promotes the health, safety and welfare of
the patrons, clients and customers of such establishments.
C. The continued unregulated operation of such adult-oriented
establishments is and would be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Fairfield.
D. The Constitution and laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the Town
powers, especially regulatory and police powers, to enact reasonable
legislation and measures to regulate and supervise such adult-oriented
establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
E. It is not the intent of the RTM, in enacting this chapter, to deny to
any person rights to speech protected by the United States and/or state
constitutions, nor is it the intent of the RTM to impose any additional
limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative
materials, including sexually-oriented films, videotapes, books and/or
other materials. Further, by enacting this chapter, the RTM does not
intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view
any sexually-oriented materials protected by the United States and/
or state constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any
constitutionally-protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such
sexually-oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit such
materials.
§ 40A-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the
context:
ADULT AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any amusement machine, as
defined below, that is regularly used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes or magazines
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented motion
pictures, live performance, display or dance of any type, which has as
a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or
simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition and
viewing of specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of less than 50 persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons herein.
§ 40A-2 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 40A-3
40A:99
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, without limitation, adult
bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters and adult mini motion-picture
theaters and further means any premises to which the public, patrons or
members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as
to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls separate
from the common areas of the premises for the purposes of viewing adult
entertainment, any premises to which the public, patrons or members are
invited or admitted wherein an adult amusement machine is located, and
any premises wherein an entertainer, as defined below, provides adult
entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when
such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a
profit, direct or indirect, regardless of how such premises are advertised or
represented, but including, without limitation, adult entertainment studio,
rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Includes any machine which, upon the payment
of a charge or upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may
be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not electronically
operated, and shall include but not be limited to such devices as pinball
machines, skillball, mechanical grab machines, any and all air-propelled
machines or games, pool tables, shooting games, any and all video games
and all other games and operations similar thereto under whatever name
they may be indicated, including video monitoring machines.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who
work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an
adult-oriented establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who engages in the performance of adult
entertainment within an adult-oriented establishment, as defined in this
section, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment
and whether or not such person is an employee or an independent
contractor.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the Public Health Department authorized
and designated by the Director of Health, or the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, or an employee of the Fairfield Building Department or a member of
the Fairfield Police Department, or the Fairfield Fire Marshal, or an agent of
any or all of such persons who is designated to inspect premises regulated
under this chapter, and to take the required actions authorized by this
chapter in case of violations being found on such premises, and to require
corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found on said premises.[Amended
10-26-1998]
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 40A-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 40A-3
40A:100
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership or corporation operating,
conducting or maintaining an adult-oriented establishment.
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — As used in this chapter, is not intended to include
any medical publications or films or bona fide educational publication or
films; nor does it include any art or photography publications which devote
at least 25% of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements
dealing with subjects of art or photography; nor does this definition apply to
any news periodical which reports or describes current events and which,
from time to time, publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons
in connection with the dissemination of the news; nor does this definition
apply to publications or films which describe and report different cultures
and which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions
of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or
seminudity is indigenous to the population.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
§ 40A-4. Operating requirements.
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
or permit any minor to loiter in any part of such establishment, including
parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used by patrons
of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on and
after June 15, 1996, shall be well lighted at all times and shall be
physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion
of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is
provided shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises.
Visibility into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked
or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths,
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic regions.
(2) Buttocks.
Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks
or female breasts.
C.
§ 40A-3 ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS § 40A-4
40A:101
cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented establishments for the
purpose of providing for adult entertainment.
C. On and after June 15, 1996, the operator of each adult-oriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room
or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented pictures
or other types of adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily
accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its
entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and its
agents to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
D. Every act or omission committed by an employee constituting a violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of
the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be subject to penalties for such act or omission in the same manner
as if the operator had committed the act or caused the omission.
E. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Fairfield Police Department, inspectors
employed by the Town or such other persons as the RTM may designate.
F. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less
than 500 feet from an area zoned residential.
G. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less
than 500 feet from any preexisting residential dwelling, public or private
school, place of worship, public library or public park.
H. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less
than 1,000 feet from an existing adult-oriented establishment.
§ 40A-5. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have violated this
chapter shall be fined a definite sum not exceeding $100 for each such
violation.
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to limit any remedy
the Town may have for the enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 41
AIRCRAFT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise from aircraft — See Ch. 78, § 78-9.
§ 40A-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 40A-5
41:102
§ 41-1. Taking off or landing restricted.
The taking off or landing of any passenger or freight-carrying airplanes,
helicopters and any other kind of aircraft registered by the Federal Aviation
Administration or any other governmental agency is prohibited in the Town
of Fairfield, except as follows:
A. In emergencies.
B. By federal, state or local government officials or their authorized agents
in the exercise of governmental responsibilities.
C. For public purposes when authorized by a permit issued by the Chief to
or Acting Chief of Police.
§ 41-2. Issuance of permits.
The Chief or Acting Chief of Police shall issue such permits only after he
has:
A. Ascertained that the permit has been requested for a valid public
purpose.
B. Determined that adequate safety precautions have been provided.
§ 41-3. Legislative intent.
The intention of this chapter is to provide for the public well-being and
safety of the citizens of the Town of Fairfield and to prohibit the landing and
taking off of said aircraft by individuals, groups or corporations for their
private use.
§ 41-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PASSENGER — Includes any pilot or copilot.
PUBLIC PURPOSES — Shall not include any regular or scheduled flights.
§ 41-5. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not affect uses authorized by the Town of Fairfield prior
to January 1, 1972.
§ 41-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $100 for each violation.
§ 40A-5 AIRCRAFT § 41-6
41:103
Chapter 43
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Director of Health — See Charter, § 9-18. Board of Health — See Charter, § 10.9.
§ 43-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy in the Town to preserve, protect
and improve the air resources of the Town so as to promote health, safety,
comfort and welfare, prevent injury or detriment to human health, plant and
animal life and property and to foster the comfort and convenience of the
Town's inhabitants.
§ 43-2. Powers and duties of Director of Health.
The Director of Health, in addition to any other powers vested in him by law,
shall have and may exercise the following powers and duties in accordance
with provisions of this chapter. He may:
A. Develop a comprehensive program for the prevention and control of air
pollution in the Town.
B. Pursuant to regulations adopted by the Board of Health, require any
person to submit to him for approval plans, specifications and other
data related to construction, modification or use of any article, machine,
equipment, facility or installation which may cause emission of air
pollutants.
C. Issue, modify, revoke or enforce orders requiring compliance with this
chapter or rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to authority
granted hereunder.
D. Enforce compliance with the laws of the state and rules or regulations
promulgated thereunder relating to air pollution.
E. Advise, consult and cooperate with other agencies of the Town, political
subdivisions of the state, industries, agencies of the state, the federal
government and affected groups and persons in furtherance of the
purposes of this chapter.
F. Encourage and conduct studies and research relating to air pollution
and conservation of the air resource.
G. Investigate complaints about air pollution and secure abatement of the
cause thereof.
H. Collect and disseminate information relating to air pollution and
conservation of the air resource.
I. Encourage voluntary cooperation by people, industries, other agencies
of the Town and others in preventing and controlling air pollution in the
Town.
J. Enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the
purpose of investigating conditions relating to air pollution.
§ 41-6 FAIRFIELD CODE § 43-2
43:104
K. Accept, receive and administer funds, grants or gifts from public or
private agencies, including the federal government, for the purpose of
carrying out any of the functions provided in this chapter. Such funds
received by the Director of Health shall be deposited with the fiscal
officer of the Town and held in a special account established for air
pollution control activities of the Department of Health.
L. Represent the Town in any and all matters relating to air pollution.
M. Appoint, convene and dissolve special advisory groups to consider and
report on any matters relating to air pollution.
N. Employ personnel, purchase equipment, supplies and materials and
enter into contracts to carry out purposes of this chapter in
conformance with any practices of the Town applicable to the
Department of Health.
O. Carry out all other activities as may be necessary to carry out this
chapter and rules and regulations promulgated by the Board of Health.
P. Designate a member of his staff to inspect, investigate, prepare reports
and perform any other duties required to carry out the purposes of this
chapter or to enforce rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
§ 43-3. Powers of Board of Health.
In addition to any other powers vested in it by law, the Board of Health shall
have power to:
A. Issue, amend and repeal all rules and regulations for the prevention,
control and abatement of air pollution and conservation of air resources
in accordance with provisions of this chapter and in accordance with
powers granted it under the Charter of the Town.
B. Adopt, promulgate, modify and repeal air quality standards for the Town
not inconsistent with state law or rules and regulations of the Public
Health Council.
C. Prohibit the installation, alteration or use of any machine, equipment,
device or other article that it finds may cause or contribute to air
pollution or is intended primarily to prevent or control the emission of air
pollutants unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the Director
of Health.
D. By rules and regulations, provide for the issuance, suspension and
revocation and renewal of any permits that it may require pursuant to
this section.
Chapter 45
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Civil defense warning signals — See Ch. 61. Noise — See Ch. 78.
§ 45-1. Purpose; applicability.
§ 43-2 AIR POLLUTION § 45-1
43:105
A. The purpose of this Alarms Chapter is to encourage security alarm
users to maintain the operational reliability and the proper use of alarm
systems in limiting unnecessary responses to false alarms.
B. This chapter governs burglary, robbery and alarm systems, provides
penalties for violators and establishes a system of administration.
§ 45-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and vice versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — A person or persons designated by the
Chief of Police to administer, control and review false alarm notifications.
ALARM OWNER/USER — Any person, firm, corporation or other
business entity who or which controls, operates or maintains any alarm
system.
ALARM (MONITORING) STATION — An office to which remote alarm
devices transmit signals where operators monitor those signals and relay
information to the Police Department.
ALARM SYSTEMS — An assembly of equipment and devices, or a single
device, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which Police Department personnel are expected to
respond. Excluded from this definition are smoke detectors, alarm
systems on motor vehicles and boats and alarm systems which signal the
presence of a fire.[Amended 1-28-2019]
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING ALARM — An alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines a prerecorded voice
message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency
situation the alarm system is designed to detect.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system to which the Police
Department responds and which is not caused by a criminal act or
other emergency. This does not include the activation of an alarm by
circumstances normally attributed to extreme weather conditions or a
prolonged power outage of four hours or more.17
KEY HOLDER — Any person holding the key or keys necessary to gain
ingress to and egress from the site of the alarm system by permission of
the alarm owner/user.
§ 45-3. Requirements.
17.Editor’s Note: The definition of “fiscal year,” which immediately followed was repealed
1-28-2019.
§ 45-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 45-3
43:106
A. No alarm system shall be installed by other than a licensed person or
other person meeting the requirements set forth in the Building and
Electrical Codes of the State of Connecticut.18
B. No alarm system shall be installed unless a permit has been obtained
from the Town of Fairfield Building Official or his designated
representative, as is required by the Building and Electrical Codes of the
State of Connecticut.
C. All alarm monitoring stations are responsible for contacting key holders.
This shall not be the responsibility of the Town of Fairfield or its agents.
§ 45-4. Automatic telephone dialing alarms prohibited.
Automatic dialing services coming directly into the communications center
of the Police Department are prohibited in the Town of Fairfield.
§ 45-5. Timing devices.
A. Except as otherwise provided by law, no alarm system which produces
an exterior audible sound shall be installed unless its operation is
automatically deactivated after no more than 15 minutes of operation.
B. Within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter, preexisting alarm
systems which produce audible sound shall be retrofitted so that they are
automatically deactivated after no more than 15 minutes of operation.
§ 45-6. Auxiliary power.
A. All alarm systems installed after the effective date of this chapter shall
have their own auxiliary rechargeable power source that meets or
exceeds Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., standards of at least four
hours' duration, which shall be maintained in good working order.
B. Within 60 days from the effective date of the chapter, preexisting alarms
shall be retrofitted to have an auxiliary rechargeable power source that
meets or exceeds Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., standards of at least
four hours' backup power.
§ 45-7. False alarms. [Amended 1-28-2019]
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Police Department to monitor and
keep records of the alarms received. In order to discourage false alarms,
the following schedule shall be set forth: after two false alarms in the
course of a one-year period, measured from the date of the first false
alarm, a letter will be sent to said alarm owner/user informing the alarm
owner/user that any further issuance of false alarms will incur a penalty
and warning the alarm owner/user that the alarm system should be
inspected and the Police Department notified of corrective action taken.
B. A Fairfield Police Department alarm report copy will be issued upon each
response to alarmed premises and will suffice as notification of alarm
activation.
C. For the third false alarm in the course of a one-year period, measured
from the date of the first alarm, the alarm owner/user shall be fined $50.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 56, Buildings, Art. II, State Basic Building Code.
§ 45-3 AIR POLLUTION § 45-7
43:107
D. For the fourth false alarm in the course of a one-year period, measured
from the date of the first alarm, the alarm owner/user shall be fined $75
per false alarm.
E. For the fifth false alarms in the course of a one-year period, measured
from the date of the first false alarm, the alarm owner/user shall be fined
$100.
F. For the sixth false alarm in the course of a one-year period, measured
from the date of the first false alarm, the alarm owner/user shall be fined
$125.
G. If the alarm owner/user causes more than seven false alarms in the
course of a one-year period, measured from the date of the first false
alarm, the alarm owner/user shall be fined $150 for the seventh false
alarm and each subsequent false alarm that occurs during the course of
that one-year period.
H. Failure to pay any such charges within 30 days shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, and the alarm owner/user is subject to an
additional fine of $125.
I. A thirty-day grace period will be granted for all newly installed burglary
alarm systems. During that time, no penalty shall be assessed.
Additional time may be granted by the Chief (or designee). The grace
period begins on the date the newly installed alarm is inspected and
approved by the Town of Fairfield Building Department.
§ 45-8. Intentional false alarms.
A. No person shall knowingly or intentionally activate any alarm system
when no police emergency exists. Any person who violates this
subsection shall be fined $125 and, when applicable, may be additionally
subject to prosecution under the Connecticut General Statutes for falsely
reporting an incident. [Amended 1-28-2019]
B. No person shall knowingly or intentionally test, repair, adjust, alter or
perform maintenance on an alarm system, or cause the same to be
tested, repaired, adjusted, altered or maintained, if such action results
in a false alarm, without first notifying the Police Department and/
or monitoring company of such test, repair, adjustment, alteration or
maintenance. When there is a reasonable need to consider public safety,
the Chief (or designee) may restrict or refuse to permit the testing,
repair, adjustment, alteration or maintenance.
(1) Any person who violates Subsection B will be issued one warning.
(2) The second and subsequent false alarms (per this subsection) shall
be fined $125. [Amended 1-28-2019]
§ 45-9. Appeals; hearing.
A. Whenever a charge for a false alarm is imposed against the alarm owner/
user, said alarm owner/user may, within 30 days of imposition, appeal the
charge by filing a written notice of appeal with the Alarm Administrator.
A hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days of receipt of the appeal.
B. This hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer(s). Hearing officers
are to be appointed by and to serve at the pleasure of the First
Selectman. All hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the
§ 45-7 FAIRFIELD CODE § 45-9
43:108
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, Section 7-152c, as
amended.
§ 45-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-28-2019]
In addition to the other penalties specifically provided in this chapter, any
person who performs or causes to be performed any of the following acts
shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $125 for each such act.
A. Failure to meet the requirements set forth in the provisions of § 45-3A
and B.
B. Use of an automatic dial alarm, in violation of the provisions of § 45-4.
C. Failure to install or maintain an exterior audible timing device, in
violation of the provisions of § 45-5.
D. Failure to install or maintain an auxiliary power source as mandated by
§ 45-6.
E. Failure to make timely payment of fines in violation of § 45-7. This
penalty is in addition to the original fine.
§ 45-11. Payment of fines.
A. Fines may be paid at police headquarters during business hours of 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. or through the mail. (Payment by mail should be made
by check or money order only; no cash.)19
§ 45-12. Failure to pay fines.
A. If any person fails to pay within 30 days any fine or charge imposed,
interest shall accrue at the highest rate allowed by law.
B. If, after a period of three months, an alarm owner/user fails to pay any
fine/charges, the matter will be turned over to the Town Attorney for
any legal action necessary for collection. The alarm owner/user will be
responsible for legal/court fees.
§ 45-13. Exceptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alarm devices owned and
operated by the Town or one of its departments or agencies, including
the Board of Education, the State of Connecticut or the United States of
America, nor to alarm devices installed in motor vehicles or boats, unless
said motor vehicles or boats are used as dwellings or businesses.
B. The department head having control over the building owned by the
Town of Fairfield or one of its agencies, the State of Connecticut or
the United States Government shall receive notification of false alarms
so that corrective measures may be taken to avoid future unnecessary
dispatches.
§ 45-14. Disclaimer of liability.
Except as expressly provided herein, the Town, its departments, officers,
agents and employees shall be under no obligation whatsoever concerning
19.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, which set forth a time during which data on alarms
was available, was repealed 1-28-2019.
§ 45-9 AIR POLLUTION § 45-14
43:109
the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any alarm system or central
monitoring station. No liability whatsoever is assumed for the failure of
such alarm systems or central monitoring station or for failure to respond
to alarms or for any other act or omission in connection with such alarm
systems. Each alarm owner/user shall be deemed to hold and save harmless
the Town, its departments, officers, agents and employees from liability in
connection with the alarm owner/user's alarm device.
§ 45-15. Annual registration requirement. [Added 1-28-2019]
All alarm owner/users shall be required to register their alarm system with
the Alarm Administrator on an annual basis by March 1 of each calendar
year. Any failure to register an alarm system in accordance with this section
shall constitute a violation of this section and may be punishable by a fine
of $100.
Chapter 46
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcohol on Board of
Education property — See Ch. 52.
§ 45-14 FAIRFIELD CODE § 45-15
46:110
ARTICLE I
Sunday Sales
[Adopted as Ch. 4 of the Code of the Town of Fairfield 1968]
§ 46-1. Certain sales permissible.
The sale of alcoholic liquor in hotels, restaurants and clubs, with meals, on
Sundays between the hours of 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m. shall be allowed
in the town, in accordance with the provisions of Section 30-91 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 46-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 46-1
46:111

ARTICLE II
Public Consumption
[Adopted 9-23-1991]
§ 46-2. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Fairfield
Ordinance Forbidding the Consumption of Alcoholic Liquor in and on Public
Highways, Sidewalks and Parking Areas."
§ 46-3. Policy.
It is hereby declared that alcoholic liquor may be a hazardous and
dangerous substance that affects the public health, safety and general
welfare of the town and its residents.
§ 46-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — The same meaning as set forth in Section 30-1 of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
PARKED VEHICLE — The same meaning as set forth in Section 14-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
PARKING AREA — Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use, with or
without charge.
POSSESSION WITH INTENT TO CONSUME — Having in one's possession
or control alcoholic liquor in a glass, open bottle, open can or other open
container so as to permit consumption.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — A highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard or other
public way within and/or under the control of the Town of Fairfield and open
to public use, including the sidewalks of any such highway, and shall include
the full highway limits, whether paved or unpaved.
§ 46-5. Prohibited acts.
A. No person shall consume or have in such person's possession with the
intent to consume any alcoholic liquor upon or within the limits of any
public highway or sidewalk or parking area within the town.
B. For the purposes of this article, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing Subsection A, the consumption of alcoholic liquor or the
possession with intent to consume alcoholic liquor in or on parked
vehicles within or upon a public highway, sidewalk or parking area, as
herein defined, is a violation hereof.
§ 46-6. Exceptions.
§ 46-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 46-6
46:113
A. The consumption of alcoholic liquor and possession with intent to
consume alcoholic liquor is permitted during any public function, festival
or celebration being conducted within a public highway, sidewalk or
parking area pursuant to written permit, issued by the Police Chief or
a person designated by the Chief to issue such permits, authorizing the
sale, service or distribution of alcoholic liquor at or in connection with
such function, festival or celebration.
B. Permits.
(1) An application for a permit shall be in writing, directed to the Police
Chief. The application shall state the name and address of
responsible officials of the organization sponsoring the function,
festival or celebration (event), shall specify the parts of the public
highway, sidewalk or parking area to be used during the event and
shall specify the beginning and ending time of the event and, if
it continues for more than one day, the people expected to be in
attendance at the event, whether the event is open to the public and
arrangements for supervision. The application shall be filed at least
10 business days before the first day of the event, and the permit
shall be issued or denied, in writing, at least five days before the first
day of the event.
(2) The permit shall be issued if all of the required information is
provided, if the application is made at least 10 business days before
the event and if the Police Chief or the Chiefs designee determines
that the event has secured all necessary permits, licenses and
approvals from all government authorities having jurisdiction,
including but not limited to the State Department of Liquor Control
and the zoning authorities, that either the applicant has a certificate
of insurance indemnifying and holding harmless the town from any
and all liability growing out of said event, with the granting of said
permit, or that a hold-harmless and indemnification agreement is
entered into and that the granting of the permit will be in accord
with the health, safety and welfare of the town.
(3) The Police Chief is authorized to issue additional guidelines and
standards for the issuance of said permit not inconsistent with this
section which, if not met, will result in denial of said permit.
C. The requirements of Subsection B may be waived by the Police Chief
for good cause shown in cases where it is found that the event does not
represent a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the town and the
Chief so informs the First Selectman.
§ 46-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this article, whether individual,
corporation, trust or other entity, shall be fined not less than $25 and not
more than $100.
§ 46-6 FAIRFIELD CODE § 46-7
46:114
Chapter 48
ANIMALS
§ 46-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 46-7
46:115

ARTICLE I
Dog Waste Removal
[Adopted 4-26-1999; amended in its entirety 10-23-2017]
§ 48-1. Removal of feces required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons owning, keeping or having
care, custody or control of any dog to allow or permit such animal to
defecate on any private property owned by another person, or condominium
common elements or any Town property whatsoever, including but not
limited to parks and school grounds, unless such person shall immediately
remove all feces so deposited by such animal and dispose of same in a
proper manner.
§ 48-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a guide or service dog
assisting a blind, hearing-impaired or mobility-impaired or disabled person.
§ 48-3. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of § 48-1 of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $100.
§ 48-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 48-3
46:117
Chapter 50
BEACHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Commission — See
Charter, § 10.10.
Violation of beach regulations — See Ch. 4,
§ 4-19B.
Designation of bathing areas — See Ch. 54,
§ 54-3.
§ 48-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 48-3
50:118
ARTICLE I
Public Bathing Beaches
[Adopted as Ch. 14 of the Code of the Town of Fairfield 1968]
§ 50-1. Establishment.
The following are hereby established as the public bathing beaches of the
Town:
A. Jennings Beach, which includes all of the shore land owned by the Town
between Beach Road and Ash Creek.
B. Sasco Hill Beach, which includes all of the shore land controlled by the
Town between the Riegel wall at the foot of Sasco Hill Road and the
beach of the Country Club of Fairfield.
C. Southport Beach, which includes all of the shore land owned by the Town
between land of the Sasquanag Association for Southport Improvements,
Inc., and the Fairfield - Westport Town line.
D. Riverside Park, which includes all of the land owned by the Town lying
east of Mill Plain Road between Brookside Drive and the Mill River.
§ 50-2. Authority of Parks and Recreation Commission;
establishment of regulations. [Amended 10-26-1998]
A. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have exclusive management
and control of the public bathing beaches of the Town and may establish
and, from time to time, amend or repeal reasonable regulations relating
to the use of such beaches and may establish a system of permits for
admission to such beaches. The free issuance of such permits shall be
restricted to residents of the Town and owners of property taxable in the
Town. The Parks and Recreation Commission may issue permits to others
upon the payment of a reasonable fee to be determined by the Parks and
Recreation Commission.
B. No such regulation or amendment thereof shall be effective until notice
of the adoption of such regulation or amendment shall have been
published in a newspaper having a circulation in the Town. Copies of
all regulations of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be kept on
file in the office of the Parks and Recreation Commission and shall be
available for public inspection.
§ 50-3. Compliance. [Amended 10-26-1998]
No person shall use any of the public bathing beaches of the Town except in
accordance with the regulations of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 50-1 BEACHES § 50-3
50:119

ARTICLE II
Lake Mohegan
[Adopted 12-19-1977]
§ 50-4. Identification required for access. [Amended 10-26-1998]
During the swimming season, access to Lake Mohegan Beach shall be
limited to those persons carrying a nontransferable identification device
issued by the Town of Fairfield, for a fee to be determined by the Parks and
Recreation Commission, provided that there is established a maximum fee
per family.
§ 50-5. Fee schedule in favor of residents. [Amended 10-26-1998]
The fee schedule, as determined by the Parks and Recreation Commission,
shall reflect a reasonable differentiation in favor of residents and/or
property owners of Fairfield.
§ 50-6. Issuance of regulations. [Amended 10-26-1998]
Within 90 days of its adoption, the Parks and Recreation Commission shall
issue reasonable regulations to implement this article.
§ 50-7. Motor vehicle beach stickers not required.
No motor vehicle beach stickers will be required for motor vehicles using
the parking lot at Lake Mohegan.
§ 50-4 BEACHES § 50-7
50:121
Chapter 51
BLIGHT PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Citations hearings — See Ch. 11.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 64.
Littering — See Ch. 72.
Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 86.
Unfit properties and structures — See Ch.
100.
§ 51-1. Statutory authority; purpose.
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town of
Fairfield under Connecticut Statutes § 7-148(7)(H)(xv).
B. This chapter prohibits any owner, agent tenant or person in control of
real property located in the Town of Fairfield from allowing, creating,
maintaining or causing to be created or maintained a blighted premise.
The chapter also establishes penalties for violations of this chapter.
§ 51-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them in this chapter.
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Real property, including any building or structure
located thereon, which is and continues to be in a state of disrepair or is
becoming dilapidated.
BLIGHT PREVENTION OFFICERS — The Town official or officials
designated by the First Selectman to act as blight prevention officer(s).
The Building Official, Fire Marshal and Director of Health shall be eligible
to be blight prevention officers. The First Selectman shall designate one
blight prevention officer to direct the blight prevention officers.[Amended
5-19-2014]
BUILDING or STRUCTURE — An edifice of any kind or any piece of work
artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some form which
is built or constructed on any real property. The words "building" and
"structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof."
Accessory buildings or structures, canopy, awnings, marquees, and each
and every type of portable equipment shall be considered "buildings" or
"structures" within the meaning of this definition.
STATE OF DISREPAIR or BECOMING DILAPIDATED — In a physically
deteriorating condition which, if left unabated, would cause an unsafe or
unsanitary condition or a nuisance to the general public which may be
evidenced by one or more of the following conditions:
A. Multiple missing, broken or boarded up windows and/or doors;
§ 50-7 FAIRFIELD CODE § 51-2
50:122
§ 51-3. Prohibition of blighted premises.
No owner, agent, tenant or person in control of real property located in the
Town of Fairfield shall allow, maintain, or cause to be maintained, a blighted
premises.
§ 51-4. Determination of violation.
A. Upon receiving a written complaint of a possible violation signed by the
complainant, the Blight Prevention Officer shall make an investigation.
B. If after investigation a probable violation is found to exist, the Blight
Prevention Officer shall serve written notice to the owner(s) and agent,
tenant and/or person in control of the real property where the violation
occurred. The notice shall be mailed by both regular mail and certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner(s)
and agent, tenant and/or person in control other than the legal owner(s).
A copy of such notice shall be sent to the Town Department of Social
Services when the Blight Prevention Officer deems it appropriate.
[Amended 3-23-2009]
C. Such notice shall state the probable violation(s) and the conditions
evidencing such violations and require the person to whom it is delivered
to attend a hearing before the Town Condemnation Board to determine
whether there has been a violation and, if so, to establish a plan for
abatement of such violation, including the date by which such violation
shall be fully abated.
D. After the hearing the Town Condemnation Board shall make a written
determination whether a violation has [in fact] occurred, the actions to
be taken to abate such violation and the date by which such violation
shall be fully abated. The date by which such violation shall be fully
abated shall not be less than 30 days from the date the written
determination is mailed.
B. Collapsing or missing walls or roof;
C. Seriously damaged or missing siding;
D. Fire or water damage;
E. Infestation by rodents or other pests;
F. Excessive amounts of garbage or trash on the property;
Inoperative or unregistered motor vehicles or inoperative boats parked,
kept or stored on the premises unless garaged or the premises is
properly permitted as a junkyard;
G.
Commercial parking lots left in a state of disrepair or abandonment;
and
H.
Vacant buildings or structures left unsecured or unguarded against
unauthorized entry.
I.
J. Graffiti. [Added 3-23-2009]
§ 51-2 BEACHES § 51-4
50:123
E. The written determination shall be mailed by both regular mail and
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
owner, agent, tenant and/or person in control other than the legal owner.
[Amended 3-23-2009]
§ 51-5. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine
of $100 for each day a violation exists after the date established in the
determination of the Condemnation Board made under § 51-4D for full
abatement of such violation.
§ 51-6. Enforcement citations. [Amended 3-23-2009]
If any violation remains unabated after the date established in the written
determination of the Condemnation Board, the Blight Prevention Officer
is hereby authorized and required to issue a citation to the violator in
accordance with this chapter. The Blight Prevention Officer will forward a
copy of said citation to the Town Attorney for recording if necessary. The
final period for the uncontested payment of any citation under this chapter
shall be 30 days after the mailing of or serving of the citation.
§ 51-7. Citation procedures.
The procedures established in the ordinance entitled "Ordinance
Establishing a Hearing Procedure for Citations"20 will apply to citations
issued under this chapter.
§ 51-8. Recording of lien. [Amended 3-23-2009]
Any unpaid fine imposed shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against
which a fine has been imposed in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes § 7-148aa. Each such lien shall be continued, recorded and
released as provided for in § 7-148aa. The Town Attorney shall record a lien
in the Town Clerk’s office against any real estate upon which a fine has been
imposed and remains unpaid for 30 days or more.
§ 51-9. Municipal performance to correct; costs. [Amended
3-23-2009]
In the event any owner, agent, tenant or person in control of real estate
shall fail to abate or correct any violation specified in any notice, after
the issuance of an enforcement citation for such failure, which citation has
become final through the failure of such owner, agent, tenant, or person
in control of real estate to appeal from the issuance of said citation, or by
such appeal being sustained, the Town of Fairfield, acting through its Blight
Prevention Officer, may cause or take such action as is necessary to correct
such violation. The cost to take such action shall be a civil claim by the Town
against such owner, agent, tenant, or person responsible for such property
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Citations Hearings.
§ 51-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 51-9
50:124
and the Town Attorney may bring an action to recover all such costs and
expenses incurred.
§ 51-10. Exemptions for pending special permit or site plan.
Any blighted premises for which a special permit or site plan application
for improvements to the blighted premises is pending shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter for a period of not more than 120 days from
the date of submittal of a complete application to the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission.
§ 51-11. Notice of Penalties Assessment with Clerk of Superior
Court.
If enforcement citation fines levied in accordance with this chapter are not
paid within 30 days, despite proper notice to the person found liable, the
Blight Prevention Officer shall proceed as set forth in § 11-3B(4) of Chapter
11, Citations Hearings.
§ 51-12. Appeal of penalty assessment to Superior Court. [Amended
3-23-2009]
A person against whom a judgment has been entered is entitled to judicial
review in accordance with the provisions of § 7-152 (c) of the Connecticut
General Statutes as set forth in § 11-4 of Chapter 11, Citations Hearings.
Penalties as provided in § 51-5 may be abated if the Condemnation Board
determines that the appeal was taken in good faith, with probable cause and
not for purposes of delay. The penalties as of the date of the judgment of the
Superior Court judgment shall not be abatable.
§ 51-13. Effective date; reports; repealer. [Amended 2-26-2007;
3-23-2009]
A. The effective date of this chapter shall be April 1, 2009.
B. The Blight Prevention Officer will report annually to the Representative
Town Meeting at its January meeting on the number of complaints
received, the disposition of all complaints processed, and the number
of complaints in process at the time of the report for the preceding
calendar year.
Chapter 52
BOARD OF EDUCATION PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Education — See Charter, § 8.2.
Real property management — See Ch. 35.
Public consumption of alcohol — See Ch. 46,
Art. II.
Littering — See Ch. 72.
§ 51-9 BOARD OF EDUCATION PROPERTY § 51-13
52:125
§ 52-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, beer, spirits or wine, as those
terms are defined in Section 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol,
spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being for
beverage purposes, except for any liquid or solid containing less then 1/2 of
1% of alcohol by volume.
BOARD OF EDUCATION PROPERTY — Includes all public schools and
adjoining properties, office facilities, buses used for student conveyance,
whether owned or contracted, and properties used by said Board of
Education for educational purposes.
LITTER — Any discarded, used or consumed substance or waste, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or detachable
tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any
flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction
material, abandoned automobiles and other motor vehicles, furniture, oil,
any noxious or offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to injure
any person or create a traffic hazard or anything else of an unsightly or
unsanitary nature.
§ 52-2. Consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Unless medicinally administered or used in conjunction with a class
supervised by a member of the school faculty or used for maintenance
purposes by maintenance personnel, the consumption, possession or
transfer by any means of alcoholic beverages is hereby prohibited in or on
property of the Board of Education, but nothing in this chapter precludes
the appropriate application for and issuance of temporary permits under
Section 30-35 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 52-3. Littering.
The depositing of litter upon Board of Education property, except in
receptacles provided for the depositing of such material, is hereby
prohibited.
§ 52-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $50 for each offense, except that, during the thirty-day period
commencing with the effective date of this chapter, alleged violators of this
chapter shall receive a written warning and shall not be subject to arrest.
§ 51-13 FAIRFIELD CODE § 52-4
52:126
Violators of § 52-2 of this chapter after three violations may be referred to
an appropriate professional counsel or agency.
§ 52-5. Students to be informed of provisions; posting of copies.
The Board of Education shall inform all public school students enrolled in
grades seven through 12 of the provisions of this chapter, and copies of this
chapter shall be placed in at least one conspicuous place in each school
attended by students in any of such grade levels.
Chapter 54
BOATS, CRAFTS AND VESSELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Commission — See
Charter, § 10.10.
Use of Harbor Management Area — See Ch.
24.
Alarms on boats — See Ch. 45.
Beaches — See Ch. 50.
Channel lines for rivers and creeks — See Ch.
59.
§ 54-1. Mooring so as to obstruct channels prohibited. [Amended
4-24-1989]
No person shall moor or anchor any vessel, craft or boat within the
boundaries of the Town of Fairfield or in waters adjacent and within 1/2 mile
of the mean low waterline of the Town, except as provided in this chapter.
§ 54-2. Mooring with inadequate gear prohibited.
No person shall moor or anchor any vessel, craft or boat with insufficient
or inadequate mooring or anchoring gear so as to endanger other persons,
vessels, crafts or boats within the area described in § 54-1.
§ 54-3. Authority of Parks and Recreation Commission. [Amended
4-24-1989; 10-26-1998]
The Parks and Recreation Commission may designate areas in waters
described in § 54-1 as mooring grounds or bathing areas.
§ 54-4. Abandoning or sinking. [Amended 4-24-198921; 10-26-1998]
No person shall abandon, sink, scuttle or burn any vessel, boat, craft or
object in areas designated by the Parks and Recreation Commission under
§ 54-3, nor shall such person abandon, sink, scuttle or burn or otherwise
21.Editor's Note: This ordinance also deleted § 54-4, Reckless operation, and renumbered
§§ 54-5, 54-6 and 54-7 as §§ 54-4, 54-5 and 54-6, respectively.
§ 52-4 BOATS, CRAFTS AND VESSELS § 54-4
54:127
place a vessel, craft or object in any of the areas described in § 54-1 where
it may be a hazard to navigation or to boats moored in such areas.
§ 54-5. Construal.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit or limit the operation
of boats, crafts or vessels propelled by power in any areas hereinbefore
designated in compliance with the maritime laws and regulations of the
United States or in accordance with rules and regulations of the Town or
private beach clubs respecting the patrolling of such areas by supervisory
personnel.
§ 54-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both fined
and imprisoned.
Chapter 56
BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Inspector — See Charter, § 9-8
Department of Public Works — See Charter,
§ 10.8
Board of Building Appeals — See Charter,
§ 10.11.
Fire Prevention Code — See Ch. 64.
Unfit properties and structures — See Ch.
100.
§ 54-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 54-6
56:128
ARTICLE I
Buildings Generally
§ 56-1. Permit required; exceptions.
No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building or
structure in an unapproved subdivision or on a lot abutting a highway
or street which has not been accepted by the Town or approved by the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission in accordance with its regulations.
This section shall not apply to the issuance of a building permit for the
construction of a building or structure on a lot which, on September 17,
1951, was on record in the office of the Town Clerk and which abutted
an accepted or approved highway or street or highway or street which
was actually in use for vehicular traffic or for the construction of farm
or accessory buildings which are not in violation of any lawful zoning
regulations of the Town.
§ 56-1 BUILDINGS § 56-1
56:129

ARTICLE II
State Basic Building Code
§ 56-2. Adoption of standards.
In accordance with Section 19-395 of the Connecticut General Statutes,22
the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code is hereby adopted as the
Building Code of the Town, for the purpose of regulating and controlling
the construction of buildings and structures, as provided therein, and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
Building Code and Section 19-395 of the Connecticut General Statutes are
hereby incorporated and adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this article.
§ 56-3. Power to amend.
The Town may, from time to time, amend any portion of the State Basic
Building Code by regulation or ordinance duly considered and acted on in
accordance with the provisions of state and local laws applicable thereto.
22.Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. § 29-252.
§ 56-2 BUILDINGS § 56-3
56:131

ARTICLE III
Moving Buildings
§ 56-4. Permit required.
No person shall move any building over, along or across any public highway
or street in the Town without first obtaining a permit from the Building
Inspector.
§ 56-5. Application; fee.
A. Application for a permit to move buildings shall be made, in writing, on
a form to be provided by the Department of Public Works at the office of
the Building Inspector and shall state the following:
(1) A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street
number, type of construction, dimensions, number of rooms and
condition of exterior and interior, together with photographs
showing the front and rear of the building.
(2) A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved,
giving the street and number, if located in the Town.
(3) A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed to move such
building, if located in the Town.
(4) Plot plan showing proposed location of building on new lot.
(5) The highways and street over, along or across which the building is
proposed to be moved.
(6) Proposed moving date and hours.
(7) Any additional information which the Building Inspector shall feel
necessary to the fair determination of whether a permit should be
issued.
B. The application shall be accompanied by receipted tax bills for all taxes,
charges and assessments outstanding and unpaid affecting the house
and lot if located within the Town and an application fee of $25.
§ 56-6. Grounds for denial of permit.
The Building Inspector shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds that:
A. Any application requirement or any fee, deposit or insurance
requirement has not been complied with.
B. The building is too large to move without endangering persons or
property in the Town.
C. The streets over which the building is to be moved would be inadequate
to accommodate such a structure or such moving would create a
dangerous traffic hazard.
D. The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is
otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without
endangering persons and property in the Town.
E. The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which
moved, if the removal location is in the Town.
F. The applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and property
would be endangered by its use.
§ 56-4 BUILDINGS § 56-6
56:133
G. Zoning regulations or other provisions of this Code or other ordinances
would be violated by the building in its new location.
H. For any other reason persons or property in the Town would be
endangered by the moving of the building.
§ 56-7. Deposit.
A. Each applicant shall deposit as security $1,000 in cash or in the form of
a bond to provide for reimbursement to the Town for damages caused by
such moving to any Town property, including but not limited to streets,
curbs, sidewalks, trees and any other public improvement.
B. The deposit paid hereunder or such balances as may remain after
payment of expenses shall be returned to the applicant by the Building
Inspector not less than two or more than four weeks after the house has
been moved to its new location.
C. In the event that the costs and expenses incurred exceed the amount
deposited, such excess shall be paid by the applicant. If he fails to pay
the amount of such excess, it shall constitute a lien on the premises to
which the house was moved, which lien may be foreclosed in the same
manner as a tax lien.
§ 56-8. Payment for damages; indemnification.
The applicant shall be required to make good and pay all losses and
damages arising out of any cause connected with the moving of the house
and shall indemnify and save harmless the Town from all claims and all
liability and responsibility of every kind for any loss, damage or injury
which any person may sustain by reason of or in any way arising out of
the moving of the house, within the Town. The applicant shall file with the
Building Inspector a certificate of insurance in amounts satisfactory to the
Town showing the Town to be named insured or containing an agreement
indemnifying and holding the Town harmless for such damages or injuries
herein described and providing the Town with a legal defense against any
such actions or claims.
§ 56-9. Responsibilities of permittee.
Every permittee under this article shall:
A. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written
permit.
B. Notify the Building Inspector, in writing, of a desired change in moving
date and hours as proposed in the application.
C. Notify the Building Inspector, in writing, of any and all damages done
to property in the Town within 24 hours after the damage or injury has
occurred.
D. Cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on every side of
the building, while standing on a street, in such manner as to warn
the public of the obstruction and shall at all times erect and maintain
barricades across the streets and provide nighttime supervision in such
a manner as to protect the public from damages or injury by reason of
the removal of the building.
§ 56-6 FAIRFIELD CODE § 56-9
56:134
E. Remove the building from the Town streets after four days, unless an
extension is granted by the Director of Public Works or the Chief of
Police.
F. Comply with the Building Code, fire regulations, zoning regulations and
all other applicable provisions of this Code or other ordinances and laws
upon relocating the building in the Town.
G. Pay the expense of traffic officers ordered by the Building Inspector
to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from
injury.
H. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing
grade at the original building site within seven days, so that the
premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition.
I. Plug any sanitary sewer line with a concrete stopper, shut off water and
notify the gas and electric and other utility service companies to remove
their services.
§ 56-10. Enforcement.
The Director of Public Works or any person within the Department of Public
Works designated by the Director of Public Works of the Chief of Police shall
enforce and carry out the requirements of this article.
§ 56-11. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for violating any provision of this article shall be a fine in an
amount not in excess of $100 or not more than 30 days in jail, or both.
§ 56-9 BUILDINGS § 56-11
56:135
Chapter 57
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Districts — See Ch. 26.
Blight prevention — See Ch. 51.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Unfit properties and structures — See Ch.
100.
§ 56-11 FAIRFIELD CODE § 56-11
56:136
ARTICLE I
Demolition Permit Waiting Period
[Adopted 9-24-2007]
§ 57-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide public notice of the intent to
demolish a building or structure, for public safety and potential
preservation of a significant building or structure in the Town of Fairfield.
This article imposes a waiting period in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes Section 29-406(b).
§ 57-2. Requirements and procedures.
The requirements and procedures under this article are in addition to the
provisions of Connecticut General Statutes Sections 29-401 through 29-415.
A. An application for demolition filed with the Building Official shall include,
in addition to such other information as may be required, the age of the
structure proposed for demolition. If the age of the structure to be
demolished is 100 years or greater, the Building Official shall promptly
notify the Town Historic District Commission of the application for
demolition.
B. The applicant shall, within seven days of filing the application for
demolition, (1) cause to be published notice of the application for demolition
in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town of Fairfield, and
(2) send, by certified mail, the notice of the application for demolition to
the Historic District Commission and the Fairfield Historical Society. The
applicant shall provide postal receipts for the certified mailings to the
Building Official for placement in the applicant’s file. [Added 9-22-200823]
C. Upon completion of all requirements for issuance of a demolition permit,
the Building Official shall provide written notification to the applicant that
a demolition permit is scheduled to be issued, provided the applicant posts
a sign on the property on which the structure is to be demolished that is
clearly visible from a public road providing notice of the demolition. The
sign shall be supplied by the applicant and shall be at least four feet by
four feet and have at least three-inch lettering. The sign shall display the
following wording, with the information specified by the Building Official
inserted:
A permit for demolition of this structure may be issued [insert number of
days specified in the written notification from the Building Official] days
after the posting of this sign and no earlier than [insert date specified by
the written notification from the Building Official].
D. After the sign has been posted for the number of days specified in the
written notification, the applicant shall provide the Building Official with a
verified statement that the posting requirement has been fulfilled.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections B and C as
Subsections C and D, respectively.
§ 57-1 BUILDINGS § 57-3
56:137
§ 57-3. Public safety delay. [Amended 9-22-2008]
If the age of the structure to be demolished is less than 100 years, the
Building Official shall specify 10 days for posting the sign and specify the
earliest date on which a demolition permit may issue as a date 10 days
from the date of the written notification. The provisions of this article shall
not apply to any demolition ordered by the Building Official because of an
emergency or threat to public health or safety.
§ 57-4. Preservation delay.
If the age of the structure to be demolished is 100 years or greater, the
Building Official shall specify 60 days for posting the sign and specify the
earliest date on which a demolition permit may issue as a date 60 days from
the date of the written notification.
§ 57-5. Maximum delay.
The Building Official shall not issue a demolition permit until all of the
requirements of this article have been fulfilled, unless the waiting period
under this article exceeds 120 days, in which case the Building Official shall
issue a demolition permit.
§ 57-6. Effective date.
This article will take effect on January 1, 2008.
§ 57-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 57-6
56:138
Chapter 59
CHANNEL LINES FOR RIVERS AND CREEKS
§ 59-1. Westerly channel line for Ash Creek established.
Those certain lines entitled "Pier and Bulkhead Line" or "Bulkhead Line"
lying in the Town on the westerly side of Ash Creek, and shown on a certain
map entitled "Proposed Pier and Bulkhead Lines at Ash Creek Between U.S.
1 and Long Island Sound" prepared by the Town Engineer's office, April
30, 1959, with a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet, are hereby
established as the channel line on the westerly side of Ash Creek from
Route U.S. 1 to Long Island Sound, beyond which, in the direction of such
waterway, no permanent obstruction or encroachment shall be placed by
any person unless permission is granted, in writing, by the Representative
Town Meeting.
§ 59-2. Course for Mill River established.
The layout or course for the Mill River from Brookside Drive to a point 1,000
feet south of the bridge over Sturges Road in the Town, which layout is set
forth on 4 maps, each entitled "Proposed Channel Lines of Mill River from
Brookside Drive and North Benson Road to 1,000 feet south of Sturges Road
- Bridge," with a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, and each dated August 5,
1958, prepared by the Town Engineer, which maps were submitted to and
approved by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission and were submitted
to and approved by the Flood and Erosion Control Board of the Town and
were submitted to the Representative Town Meeting, is hereby adopted and
established as the layout or course for the Mill River in the Town from
Brookside Drive to a point 1,000 feet south of the bridge over Sturges
Road. The lines shown thereon shall be the lines beyond which, in the
direction of the Mill River, no permanent obstruction or encroachment shall
be placed by any person unless permission is granted, in writing, by the
Representative Town Meeting.
§ 59-3. Course for Rooster River established.
A. The layout or course for the Rooster River from the Town line at Park
Avenue to the Town line at the junction of Brooklawn Avenue and
Stratfield Road in the Town, which proposed layout is set forth on a map
entitled "Map Showing Channel Lines of Rooster River from Stratfield
Road to Park Avenue", dated August 24, 1956, prepared by the Town
Engineer, which map was submitted to and approved by the Town Plan
and Zoning Commission and was submitted to the Representative Town
Meeting and will be placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk is
hereby adopted and established as the layout or course for Rooster River
in the Town from the Town line at Park Avenue to the Town line at
the junction of Brooklawn Avenue and Stratfield Road. The lines shown
thereon shall be the lines beyond which, in the direction of the Rooster
River, no permanent obstruction or encroachment shall be placed by any
§ 57-6 CHANNEL LINES FOR RIVERS AND CREEKS § 59-3
59:139
person unless permission is granted, in writing, by the Representative
Town Meeting.
B. The layout or course for the Rooster River from Brooklawn Avenue to
North Avenue in the Town, which proposed layout is set forth on a
map entitled "Map Showing Channel Lines of Rooster River from North
Avenue to Brooklawn Avenue," dated August 1, 1956, prepared by the
Town Engineer in collaboration with the City Engineer of Bridgeport,
which map was submitted to and approved by the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission and was submitted to the Representative Town Meeting of
the Town is hereby adopted and established as the layout or course for
the Rooster River in the Town from Brooklawn Avenue to North Avenue.
The lines shown thereon shall be the lines beyond which, in the direction
of the Rooster River, no permanent obstruction or encroachment shall
be placed by any person unless permission is granted, in writing, by the
legislative body of the Town.
Chapter 61
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 45.
Littering — See Ch. 72.
Noise — See Ch. 78.
§ 59-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 59-3
59:140
ARTICLE I
Recovery of Costs for Violations
[Adopted 3-25-201924]
§ 61-1. Recovery of costs related to properties with breaches of the
peace, public disturbances and disorderly conduct.
A. Charge for violations.
(1) If it is determined by the Chief of Police or his designee that: there was
reasonable cause for a law enforcement officer to have issued a notice
and warning as set forth below to any property owner for actions on or
arising from the owner's property in violation of Connecticut General
Statutes, Section 53a-181, 53a-181a or 53a-182; and such owner was
sent such a notice and warning by certified mail within 30 days of
the violation as set forth above; and subsequent to the mailing of
the notice and warning, and at any time during the three-year period
following the date of such notice and warning, any person or persons
were found by a law enforcement officer to be in violation of any such
section and arrested or given a citation for such subsequent acts at
the location set forth in the notice and warning; and the person or
persons were thereafter found guilty of one or more of the subsequent
violations of Connecticut General Statutes, Section 53a-181, 53a-181a
or 53a-182 for which they were arrested or given a citation or in
the event such violations are nolled at the request of the defendant
or in connection with a plea bargain or resolved by the granting of
accelerated rehabilitation, then the reasonable cost of police response,
notice and warning processing, arrest, processing, court-related costs
and any related costs incurred by the Town for both the first appearance
at the location which resulted in the issuance of the notice and warning
and the return to the location of the incident which led to any such
disposition set forth in this Subsection A shall be a charge against the
owner of such property.
(2) The charge shall constitute a debt of such owner and is collectible by
the Town in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a
contract. Prior to initiating an action to collect any such debt, the Town
shall provide such owner a bill itemizing the charges and afford at least
60 days to pay the bill, provided that no such charge in its aggregate
shall exceed $3,000 in such three-year period.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the owner of the property at the time
of the subsequent violation did not own the property at the time of the
issuance of the initial notice and warning, the owner shall not be liable
for the charges set forth above, and the subsequent violation shall be
deemed the initial notice and warning as to the current owner.
B. The form of the written notice and warning shall be substantially as follows:
NOTICE AND WARNING
To:
24.Editor's Note: This legislation also superseded former Art. I, Recovery of Costs for Repeat
Violations, adopted 9-25-2000.
§ 61-1 CHANNEL LINES FOR RIVERS AND CREEKS § 61-1
59:141
(name) (date)
On at _______________ a.m./p.m.
(date)_______________ (time)_______________
at (address)______________________________________________
you, or, persons on such property owned by you, were warned or cited by
(name of enforcement officer)
that your/their actions were in violation of Connecticut General Statutes
Section 53a-181, 53a-181a or 53a-182 and that if, within three years of
the above date of this notice and warning, you/persons are found by a
law enforcement officer to be in violation of such sections and arrested or
given a citation for further such acts at or arising from the location set
forth above, and a disposition designated in Town Code § 61-1A thereafter
results, you may be required to pay the reasonable costs of police response,
notice and warning processing, arrest, processing, court-related costs and
any related costs necessarily incurred by the Town of Fairfield both for the
first appearance at the location which resulted in the issuance of this notice
and warning and for law enforcement officers' return to the location/your
property which led to such arrest or citation and any disposition set forth
in § 61-1A.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the owner of the property at the time
of the subsequent violation did not own the property at the time of the
issuance of the initial notice and warning, the owner shall not be liable for
the charges set forth above and the subsequent violation shall be deemed
the initial notice and warning as to the current owner.
C. The First Selectman, or his designee, shall give a report to the RTM yearly
at its January meeting. At that time, the RTM shall review this article.
§ 61-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 61-1
59:142
Chapter 63
FIREARMS
§ 61-1 CHANNEL LINES FOR RIVERS AND CREEKS § 61-1
59:143

ARTICLE I
Safe Discharge of Firearms
[Adopted 6-25-2018]
§ 63-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the discharge of firearms in the
Town of Fairfield in furtherance of the protection of public peace and safety.
§ 63-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Shall have the same definition as in the Connecticut Penal
Code, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 53a-3(19), as the same may from time to time be
amended.
PEACE OFFICER — Shall have the same definition as in the Connecticut
Penal Code, Connecticut General Statutes § 53a-3(9), as the same may from
time to time be amended.
§ 63-3. Discharge of firearms in Town prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the Town on
public or private property, except as follows:
A. By the following persons in the performance of their official or
ceremonial duties:
(1) Peace officers; or
(2) Members of the Armed Forces of the United States or of the State of
Connecticut; or
(3) Authorized or licensed security personnel.
B. By any person acting to defend himself or herself or a third person from
physical force, solely in a manner consistent with all federal, state, and
local laws.
C. By any person responding to wildlife threatening human safety, solely in
a manner consistent with all federal, state, and local laws.
D. On any ranges authorized, in writing, by the Chief of Police of the
Town for the discharge of firearms. Such written authorization must be
received on an annual basis, and all such ranges shall be inspected by
the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, prior to any such written
authorizing being provided.
E. By any person hunting who is legally authorized to hunt under the
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes or by local ordinance and
any regulations issued thereunder in such places and such manner as is
authorized under such statutes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 63-1 CHANNEL LINES FOR RIVERS AND CREEKS § 63-4
59:145
§ 63-4. Written notification requirement.
Before any firearm is discharged on a person's property as authorized by
§ 63-3E herein, the owner of the property shall provide annual written
notice to all abutting property owners which shall state:
A. The person's address; and
B. That the person intends to hunt, or to allow hunting by third parties, on
his or her property consistent with this article.
§ 63-5. Penalties for offenses.
Each and every discharge of any firearm in violation of this article shall
constitute an offense and be punishable by a fine of $250 per offense.
§ 63-6. State law.
This article shall not supersede any provision of state law, including, but not
limited to, any state criminal law or state law regulating hunting.
§ 63-7. When effective.
This article shall become effective 30 days after its passage by the
Representative Town Meeting.
§ 63-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 63-7
59:146
Chapter 64
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Commission and Department — See
Charter, § 10.6.
State Basic Building Code — See Ch. 56, Art.
II.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 100.
§ 64-1. Ratification of provisions.
The Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut, as
promulgated by the Board of Fire Commissioners of said Town, which code
is effective as of the fifth day of March 1981, as the same has been amended
to January 1, 1986, is hereby ratified and confirmed, and the same shall
henceforth be an ordinance of said Town of Fairfield.
§ 64-2. Scope.
No such regulation of any such Fire Prevention Code shall be adopted that
does not meet or exceed the provisions of the State Fire Code or that is, at
the time of its adoption, inconsistent with state or local law.
§ 64-3. Amendments.
Any subsequent amendments, changes or alterations in said Fire Code shall
be first approved by the Board of Fire Commissioners prior to submission
to the Representative Town Meeting of the Town of Fairfield for its
consideration. Any proposal introduced to cause a change in said Fire Code
shall be considered by the Board of Fire Commissioners at a public hearing,
at which time all interested persons will be given an opportunity to be
heard. This hearing will be in addition to any public proceeding conducted
by the Representative Town Meeting.
Chapter 67
INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES
§ 67-1. Statement of purpose.
A. The inland wetlands and watercourses of the Town of Fairfield are
an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with
which the citizens of the Town have been endowed. The wetlands and
watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate
supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and
control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of
groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and
plant life.
§ 63-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 67-1
64:147
B. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are
in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the
deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of
water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have
despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such
unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant,
adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the Town of Fairfield
and has imperiled, and will continue to imperil, the quality of the
environment, thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and
recreational values and benefits of the Town of Fairfield for its citizens
now and forevermore.
C. The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from
random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or
destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare
and safety of the citizens of Fairfield.
D. It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to protect the citizens of the
Town of Fairfield by making provisions for the protection, preservation
and maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by
minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving
water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal,
state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or
siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms,
wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats
thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution;
protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their
conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and
private uses and values; and protecting Fairfield's potable fresh water
supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and
mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for
the economic growth of Fairfield and the use of its land with the need
to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee
to the people of Fairfield the safety of such natural resources for their
benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations
yet unborn.
§ 67-2. Designation of Agency.
The Fairfield Conservation Commission shall be the Inland Wetlands Agency
for the Town of Fairfield.
§ 67-3. Powers of Agency.
The Wetlands Agency is authorized to promulgate such regulations in
conformity with Connecticut General Statutes, §§ 22a-36 through 22a-45,
inclusive.
§ 67-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § 67-4
67:148
§ 67-4. Severability.
The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part or provision of
this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given
effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 67-5. When effective.
The chapter shall take effect upon publication in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the Town of Fairfield.
Chapter 72
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering in Harbor Management Area — See
Ch. 24, § 24-13.
Littering on Board of Education
property — See Ch. 52.
§ 72-1. Depositing upon streets prohibited; exception.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Town, except in public receptacles, in private
receptacles for litter or refuse collection or in the official Town dump.
§ 72-2. Placement in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon
private property.
§ 72-3. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited; responsibility of
property owners.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 72-4. Responsibility of persons owning or occupying place of
business.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
§ 67-4 LITTERING § 72-4
72:149
within the Town shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter.
§ 72-5. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Town or upon private
property.
§ 72-6. Loading of trucks.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Town
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place.
§ 72-7. Transportation of certain substances.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle over the
streets or highways of the Town while transporting therein or thereon
any dust-producing substance unless such vehicle is so constructed,
loaded or covered in such manner as will, at all times, effectually prevent
the spread or dissemination of dust from such dust-producing substance
into the air or upon any public or private property.
B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle over the
streets or highways in the Town while transporting therein or thereon
sand, loam, muck, stones, gravel or dirt unless such vehicle is so loaded,
constructed or covered in such manner as will, at all times, effectually
prevent any load or any part thereof in or upon such vehicle from falling
upon the street or highway or being blown upon the same.
C. The term "dust" as used in this section shall mean all dust, soot, ash, dirt
or other fine particles or matter. The term "dust-producing substance"
as used in this section shall mean all ashes, coal, charcoal, cinders,
coke, sand, gravel, dirt or any other substance producing or capable of
producing, spreading or disseminating dust.
D. All persons, whether as principals or agents, causing or otherwise
responsible for any violation of any provision of this section shall be
severally guilty of such violation and shall be fined not more than $25 for
each offense. Each violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 72-8. Definitions. [Added 1-25-199325]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the following meanings given herein:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature which:
25.Editor's Note: This legislation also repealed former § 72-8, Violations and penalties. See
now § 72-10.
§ 72-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 72-8
72:150
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a "commercial handbill."
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 72-9. Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on
vehicles. [Added 1-25-1993]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle located upon any Town-owned and/or
maintained property; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any
public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver thereof, a commercial or noncommercial handbill to any occupant
of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. The prohibitions of this section shall
not preclude any Town, state or federal employee from fulfilling their official
duties.
§ 72-10. Penalties for offenses. [Added 1-25-1993]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise
specified, shall be fined in the amount of $75. Any person violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall also be responsible for retrieving
and properly disposing of any commercial and/or noncommercial handbills,
including those which have fallen off of any vehicle on which they were
placed or have been discarded from such vehicles.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 72-8 LITTERING § 72-10
72:151
Chapter 78
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms producing exterior audible
sound — See Ch. 45, § 45-5.
§ 78-1. Legislative intent.
Government is instituted to protect life, liberty and property. Loud,
excessive and unreasonable noise during the nighttime hours is an
interference with a person's right to the use and enjoyment of his property,
especially in residential areas where human beings sleep or areas where
serenity and tranquillity are essential to the intended use of the land. The
purpose of this chapter is to provide an objective standard and procedure
for enforcing property rights.
§ 78-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following items shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMBIENT NOISE or BACKGROUND NOISE — Noise of a measurable
intensity which exists at a point as a result of a combination of many distant
sources individually indistinguishable.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — Any business district, including Business District
No. 1, Business District No. 2, Business District No. 3, Designed Business
District No. 1, Designed Business District No. 2, Designed Business District
No. 3 and Designed Business District No. 4, as defined in the Zoning
Regulations of the Town of Fairfield.
DECIBEL — A logarithmic unit of measure in measuring magnitudes of
sound. The symbol is "dB."
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical or property damage which demands immediate action.
EMITTER — A person who creates, causes to be created or allows the noise.
IMPULSE NOISE — Sound of short duration (generally less than one
second) with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — Any industrial district, including Industrial
District No. 1, Industrial District No. 2, Designed Industrial District No.
1, Designed Industrial District No. 2 and Designed Research District, as
defined in the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Fairfield.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall be defined as per Section 14-1(26) of the
Connecticut General Statutes (Revision of 1958, as amended).26
§ 72-10 FAIRFIELD CODE § 78-2
72:152
NIGHTTIME HOURS[Amended 9-25-2017] —
NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set forth
in § 78-5 of this chapter.
NOISE LEVEL — The sound pressure level, as measured with a sound level
meter.
PERSON — Any individual, including the singular and plural, firm,
partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation,
municipality, agency or political administrative subdivision of the state or
on other legal entity of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building structure, land or portion thereof, including
all appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards and
real properties without buildings or improvements, owned or controlled by
a person. The emitter's premises includes contiguous publicly dedicated
street and highway rights-of-way and waters of the state.
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which:
RECEPTOR — The person who receives the noise impact.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — Any residential district, including Residential
Districts AAA, AA, R-3, R-2, A, B, C, Designed Residence District No. 1 and
Designed Residence District No. 2, as defined in the Zoning Regulations of
The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Sunday night through
Friday morning (weekday schedule); and the hours between 11:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Friday night through Sunday morning (weekend
schedule).
Weekday Schedule:
10:00 p.m. Sunday through 7:00 a.m. on Monday
10:00 p.m. Monday through 7:00 a.m. on Tuesday
10:00 p.m. Tuesday through 7:00 a.m. on Wednesday
10:00 p.m. Wednesday through 7:00 a.m. on Thursday
10:00 p.m. Thursday through 7:00 a.m. on Friday
Weekend Schedule:
11:00 p.m. Friday through 8:00 a.m. on Saturday
11:00 p.m. Saturday through 8:00 a.m. on Sunday
A.
During any state or national holiday, the weekend schedule will be in
effect the night before the holiday through the morning of the holiday.
B.
A. Separates real property owned or controlled by another person; and
B. Separates real property from the public right-of-way.
26.Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. § 14-1(54).
§ 78-2 LITTERING § 78-2
72:153
the Town of Fairfield, and all uses permitted therewith either as a right or
as a special use.
SOUND — The transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous
media in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure
or position of the particles in the medium and which, in the air, evoke
physiological sensations, including but not limited to an auditory response
when impinging on the ear.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument used to take sound level
measurements and which should conform, as a minimum, to the operational
specifications of the American National Standards Institute for sound level
meters (TYPE s2A).
§ 78-3. Excessive noise prohibited. [Amended 9-25-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise
from such person's property beyond the boundaries of his property lines
in excess of the noise levels set forth in § 78-5 during the nighttime hours
as defined in § 78-2, except in those incidences provided for in §§ 78-8 and
78-9.
§ 78-4. Noise level measurement procedures.
For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this chapter, the
following guidelines shall be applicable:
A. Instruments used to determine noise levels shall conform, as a minimum,
to the operational specifications of the American National Standards
Institute for sound level meters (Type s2A), maintained in calibration and
good working order, and instrument manufacturer's instructions for use
of the instruments shall be followed.
B. All personnel conducting sound measurements shall be trained in the
current techniques and principles of sound-measuring equipment and
instrumentation.
C. Measurements shall be taken at a point that is located at least one foot
beyond the boundary of the emitter's property line within the premises
of the complaining receptor. The emitter's premises includes his/her
individual unit of land or group of contiguous parcels under the same
ownership as indicated by public land records.
§ 78-5. Noise level standards.
A. No person shall emit noise exceeding the levels stated herein during
nighttime hours, except in those incidences provided for in §§ 78-8 and 78-9
of this chapter:
Zone in Which Emitter is Zone in Which Receptor is Located
Located Industrial Business Residential
Industrial 70 dBA 66 dBA 51 dBA
Business 62 dBA 62 dBA 45 dBA
§ 78-2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 78-5
72:154
Zone in Which Emitter is Zone in Which Receptor is Located
Located Industrial Business Residential
Residential 62 dBA 55 dBA 45 dBA
B. Background noise and impulse noise. In those individual cases where the
ambient or background noise levels caused by sources not subject to this
chapter exceed the standards contained herein, a source (impulse or
sustained) shall be considered to cause excessive noise if the noise emitted
by such source exceeds the background noise levels by five dBA, provided
that no source subject to this chapter shall emit in excess of 80 dBA at
any time, with the exceptions of those sources referenced in Subsection C,
and provided that this subsection shall not be interpreted as decreasing the
noise level standards of § 78-5 of this chapter.
C. All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the Town of Fairfield shall
be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels as set forth in the
regulations of the State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles,
Sections 14-80a-la through 14-80a-10a, Maximum Permissible Noise Levels
for Vehicles.27
§ 78-6. Administration and enforcement.
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this
chapter upon the complaint of any person and shall, upon such complaint,
carry out the intent of this chapter as specified in § 78-3. Upon receiving
the first complaint, the police shall make the required sound level reading.
If the sound level exceeds the standards enumerated in § 78-5, a verbal
warning shall be given to the emitter. If such noise does not cease, and upon
receiving a second complaint, the police shall follow the procedures as set
forth in § 78-7. Notwithstanding that enforcement of this chapter shall be
initiated by such complaint, no signed complaint shall be required by the
Police Department to enforce or administer any of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 78-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be given
an infraction notice which incorporates a fine of $50 for the first offense and
$90 for each additional offense within a twenty-four-hour period. Failure to
pay the fine in the time prescribed in the infraction notice will result in the
issuance of a summons to appear in Superior Court.
§ 78-8. Exceptions.
The noise level standards defined in § 78-5 shall not apply to any noise
emitted by or related to:
A. Natural phenomena.
B. Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church.
27.Editor's Note: See now C.G.S. § 14-80a, Maximum noise levels.
§ 78-5 LITTERING § 78-8
72:155
C. Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any
other alarm systems used in emergency situations; provided, however,
that burglar or fire alarms not terminating within 30 minutes after being
activated shall be unlawful.28
D. Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration or other state or federal safety regulations.
§ 78-9. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from these regulations, subject to special
conditions as spelled out:
A. Noise created as a result of or relating to an emergency.
B. Noise created by snow-removal equipment.
C. Noise created by certificated aircraft operating under the control of the
Federal Aviation Administration.
D. Noise created as a result of or relating to maintenance and repairs
conducted by public utilities.
E. Noise generated from swimming pool pumps, air-conditioning systems
and heating systems which are in good working order and which meet
the specifications accepted by federal, state and Town agencies
designated to govern their installation and standards of performance.
F. Noise created by public celebrations and on-site recreational or sporting
activities which are sanctioned by the State of Connecticut or the Town
of Fairfield.
G. Any person who owns or operates any stationary noise source granted
a variance pursuant to Section 22a-69-7.1 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies shall be exempt from provisions of this
chapter by said variance. Any person seeking a variance pursuant to
Section 22a-69-7.1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies
shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter while the variance
application is pending.
§ 78-10. Existing noise sources.
Existing noise sources pursuant to Section 22a-69-3.7 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies shall be entitled to the allowances contained in
said section.
Chapter 84
RECYCLING AND SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 72.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Alarms.
§ 78-8 FAIRFIELD CODE § 78-10
72:156
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste and Recycling Commission
[Adopted 3-26-1990]
§ 84-1. Commission created; membership. [Amended 7-28-1997]
There shall be a Solid Waste and Recycling Commission which shall consist
of seven members who must be electors of the Town of Fairfield. No more
than four members shall be members of the same political party. These
members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and subject to
legislative ratification. The Director of the Solid Waste and Recycling
Department shall serve as an ex officio member of the Commission without
vote.
§ 84-2. Term of office; removal; officers; quorum.
A. The terms of all members shall run for four years, except that the terms
of members serving as of July 1, 1997, shall be adjusted and thereafter
staggered as follows: two terms ending in 1998, two terms ending in
1999, two terms ending in 2000 and one term ending in 2001, so that the
terms of not more than two members shall terminate in any single year.
[Amended 7-28-1997]
B. If a member resigns or is removed for any reason before his or her
term expires, a replacement shall be appointed within two months of
termination by the Board of Selectmen, in accordance with § 84-1, to
complete that term. A Commission member may be removed by the
Board of Selectmen for good cause, upon request of the Commission.
Failure to attend four consecutive meetings without good reason shall
constitute good cause for removal.
C. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and
Secretary. The Commission may form subcommittees to address specific
duties of the Commission.
D. A quorum at any such meetings shall consist of a majority of the
membership.
§ 84-3. Supervision.
The Solid Waste and Recycling Commission shall direct and supervise the
activities of the Solid Waste and Recycling Department implementing state
and local mandated programs for the collection, disposal and recycling
of garbage and other refuse. Policymaking responsibilities or general
management supervision is also suggested.
§ 84-4. Powers and duties.
The purpose of the Solid Waste and Recycling Commission will be to
prepare a Solid Waste and Recycling Plan, and it shall amend said plan from
time to time as required by provision of the Connecticut General Statutes. It
shall review and recommend to the Representative Town Meeting proposals
for local and regional solid waste and recycling. It may propose ordinances
for adoption by the Representative Town Meeting and may adopt
§ 84-1 LITTERING § 84-4
72:157
regulations for the disposal of solid waste and recycling of recyclable
materials. Such regulations shall be adopted in accordance with the
requirements of the Charter of the Town of Fairfield and, if applicable, the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. It shall review and recommend
to the Board of Selectmen, Board of Finance and to the Representative
Town Meeting an annual budget for operations of the Solid Waste and
Recycling Department.
§ 84-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 84-4
72:158
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste and Recycling Department
[Adopted 3-26-1990]
§ 84-5. Purpose.
The State of Connecticut has mandated new laws affecting the collection,
disposal and recycling of garbage and other refuse within the cities and
Towns of the State of Connecticut. Disposal of such items is a significant
social and health concern affecting the well-being of the citizens of Fairfield.
A separate department is desirable, proper and necessary to discharge the
obligations of the Town to be in conformance with such state mandated
laws.
§ 84-6. Powers of Department.
The Town of Fairfield hereby establishes a Solid Waste and Recycling
Department with responsibility for implementing the Connecticut General
Statutes, ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Representative Town
Meeting and Board of Health regulations affecting the collection, disposal
and recycling of garbage and other refuse.
§ 84-7. Powers of Director.
There shall be a Director of Solid Waste and Recycling appointed for an
indefinite term by the Board of Selectmen and reporting directly to the First
Selectman. The Director shall administer and supervise the Department of
Solid Waste and Recycling, including the preparation of annual budgets,
and shall prescribe the duties of subordinates and employees to carry out
the responsibilities of the Department to manage solid waste collection and
disposal, implement a mandatory residential, commercial and institutional
recycling program, maintain records of amounts of collected materials and
promote the recycling program to assure public compliance with source
separation of recyclables.
§ 84-8. When effective.
This article shall take effect 14 days after adoption by the Representative
Town Meeting.
§ 84-5 LITTERING § 84-8
72:159

ARTICLE III
Recycling Program
[Adopted 3-26-1990]
§ 84-9. Establishment of program. [Amended 10-26-1998]
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
certain recyclable materials from municipal solid waste in the Town of
Fairfield and the collection of segregated recyclables at the Town's curbside
and/or at other specified locations. The collection of segregated recyclables
shall be made periodically under the supervision of the Solid Waste and
Recycling Commission.
§ 84-10. Implementation. [Amended 10-26-1998]
The Solid Waste and Recycling Commission shall have the responsibility and
shall oversee implementation of this article.
§ 84-11. Director.
A Director of the Solid Waste and Recycling Department shall be appointed
for an indefinite term by the Board of Selectmen and shall report directly
to the First Selectman. The Director of the Solid Waste and Recycling
Department shall administer the Town's recycling program and coordinate
the program with private trash haulers and recycling centers in a manner
consistent with state and federal regulations. In addition, the Director of the
Solid Waste and Recycling Department shall provide recycling education
for residents and school children through appropriate media and through
schools.
§ 84-12. Recyclable materials. [Amended 10-26-1998]
Recyclable materials are any discarded materials which are mandated by
the state to be recycled, as well as other items which are deemed recyclable
by the Solid Waste and Recycling Commission.
§ 84-13. Separation and method of collection. [Amended
10-26-1998]
All recyclables shall be separated from nonrecyclables and prepared for
collection according to the procedures contained in regulations adopted by
the Solid Waste and Recycling Commission.
A. Recyclable materials shall be placed in containers approved by the
Director and kept separate from other garbage or rubbish.
B. Containers with recyclable materials shall be placed at curbside and/or
at other locations as approved by the Director, in a manner contained in
regulations published by the Solid Waste and Recycling Commission.
C. The Director shall prominently publish or cause to be published the
initial schedule of said collection and shall publish or cause to be
published a new schedule or guidelines thereafter whenever there is
§ 84-9 LITTERING § 84-13
72:161
a change in either materials to be collected, methods of collection or
schedule for collections.
D. The Solid Waste and Recycling Commission shall adopt regulations
covering the length of time, hours and days, that recyclable containers
shall remain at curbside.
§ 84-14. Noncurbside collection. [Amended 5-23-2011]
A. Apartments, condominiums and businesses serviced by private
collectors shall have an area or container designated for recyclables, and
the area or container shall be so labeled.
B. Effective 07/01/11, public gasoline filling stations which are subject to
Connecticut State Department of Environmental Protection regulations
shall provide suitable containers designated for the receipt of
recyclables in the form of glass, plastic and aluminum at the point of
purchase of gasoline for use by customers. There shall be at least one
recycling container for every four installed pumps. Filling stations with
less than four installed pumps shall have at least one container. The
containers are to be clearly marked and readily accessible for use by
customers. The provided container must be at least a twelve-gallon size
or measure 19" x 16" x 13". Marina facilities are excluded from this
provision.
C. Effective 07/01/11, car washes open to the public and serviced subject to
Connecticut State Department of Environmental Protection regulations
shall provide containers designated for recyclables in the form of glass,
plastic and aluminum at the point where a customer exits and/or
vacuums his or her vehicle for the use of said customer. There shall be
at least one container for every two vacuum stations with an overall
minimum of one. The containers are to be clearly marked and readily
accessible for use by customers. The provided container must be at least
a twelve-gallon size or measure 19" x 16" x 13". This Subsection C shall
not apply to charity or other fund-raising car washes primarily designed
to raise funds for a registered charity or nonprofit organization.
§ 84-15. Frequency of collection. [Amended 10-26-1998]
Recyclable materials shall be collected no less than once every two weeks
or as deemed necessary by the Solid Waste and Recycling Commission.
§ 84-16. Disposal of recyclables. [Amended 10-26-1998]
Persons having custody or control of residential, industrial or business
garbage disposal within the Town of Fairfield shall not dispose of
recyclables along with nonrecyclables at the transfer station. Failure to
properly exclude recyclables from other waste, i.e., nonrecyclables, may
result in a suspension of disposal privileges or a fine, or both, as determined
in regulations adopted by the Solid Waste and Recycling Commission.
§ 84-13 FAIRFIELD CODE § 84-17
72:162
§ 84-17. Licensing of public events.
The Town shall require the separation of recyclables as a condition of
licensing or authorizing public events at which solid waste and recyclables
will be generated.
§ 84-18. Household hazardous waste. [Amended 10-26-1998]
The Solid Waste and Recycling Commission, in cooperation with the
Department of Environmental Protection and with other state, local and
federal regulatory authorities, will develop and implement a plan to
encourage and effectuate the periodic collection of hazardous substances,
recyclable or not, and prominently publish information on the procedures
for safe and ecologically sound disposal of these substances. Certain
substances such as toxic chemicals, dead animals, demolition debris,
excrement, surgical medical waste, explosives and other similar dangerous
wastes that are liable to do injury to persons or property are not acceptable
for municipal collection and such items shall be disposed of in accordance
with the regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection and the
Town Health Code.
§ 84-19. Authorization for collection.
No person or business, shall pick up, procure or otherwise tamper with
any refuse deemed recyclable under this article or a valid regulation, after
such time this recyclable material is placed for collection, unless otherwise
authorized by the Director.
§ 84-20. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this article is the responsibility of the Director. Any
private contractor hired to haul refuse shall be responsible for notifying the
Director if a residence or commercial establishment is in violation of any
provisions of this article or valid regulation.
§ 84-21. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-26-1998]
A. Subject to a moratorium of enforcement to be determined by the Solid
Waste and Recycling Commission, any person, business or institution in
violation of the terms of this article shall be subject to the following:
(1) Upon the first offense, the hauler shall notify the violator that
subsequent violations may result in fines and/or noncollection of
refuse. The hauler will not be required to collect the refuse and shall
notify the Director of said violation.
(2) Upon notification of the second offense within 365 days of the first
violation, the Director shall issue a final written warning that a
subsequent violation will result in a fine and/or noncollection of
refuse.
(3) Upon notification of the third violation within 365 days of the first
violation, the violator shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 but not to exceed $100, and a written warning that subsequent
§ 84-17 LITTERING § 84-21
72:163
violation of Section 21 of the Health Code of the Town of Fairfield
shall be issued by the Director.
B. The above shall also apply to any commercial hauler.
§ 84-22. Volunteer collection of recyclables.
The Director may issue permits to private parties or charitable
organizations to collect recyclable materials on the condition that a report
is filed by the party or organization detailing the amount of materials
collected, and provided that the Director determines that said collection
does not defeat the purpose or cost effectiveness of the Town's recycling
program nor conflict with the responsibilities of the Town pursuant to its
membership in the intercommunity agreement establishing the Southwest
Connecticut Regional Recycling Operating Committee, or any such
agreement as the Town may enter into.
§ 84-23. Severability.
This article and the various parts, sentences, sections and clauses hereof
are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, section or clause
is adjudged invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this article
shall not be affected thereby.
§ 84-24. Regulations. [Amended 10-26-1998]
The Solid Waste and Recycling Commission is authorized and directed to
prepare and publish regulations governing recycling. The initial body of
regulations shall be subject to the approval of the Representative Town
Meeting.
§ 84-25. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances of the Town of Fairfield heretofore enacted and in
force and effect on the date of adoption of this article which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 84-26. When effective. [Amended 10-26-1998]
The provisions of this article shall become effective 14 days following
the adoption of regulations by the Solid Waste and Recycling Commission
and approval of the Representative Town Meeting, whichever is later, as
authorized in § 84-24 of this article but no earlier than 14 days after
adoption of this article and no later than January 1, 1991.
§ 84-21 FAIRFIELD CODE § 84-26
72:164
ARTICLE IV
Reusable Checkout Bags
[Adopted 5-28-201929]
§ 84-27. Purpose.
Plastic bags are often discarded into the environment, resulting in
waterway pollution, storm drainage issues, marine life endangerment, and
litter, which, in turn, creates economic and social burdens and costs to
Fairfield. The purpose of this article is to encourage the use of reusable
checkout bags to mitigate the adverse impacts of plastic bag usage and to
improve and maintain Fairfield's natural resources.
§ 84-28. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the following meanings:
CHECKOUT BAG — A bag of any material, commonly plastic or paper, that
is provided to a customer at the point of sale to carry purchases out of the
retail establishment. The term shall not include:
RECYLCED PAPER CHECKOUT BAG — A paper bag that:
Bags used by customers inside a retail establishment to:
Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy,
or small hardware items;
(1)
Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether prepackaged
or not;
(2)
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may be a problem;
(3)
Segregate food or merchandise that could damage or contaminate
other food or merchandise when placed together in a bag;
(4)
(5) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods; or
(6) Contain pharmacy prescriptions.
A.
B. Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, or laundry/dry-cleaning bags.
Bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as
garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bags.
C.
Bags of any type that customers bring to a retail establishment for their
own use.
D.
A. Contains no old growth fiber;
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect on 2-1-2020. See § 84-33.
§ 84-27 LITTERING § 84-28
72:165
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any person, corporation, partnership,
business, or other organization or group, however organized, that transfers
merchandise, goods, or materials, including, without limitation, clothing,
food, or personal items of any kind, directly to a customer in exchange
for payment. The term includes, by way of example and not limitation,
any grocery store, grocery delivery service, department store, clothing
store, hardware store, pharmacy, liquor store, restaurant, delicatessen,
convenience store, food truck, sidewalk vendor, farmers' market, flea
market, and any other retail store or vendor. The term shall not include the
sale of goods at yard sales, tag sales, or other sales by residents at their
home.
REUSABLE CHECKOUT BAG — A bag with handles that is specifically
designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and that is made of 1) cloth,
fiber, or other machine-washable fabric, and/or 2) durable plastic that is
at least 12.0 mils (thousandths of an inch) thick. A reusable checkout bag
shall not contain lead, cadmium, or any other toxic material, as defined
by applicable state and federal standards and regulations for packaging or
reusable bags.
§ 84-29. Restriction on checkout bags.
A. No retail establishment shall sell, provide, or distribute to customers
or clients checkout bags made of plastic, unless such bags qualify as
reusable checkout bags as defined in § 84-28.
B. No retail establishment shall sell, provide, or distribute checkout bags
to customers or clients made of paper unless they satisfy all of the
conditions set forth in § 84-28 for recycled paper checkout bags.
C. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a retail establishment from
encouraging and providing incentives or rebates to customers or clients
who bring their own checkout bags.
D. Nothing in this article shall prohibit customers or clients from using any
bags or containers they choose to bring to a retail establishment to carry
out goods.
§ 84-30. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by a person or persons,
employed in the Fairfield Health Department, appointed by the Health
Director to perform such task.
B. Upon determination that a violation of this article has occurred, the
retail establishment shall be liable for the following:
Is 100% recyclable;
Contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content
(except that an eight-pound or smaller paper bag shall contain a
minimum of 20% post-consumer recycled content); and
(1)
Conspicuously displays the phrase "reusable" and "recyclable" on
the outside of the bag and the percentage of post-consumer
recycled content.
(2)
B.
§ 84-28 FAIRFIELD CODE § 84-30
72:166
(1) Upon the initial violation, written warning notice that a violation of
this article has occurred shall be issued to the retail establishment.
No monetary penalty shall be imposed for the initial violation;
(2) For the second violation of this article, a monetary penalty of $150
shall be imposed; and
(3) For the third and each subsequent violation of this article, a
monetary penalty of $250 shall be imposed.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no monetary penalty shall be imposed
for a second violation of this article if such violation has occurred on or
prior to the date that is 30 calendar days following receipt by the retail
establishment of a written warning notice of its initial violation. Further,
if multiple violations by a retail establishment occur within a twentyfour-
hour period, no more than one monetary penalty shall be imposed
for such violations.
D. Payment of each monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this article shall
be made within 10 calendar days after the date of delivery of notice of
the violation.
E. Any written notice to the retail establishment of a violation of this article
shall be delivered by hand or certified mail to the retail establishment by
a Health Department official or his/her designee.
§ 84-31. Hearing procedure for citations.
A. Right to appeal to a hearing officer. Any retail establishment in receipt of
a notice of violation under this article may contest the liability before a
citation hearing officer by making a written request for a hearing within
10 calendar days of the date the notice of violation was delivered to the
retail establishment. Such request for a hearing shall be delivered by
hand or certified mail to the Health Department.
B. Failure to appeal is an admission of liability. If a hearing is not requested,
and if one or more monetary penalties are subsequently assessed, the
failure to appeal shall be deemed an admission of liability and an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against the retail
establishment by the Superior Court as provided in Chapter 11, § 11-3.
Such judgment may be issued without further notice.
C. After an appeal has been submitted, no further notice of violation shall
be issued. Once a written request for a hearing has been received by the
Health Department, no additional notices of violation shall be issued to
the retail establishment until after the hearing procedure concludes.
D. Hearing procedure for appeals. The procedures established in Chapter
11, titled "Citations Hearings," will apply to citations issued under this
article.
§ 84-32. Severability.
If any section, clause, sentence, or provision of the article shall be adjudged
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, such
adjudication shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other
provision hereof, and the applicability thereof to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 84-30 LITTERING § 84-33
72:167
§ 84-33. Operative date.
This article shall become effective as of 12:01 a.m. Eastern standard time
on February 1, 2020.
§ 84-33 FAIRFIELD CODE § 84-33
72:168
Chapter 86
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
§ 86-1. Storing or discarding prohibited; exception.
No person shall cause or permit any unused icebox or refrigerator to be
stored, discarded or abandoned in the open or in any open shed, barn or
in any other open structure unless such icebox or refrigerator has been
rendered harmless by the removal of its doors.
§ 86-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $100.
Chapter 88
SCENIC ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 91.
§ 88-1. Legislative findings; purpose.
The following general provisions shall apply in the interpretation and
application of this chapter:
A. Legislative finding. It is hereby found that there exist, and may in the
future exist, within the Town of Fairfield, roads, highways or portions of
highways that should be designated as "scenic roads."
B. Purpose. It is hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to
protect, preserve and promote the current quality of Town roads while
concomitantly providing for common convenience and safety along the
public way.
§ 88-2. Qualifying criteria.
A. The designation of a road, highway or portion of a highway by the Town
Plan and Zoning Commission, as designated in Section 7-149a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, shall meet at least one of the following
criteria:
(1) It is unpaved.
(2) It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls.
(3) The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in width.
(4) It offers scenic views.
(5) It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain.
(6) It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or ponds.
B. Application thereof shall meet the procedural steps set forth in § 88-3.
§ 84-33 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 88-3
86:169
§ 88-3. Procedural steps.
As enabled by this chapter and Section 7-149a of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Town Plan and Zoning Commission may designate highways or
portions of highways as scenic roads, subject to the following procedures:
A. Written statement of approval. A written statement of approval shall
be submitted to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission and the Town
Clerk and shall include a statement of intent requesting scenic road
designation, a map showing what highway or portion of highway the
scenic designation is requested for and indicating all abutting property
owners and addresses and a certified petition form as prescribed by the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission, signed by the owners of a majority
of lot frontage abutting the highway or portion of the highway to be
designated scenic.
B. Public hearing. The Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall hold a
public hearing within 65 days after receipt of a written statement of
approval as described above. Notice of a public hearing to be held by the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall be published in a newspaper
having substantial circulation in the Town at least twice at intervals of
not less than two days, the first not more than 15 nor less than 10
days and the last not less than two days before the public hearing.
Within 65 days after the public hearing, the Commission shall approve or
disapprove the designation. The failure of the Commission to act within
65 days after the public hearing shall be considered as an approval. The
petitioner may consent in writing, to any extension of time for the public
hearing and action on the request.
§ 88-4. Plan and Zoning Commission action.
A. Designation. The Town Plan and Zoning Commission, after the public
hearing, may approve the scenic road designation if it finds that the
requested designation conforms to the standards outlined in the Fairfield
Town ordinances and Section 7-149a of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
B. Other. The Town Plan and Zoning Commission actions are subject to
all other requirements and procedures stated in the Town Code of
Ordinances and Section 7-149a of the Connecticut General Statutes.
In particular, the Town or its Town Plan and Zoning Commission may
regulate future alterations and improvements on such designated scenic
roads, including but not limited to widening of the right-of-way or of the
traveled portion of the highway, paving changes of grade, straightening,
removal of stone walls and removal of mature trees.
§ 88-5. Exclusions.
A. No state highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road
under the provisions of this chapter.
B. No Town road or highway or portion thereof may be designated as a
scenic road if:
(1) It contains any condition posing an unreasonable risk to the safety of
travelers thereon;
§ 88-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 88-5
88:170
(2) It contains any condition which burdens unreasonably the capacity
of ambulances, fire trucks, police cars or other emergency vehicles
to respond to emergencies or to carry out other duties in the Town;
or
(3) It contains any condition which burdens unreasonably the capacity
of police officers to enforce the law or to carry out other duties in the
Town.
§ 88-6. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an official action or decision of the Town Plan and
Zoning Commission, including a decision to take no action, or any person
owning land which abuts or is within a radius of 100 feet of any portion of
the land involved in any decision of the Commission may appeal therefrom,
within 15 days from the date when notice of such action or decision was
so published in a local newspaper, to the Superior Court for the Judicial
District of Fairfield at Bridgeport. In those situations where an approval of
the Commission must be inferred because of the failure of the Commission
to act on any application, any person aggrieved by such approval or any
person owning land which abuts or is within a radius of 100 feet of any
portion of the land involved in such approval may appeal therefrom within
20 days after the expiration of the period.
§ 88-7. Abridgement of powers.
Nothing contained within this chapter shall abridge the legal authority
of any board, commission or agency of the Town of Fairfield to make,
publish, adopt, repeal, change or amend its rules, regulations or bylaws in
accordance with law.
Chapter 91
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Charter,
§ 10.8.
Littering — See Ch. 72.
Vending machines on streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 104, Art. I.
§ 88-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 88-7
91:171

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 91-1. Payment of assessments in installments; interest on
delinquent payments.
A. Whenever the Director of Public Works shall make any assessment of
benefits under the provisions of No. 268 of the Special Acts of 1921
or any amendment of or substitute for No. 268 of the Special Acts
of 1921, he shall provide for the payment of any assessment in such
number of substantially equal annual installments, not exceeding 10, as
he shall determine and shall provide for interest charges on any deferred
payments at such rate of interest as shall be set by the Board of Finance.
Any person who may have elected to pay his assessment in more than
one installment may make payment at any time in full of the whole or
such part of such assessment as still remains unpaid.
B. Any such installment of an assessment not paid within 30 days of the
due date shall thereupon be delinquent and shall be subject to interest
from the due date at the same interest rate and in the same manner as
provided by the Connecticut General Statutes in the case of delinquent
taxes. Interest shall be computed on the entire unpaid balance of the
assessment from the due date of the last installment which was paid
or from the due date of the assessment if no previous installment has
been paid. Each addition of interest shall become and be collectible as
a part of such assessment. Whenever any installment of an assessment
becomes delinquent, any remaining unpaid installments of such
assessment shall also become delinquent, provided that if all past due
installments, together with interest and any other charges, have been
paid in full, remaining installments may be paid without additional
penalty, except for subsequent default, in accordance with the original
installment schedule.
§ 91-2. Removal of snow, ice and rubbish from sidewalks and other
property.
A. No natural accumulation of snow or ice shall be permitted to remain
on the sidewalks or hard-surfaced, improved walkways fronting on the
property of any property owner, tenant or occupant of the Town for a
period in excess of 24 hours after any storm causing or contributing to
such accumulation, unless abrasives are applied to reduce slipping.
B. The Department of Public Works may remove or cause to be removed
any such accumulation or apply the necessary abrasives upon failure of
the owner, tenant or occupant to do so within the time specified herein.
The expense of such removal shall be paid by the Town, but shall be
charged to the owner of the property from in front of which the snow
or ice was removed. Such charge, if unpaid, shall be a lien upon the
premises adjoining such walk upon filing of a certificate of lien, which
certificate shall be recorded in the Town Clerk's office within 60 days
after the completion of such removal.
C. No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited any snow or ice on
a sidewalk, street, road, highway or other public property. This clause
§ 91-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 91-2
91:173
shall apply to the removal of snow and ice from any sidewalk, driveway
or private property. No person shall cause ice to form on a sidewalk,
street, road, highway or other public property by discharging or allowing
water to be discharged from private property.
D. All accumulations of rubbish on any public sidewalk shall be removed
within 24 hours of the accumulation thereof by the person who owns
or is in possession of the premises upon which or adjacent to which
such sidewalk is located. The Town shall have the right to cause any
accumulation of rubbish to be removed from a sidewalk, and the cost
thereof shall be a debt to the Town and the person shall be liable to the
Town for such removal.
E. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to see that Article I, § 91-2C
and D are duly enforced. Any person found violating the terms of this
section shall be fined not more than $99 (or the maximum amount
permitted by state law) for each offense. The person to be fined may be
the owner of the property, the occupant or the operator of any vehicle
or equipment depositing the ice or snow on the sidewalk, street, road,
highway or other public property.
§ 91-3. (Reserved)
§ 91-4. Building numbering.
Every owner of a residential, commercial or industrial structure in the Town
shall affix numbers indicating the building's address of such a size and in
such a location on the property that emergency vehicles can identify the
address.
§ 91-5. Removal of hazardous vegetation.
Every owner or possessor of land or a sidewalk within the right-of-way
of the Town adjoining any street, road, highway or other public property
shall cut or mow all bushes, hedges, weeds, thistles and briars growing on
the street, road, highway or other public property and the land adjoining
the street, road, highway or other public property, upon direction of the
Director of Public Works whenever he finds that the existence of the bushes,
hedges, weeds, thistles or briars constitute a traffic or fire hazard or a
public nuisance. If the owner fails to comply within 10 days after receiving
notice from the director of Public Works, the Director of Public Works may
perform such work and charge the owner for doing so. Such charge, if
unpaid, shall be a lien upon said property upon the filing of a certificate of
lien, which certificate shall be recorded in the Town Clerk's Office within 60
days after such work is completed.
§ 91-2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 91-5
91:174
ARTICLE II
Planting, Removing or Pruning Trees and Shrubs
§ 91-6. Permit required.
No person shall plant, remove or prune any tree or shrub within the limits of
any public street in the Town without first obtaining a written permit from
the Town Tree Warden.
§ 91-7. Application; fee.
Application for a tree planting, removal or pruning permit shall be made, in
writing, upon forms provided by the Tree Warden. The application shall set
forth the size, species, type and location or proposed location of such tree
or shrub, together with such further information as the Tree Warden may
require. In passing upon such application, the Tree Warden shall consider
the effect of the proposed planting, removal or pruning upon the present
and future use, safety, maintenance and improvement of the public streets
and, on the basis of such consideration, shall grant or deny the application.
The Tree Warden may establish, from time to time, a reasonable fee for such
application.
§ 91-8. Authority of Tree Warden to set conditions.
In issuing any permit under this Article II, the Tree Warden may set forth
such conditions and limitations as he may think necessary or desirable; and
the permittee shall observe such conditions and limitations as may be set
forth by the Tree Warden.
§ 91-9. Effect of planting or removal without a permit.
If any person shall plant or remove a tree or shrub without a permit or in
violation of the conditions and limitations of any such permit issued under
this Article II, the Tree Warden may order the person planting or removing
such tree or shrub or the owner of the property on which such planting or
removing occurred to remove or replace the same at his own expense. If the
person so ordered to remove such tree or shrub shall fail to do so within
a period of 30 days after such order, the Tree Warden may cause the same
to be removed or replaced and charge the expense thereof to the person to
whom such order was given.
§ 91-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 91-9
91:175

ARTICLE III
Curb and Sidewalk Construction; Replacement
§ 91-10. Permit required.
No person shall construct, replace or cause to be constructed or replaced
in any Town maintained street any new curb or walk or combined curb and
gutter or driveway apron without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from
the Director of Public Works.
§ 91-11. Application; fees.
Permits shall be upon blank forms provided at the office of the Director of
Public Works and shall specify the location and ownership of the property
where such work is to be done, the kind of work to be done and such
other information and conditions as the Director of Public Works shall deem
necessary in order to assure that such work is to be done in accordance
with such standards of construction, line and grade as the Director of Public
Works may reasonably require in order to achieve safety and uniformity. The
Director of Public Works may establish, from time to time, a reasonable fee
for such application.
§ 91-12. Expiration of permits; permits to be kept on premises.
All permits required by this Article III shall expire 90 days after issuance
and shall be kept on the premises during the continuance of the work
permitted.
§ 91-13. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this Article III shall not apply to the making of minor
repairs to existing curb, sidewalk or driveway facilities.
§ 91-14. Failure to obtain permit.
If any person shall fail to obtain a permit as provided in this Article III,
the Director of Public Works may, by registered letter, order the owner of
the premises upon which such construction took place to change, alter or
reconstruct such construction in a manner satisfactory to the Director of
Public Works, provided that, if the owner of such premises fails to complete
such change, alteration or reconstruction within 90 days after the mailing
of such order, then the Director of Public Works may cause such work to be
done and charge the expense thereof to the owner of the premises.
§ 91-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article III shall be fined not
more than $99 (or the maximum amount permitted by state law) for each
offense.
§ 91-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 91-15
91:177

ARTICLE IV
Excavations
§ 91-16. Permit required.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall, without a permit from
the Town Engineer, make any excavation in any public street or highway
owned or maintained by the Town, lay any pipe, drain, sewer, conduit in or
under or place any structure on any such public street or highway or leave
upon, above or under the surface of any such public street or highway any
material or equipment used or to be used for any of the foregoing purposes.
§ 91-17. Application; fee; deposit; indemnification; bond.
A. Every application for a permit required under this Article IV shall be
made, in writing, to the Town Engineer on forms provided by the Town
and shall include the following information, in addition to such other
information as may reasonably be required by the Town Engineer: the
approximate location of the proposed excavation, pipe, drain, sewer,
conduit or structure; the purpose thereof; a careful estimate of the area
of the proposed excavation or an accurate description of the proposed
pipe, drain, sewer, conduit or structure; the date and time when work
thereon will commence; and the period within which such work will be
completed.
B. The Director of Public Works shall establish the permit fee, which fee
shall be paid to the Town Engineer at the time such permit is issued.
In addition, the permittee shall deposit with the Town Engineer the
sum of not less than $100, which deposit, to the extent necessary, shall
be applied toward the reasonable expenses incurred by the Town in
replacing the pavement or surface of the street or highway following
the excavation therein, any unexpended balance of such deposit to be
returned to such permittee, provided that such deposit shall not be
required of any public utility company authorized by law to conduct its
operations in or through the Town.
C. Every application for such a permit under this Article IV shall include
an agreement signed by the applicant to reimburse the Town for the
reasonable expenses which it may incur in replacing the pavement or
surface of the street or highway and to indemnify and save the Town
harmless from any claim for injury to person or property arising out of
prosecution of the work for which the permit is sought.
D. Every application for such a permit under this Article IV shall be
accompanied by a bond issued by a surety company authorized to do
business in the State of Connecticut in the amount of $10,000,
conditioned on faithful performance by the applicant of the requirements
of this article with respect to the manner in which such excavation is
to be made, provided that this provision shall be deemed to have been
fulfilled if such applicant shall have on file with the Town Engineer a
blanket bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in
the state in an amount of $10,000. The Town Engineer may increase the
amount of such bond from time to time as necessary to ensure faithful
performance of the requirements of this article.
§ 91-16 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 91-18
91:179
§ 91-18. Time limit.
All permits issued under this Article IV shall be good for a period of 30
days from the date of issuance, and all work to be done thereunder shall
be completed within such period to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer,
provided that when, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, such work will
require more than 30 days for its completion, he may issue a permit good
for any period up to 90 days from the date of issuance, and provided further
that the period of any such permit may be extended by the Town Engineer
for good cause. Nothing herein contained shall limit the right of the Town
Engineer to revoke any such permit at any time for cause.
§ 91-19. Insurance.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, the financial responsibility
of the applicant is not sufficient to enable such applicant to respond in
damages to any claim for injury to person or property arising out of
prosecution of the work for which the permit is sought, he may require
that such applicant submit proof of public liability and property damage
insurance with personal injury limits of not less than $1,000,000 and
property damage limits of not less than $1,000,000. The Town Engineer may
increase the amount of insurance required from time to time as necessary
to protect the interests of the Town.
§ 91-20. Change in location or method of work to avoid
interference.
Whenever, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, the work for which such a
permit is granted under this Article IV may interfere with any installation
of an existing municipal storm or sanitary sewer or with any installment of
a planned municipal sanitary sewer recommended by the Water Pollution
Control Authority, he may require that the location or method of such work
be changed to the extent necessary to avoid such interference and that such
work be done in the presence of and to the satisfaction of a Town inspector.
The reasonable expenses of such inspector shall be borne by the person
doing such work.
§ 91-21. Fences and lights.
Any person making any excavation shall erect and maintain a substantial
railing, fence or barrier around the same and shall keep at and over such
excavation a sufficient number of bright yellow lights to mark the same
and to warn pedestrians and vehicles of its existence, which yellow lights
shall be kept burning from sunset to sunrise until the work involved in such
excavation is completed.
§ 91-22. Placement of excavated material; restoration.
Any person making any excavation shall remove the pavement or surface
of the street or highway with the least possible damage and shall place
all excavated material where it will cause the least possible inconvenience
§ 91-18 FAIRFIELD CODE § 91-22
91:180
to the public and, as soon as practicable, shall fill the hole resulting from
such excavation, tamp or puddle the earth or other material therein in
such manner that it will not settle and, except for the pavement or surface
of the street or highway, shall restore the immediate area thereof to the
condition in which it existed before such excavation was made, all with
the approval and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer. If any such
excavation shall not be so refilled or if the area thereof shall not be so
restored, the Town Engineer may do such refilling and restoration and
charge the expense thereof against the permittee making such excavation.
Nothing herein contained shall limit the right of the Town Engineer to allow
the permittee to replace the pavement or surface of the street or highway
with similar material in accordance with specifications approved by the
Town Engineer or to require the permittee to replace the excavated material
with such other material as the Town Engineer may specify whenever such
excavated material is, in his opinion, unsuitable for backfill.
§ 91-23. Emergency excavations.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Article IV, in any case of an
emergency making an immediate excavation essential to the public health
and safety, such excavation may be commenced without a permit, but
notice of such excavation shall be given to the Town Engineer as soon
as practicable after it is commenced and a permit then applied for. Such
emergency excavations shall be made as nearly as practicable in conformity
with the provisions of this article.
§ 91-24. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any provision of this Article IV shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $99 (or the maximum permitted by state law) or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, for each such violation.
In addition to any other penalty provided by this Code, in the event of
the refusal or neglect of any person to remedy or repair any dangerous or
defective condition caused by or resulting from a violation of this article, the
Town may remedy or repair the same and may assess the expense thereof
against such person.
§ 91-25. Right of Water Pollution Control Authority to make
regulations.
Nothing contained in this Article IV shall limit the right of the Water
Pollution Control Authority to make regulations respecting connections to
municipal sanitary sewers not inconsistent with this article.
§ 91-26. Installation of natural gas pipelines.
The Public Works Department is authorized to supervise the installation
of natural gas pipelines. The Director of Public Works shall have power to
adopt regulations prescribing standards for the construction of natural gas
lines in the public streets of the Town.
§ 91-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 91-26
91:181

ARTICLE V
Limitation on Liability
§ 91-27. Disclaimer of Town liability.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13a-149 of the General
Statutes or any other state statute or special act, the Town of Fairfield
shall not be liable to any person for injury or damage to persons or
property caused by defects and obstructions and/or the presence of ice
and snow on a public sidewalk unless the Town is the owner or person in
possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk, other than land
used as a public highway or public street, provided that the Town shall
be liable for its affirmative acts with respect to such sidewalk.
B. The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to any defects and
obstructions and/or the presence of ice and snow on the sidewalk toward
the portion of the sidewalk abutting his property as a municipality had
prior to the adoption of Section 13A-149 of the General Statutes and
shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach
of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury. No action to recover
damages for injury to the person or to property caused by defects and
obstructions and/or the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk
against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land
abutting a public sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from
the date when the injury is first sustained.
§ 91-27 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 91-27
91:183
Chapter 93
SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Charter, § 10.9.
Building Inspector — See Charter, § 9.8.
Department of Public Works — See Charter,
§ 10.8.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Noise from swimming pool pumps — See Ch.
78, § 78-9E.
§ 93-1. Definitions.30
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health of the Town of Fairfield
or his duly authorized agent.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Town Engineer and Director of
Public Works of the Town of Fairfield or his duly authorized agent.
RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL — A body of water in an artificial
receptacle or other container, permanently constructed either above or
below the ground, having a depth at any point greater than two feet
or having a water surface area greater than 250 square feet, used or
intended to be used for swimming, including all structures, appurtenances,
equipment, appliances or other facilities pertinent to and maintained for the
operation thereof. Such requirements apply only to swimming pools located
on private property under the control of the occupant, the use of which is
intended for swimming or bathing by members of the occupant's family.
SUPERVISOR OF THE BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT — The
Supervisor of the Building Inspection Department of the Town of Fairfield
or his duly authorized agent.
§ 93-2. Compliance.
All residential swimming pools hereafter constructed shall conform to all
the requirements of this chapter. All existing swimming pools shall conform
to §§ 93-9, 93-10 and 93-11.
§ 93-3. Approval and permits required.
No residential swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be
constructed, installed or altered prior to approval from the Director of
Health and subsequent issuance of zoning and building permits.
30.Editor's Note: The provisions in this chapter have been preempted by the enactment of the
State Building Code, which contains swimming pool regulations and requirements which
are controlling over those contained herein. See C.G.S. § 29-253.
§ 91-27 FAIRFIELD CODE § 93-4
93:184
§ 93-4. Fees.
Zoning and building permit fees shall be set according to the regulations of
the Plan and Zoning and Building Commissions of the Town.
§ 93-5. Submission of plans; copies to be furnished.
A. Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Director of Health
and the Supervisor of the Building Inspection Department, shall be
drawn to scale and shall show dimensions and construction of pool and
appurtenances, properly established distances to lot lines, buildings,
walks and fences, details of water supply, drainage and water disposal
systems, location of overhead electrical conductors, location of existing
domestic sewage disposal system and all appurtenances pertaining to
the swimming pool. Detail plans of structures, vertical elevations and
sections through the pool showing depth shall be included.
B. When applying for permits, one copy of the plans shall be furnished to
the Director of Health and one copy to the Supervisor of the Building
Inspection Department.
§ 93-6. Certificate of use.
Before the pool may be used, a certificate of use shall be obtained from the
Building Inspection Department. This shall be issued following approval of
the Director of Health and final inspection by the Supervisor of the Building
Inspection Department.
§ 93-7. Conformance with zoning regulations.
Residential swimming pools shall conform to the zoning regulations of the
Town.
§ 93-8. Design and construction.
A. Generally. Residential swimming pools shall be engineered, designed
and constructed to withstand the expected forces to which they will be
subjected, full or empty.
B. Wall slopes. To a depth up to five feet from the top, the wall slopes shall
not be more than two feet horizontal in five feet vertical.
C. Floor slopes. The slope of the bottom of the shallow side of the transition
point shall not exceed one foot vertical to seven feet horizontal. The
transition point between shallow and deep water shall not be more than
five feet deep.
D. Steps and ladders. One or more means of egress shall be provided from
the pool. Treads of steps or ladders shall be equipped with a handrail,
except that handrails may be omitted when there are not more than four
steps or when the steps extend the full width of the side or end of the
pool.
E. Diving boards. No diving board platform shall be installed or used for
any residential swimming pool having a depth of less than eight feet of
water under the end of the board.
§ 93-4 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 93-9
93:185
§ 93-9. Water supply and treatment; wastewater disposal; drainage.
A. Water supply to be potable. All swimming pools shall be provided with
a potable water supply, except that water from natural sources may
be used if approved by the Director of Health in accordance with the
standards for water purity as set forth in the Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut, Section 19-13-B 33.
B. Protection of water supply, There shall be no cross connection between
the potable water supply and the water in the pool which would allow
pool water to get into the water supply.
C. Recirculating systems. Residential swimming pools shall be equipped
with a recirculating system capable of filtering the entire contents of the
pool in 18 hours or less. The pool owner shall have available operating
instructions, which shall be provided by the supplier or builder, covering
the proper care and maintenance of the pool, including the use of
high-test calcium hypochlorite (dry chlorine) or sodium hypochlorite
(liquid chlorine) or equally effective germicide and algaecide, and the
importance of proper pH (alkalinity and acidity) control. Operating
instructions shall also be provided with every recirculating system.
D. Wastewater disposal. Effluent from filters during the backwash cycle
shall be discharged to a dry well, leaching field, disposal area or device
approved by the Director of Health.
E. Drainage systems. The swimming pool and equipment shall be equipped
to be completely emptied of water. Pool water may be disposed of in
a manner approved by the Director of Public Works and the director
of health so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard to adjoining
property or to the public.
F. Discharge of pool water. Pool water may not be discharged at the curb
or on the surface of any road. In all instances where a public stormwater
drain is available, the water from the pool may be discharged therein
if, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, such stormwater drain
is adequate. Where the water from the pool is not disposed of in the
public stormwater drain, it shall be disposed of by means of dry wells or
leaching fields or a tank truck or a sprinkling system or dispersion point
on the surface, provided that such water will not overflow onto abutting
property or flood existing leaching areas of a sewage disposal system.
G. Protection of water supply. There shall be no direct physical connection
between any drain from the pool and any storm drain which would
permit a backup from the storm drain into the swimming pool.
§ 93-10. Use of lights.
Where lights are used to illuminate any portion of a residential swimming
pool, they shall be so arranged or shaded as to reflect light away from
adjacent premises or public highways.
§ 93-11. Safety precautions.
A. Overhead electric conductors. No overhead electrical conductor shall be
installed or maintained within 20 feet of the perimeter of any swimming
pool. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to pools
to which bathers have access, which may become electrically charged as
§ 93-9 FAIRFIELD CODE § 93-11
93:186
a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other
cause shall be effectively grounded.
B. Abandonment of pools. If any residential swimming pool shall be
abandoned or permanently discontinued, it shall be filled, regraded
or covered in a manner approved by the Supervisor of the Building
Inspection Department.
C. Enclosures. Residential swimming pools shall be protected with fencing
or permanent enclosures, either around the pool area or the property,
to make the water inaccessible from the outside to small children. Such
fencing or permanent enclosures, including gates therein, shall be not
less than four feet high above the underlying ground. All gates shall
be self-closing and self-latching, with latches placed four feet above the
underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to
small children. Buildings may constitute part of the enclosure. Natural
barriers may constitute part of the enclosure as long as the protection
afforded is equal to that provided by the fencing, gate and latch
described above. Aboveground pools which are protected by steps, with
self-closing, self-latching gates, at least four feet high, or with vertical
sides at least four feet high and steps easily removable by one person,
shall not require fencing or other enclosure.
§ 93-12. Inspections; suspension of use.
A. The Supervisor of the Building Inspection Department and the Director
of Health shall conduct such inspections as they deem necessary to
ensure compliance with provisions of this chapter.
B. In the event that any swimming pool is found to be a hazard to health,
the Director of Health may cause a suspension of the use thereof until
such time as it shall no longer constitute a hazard.
§ 93-13. Appeals.
An appeal may be taken from a decision of the Supervisor of the Building
Inspection Department in the enforcement of this chapter in accordance
with the provisions of the Building Code of the Town.31
Chapter 95
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Charter, § 9.17, and Ch.
40, Art. I.
Determination of property tax rate — See
Charter, § 12.3E.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 56, Building, Art. II, State Basic Building Code.
§ 93-11 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 93-13
93:187

ARTICLE I
Tax Abatement for Low- or Moderate-Income Housing
[Adopted 5-29-201832]
§ 95-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing, the construction or
rehabilitation of which is financially subsidized, aided or assisted in any
way, by federal or state statute, which housing is subject to regulation
or supervision of rents, charges or sales prices and methods of operation
by a governmental agency pursuant to a written agreement, contract or
other written instrument with the Town as prescribed by § 95-2 below
that restricts occupancy of such housing to persons and/or families whose
incomes do not exceed prescribed limits (each, a "housing agreement"),
and shall be deemed to include the real property on which such housing is
situated.
OWNER — A person or persons, partnership, joint venture, limited liability
company, trust or corporation who or that has executed a housing
agreement with the Town.
§ 95-2. Contracts for abatement.
The First Selectman may, by resolution enacted by majority vote of the
Board of Selectmen, enter into one or more housing agreements on behalf
of the Town with an owner granting abatement, in whole, or in part, of the
real property taxes on such housing, provided that such abatement need not
be conditioned upon receipt of state reimbursement to the Town for such
abatement; and provided further that each such housing agreement shall
require that the owner apply the money equivalent of the taxes abated to
one or more of the following specified purposes; 1) to reduce rents below
the levels which would be achieved in the absence of abatement and to
improve the quality and design of such housing; 2) to effect occupancy
by persons and families of varying income levels, within limits determined
by the Commissioner of Housing by regulation; or 3) to provide necessary
related facilities or services in such housing. Such abatement shall be made
pursuant to a housing agreement between the Town and the owner of
any such low- or moderate-income housing, which housing agreement shall
provide the terms of such abatement, that funds equal to the amount of
such abatement shall be used for any one or more of the purposes herein
stated, and that such abatement shall terminate at any time when such
housing is not used solely for low- or moderate-income persons or families.
The amount of such abatement shall be established in each such housing
agreement, giving due consideration to the purpose or purposes to which
the money equivalent to the taxes so abated is to be applied.
32.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Tax Abatement to Church
Housing for Fairfield, Inc., adopted 9-23-1974.
§ 95-1 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-3
93:189
§ 95-3. Procedure.
Any property owner desiring to have real property taxes abated pursuant
to C.G.S. § 8-215 and the provisions of this article may apply to the Tax
Assessor, in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the
Tax Assessor, for such abatement. The Tax Assessor shall investigate the
circumstances regarding such real property, and, if the Tax Assessor finds
that the property qualifies for tax abatement pursuant to C.G.S. § 8-215
and the provisions of this article, shall prepare a resolution regarding
same and submit said resolution to the Board of Selectmen along with
the recommendation of the Tax Assessor. Said housing agreement shall be
considered by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with its procedures.
The recommendation of the Tax Assessor shall be considered by the Board
of Selectmen but shall not be binding upon said body.
§ 95-4. Term.
The abatement shall become effective on the date specified in the housing
agreement between the Town and the owner of low- or moderate-income
housing. The terms of abatement shall extend for the remainder of the
fiscal year in which such abatement becomes effective and may continue
as specified in the housing agreement, provided that such abatement shall
terminate at any time when the housing agreement is terminated in
accordance with its terms, including without limitation when the property
for which tax abatement had been granted is not used solely for low- or
moderate-income housing.
§ 95-4.1. Valuation.
For the purpose of determining the amount of taxes to be abated as
aforesaid, the present true and actual value of low- or moderate-income
housing on which rents and carrying charges are limited by regulatory
agreement with, or otherwise regulated by, federal or state government or
department or agency thereof, shall be based upon and shall not exceed
the capitalized value of the net rental income of the housing project. For
purposes of this article, "net rental income" shall mean gross income of the
project as limited by schedule of rents or carrying charges, less reasonable
operating expenses and property taxes.
§ 95-4.2. State assistance.
The First Selectman of the Town of Fairfield may, when authorized by
resolution enacted by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen, enter
into written agreements, contracts or other instruments with the state for
financial assistance by the state in the form of reimbursement for all or
part of the tax abatement granted to an owner of low- or moderate-income
housing in accordance with this article; provided that such an agreement,
contract or instrument with the state need not be a condition of any tax
abatement.
§ 95-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 95-4.3
93:190
§ 95-4.3. Abated property report.
At fiscal year end, the Tax Assessor shall provide to the Affordable Housing
Commission a list of all housing agreements approved by the Board of
Selectmen pursuant to this article during such fiscal year. The list shall
include the property address, owner and dollar amount of taxes abated at
fiscal year end for the property. The Affordable Housing Commission shall
include the Tax Assessor's abated property report in the annual report to
the Representative Town Meeting as prescribed by Town Code § 6-1.
§ 95-4.3 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-4.3
93:191

ARTICLE II
Solar Energy Exemptions
[Adopted 7-26-201033]
§ 95-5. Heating or cooling systems.
A. Any building in the Town of Fairfield, the construction of which is
commenced on or after October 1, 1976, which is equipped with an
active solar heating or cooling system, or any building to which a solar
energy heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976,
to the extent of the amount by which the assessed valuation of such real
property equipped with such solar heating and cooling system exceeds
the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the
conventional portion of the heating or cooling system exclusive of any
portion of such system related to solar energy, shall be exempt from
taxation, provided that this exemption shall only apply to the first 15
assessment years following the construction of such building or the
addition of such system to a building.
B. As used in this section, "solar energy heating or cooling system" means
equipment which:
(1) Provides for the collection, transfer, storage and use of incident solar
energy for water heating, space heating or cooling which, absent
such solar energy system, would require a conventional energy
source such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity;
(2) Employs mechanical means such as fans or pumps to transfer
energy; and
(3) Meets standards established by regulation, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 54 of the Connecticut General Statutes, by the
Secretary of the Office of Policy and Management.
C. Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this section
for any assessment year shall file with the Assessor, on or before
November 1 in such assessment year, a written application claiming such
exemption on a form prescribed by the Assessor. Failure to file such
application in said manner and form within the time limit prescribed
shall constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for the
assessment year. Such application shall not be required for any
assessment year following that for which the initial application is filed,
provided that, if such solar energy heating or cooling system is altered in
a manner which would require a building permit, such alteration shall be
deemed a waiver of the right to such exemption until a new application,
applicable with respect to such altered system, is filed and the right to
such exemption is established as required initially.
§ 95-6. Class I renewable energy sources, hydropower facilities,
solar water or space heating systems and geothermal energy
sources.
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Solar Energy, adopted
10-24-1977.
§ 95-5 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-6
93:193
A. Any Class I renewable energy source, as defined in Subsection B of this
section, or any hydropower facility, as defined in Subsection C of this
section, installed for the generation of electricity for private residential
use or on a farm, as defined in Subsection (q) of Section 1-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, shall be exempt from taxation, provided
such installation occurs on or after October 1, 2007, and further
provided such installation is for a single-family dwelling, multifamily
dwelling consisting of two to four units or a farm, or any passive or active
solar water or space heating system or geothermal energy resource.
B. "Class I renewable energy source" means:
(1) Energy derived from solar power, wind power, a fuel cell, methane
gas from landfills, ocean thermal power, wave or tidal power, lowemission
advanced renewable energy conversion technologies, a
run-of-the-river hydropower facility provided such facility has a
generating capacity of not more than five megawatts, does not cause
an appreciable change in the river flow, and began operation after
July 1, 2003, or a sustainable biomass facility with an average
emission rate of equal to or less than 0.075 pound of nitrogen oxides
per million BTU of heat input for the previous calendar quarter,
except that energy derived from a sustainable biomass facility with
a capacity of less than 500 kilowatts that began construction before
July 1, 2003, may be considered a Class I renewable energy source;
or
(2) Any electrical generation, including distributed generation,
generated from a Class I renewable energy source.
C. "Hydropower facility" means a run-of-the-river hydropower facility,
provided such facility has a generating capacity of not more than five
megawatts, does not cause an appreciable change in the riverflow, and
began operation prior to July 1, 2003.
D. Any person claiming the exemption provided in this section for any
assessment year shall, on or before the first day of November in such
assessment year, file with the Assessor in the Town in which such
hydropower facility, Class I renewable energy source, or passive or
active solar water or space heating system or geothermal energy
resource is located, a written application claiming such exemption.
Failure to file such application in the manner and form as provided by
such Assessor or board within the time limit prescribed shall constitute
a waiver of the right to such exemption for such assessment year. Such
application shall not be required for any assessment year following that
for which the initial application is filed, provided that if such hydropower
facility, Class I renewable energy source, or passive or active solar water
or space heating system or geothermal energy resource is altered in a
manner which would require a building permit, such alteration shall be
deemed a waiver of the right to such exemption until a new application,
applicable with respect to such altered source, is filed and the right to
such exemption is established as required initially.
§ 95-6.1. Passive solar energy heating or cooling systems and
hybrid systems.
§ 95-6 FAIRFIELD CODE § 95-6.1
93:194
A. Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or after April
20, 1977, which is equipped with a passive or hybrid solar energy
heating or cooling system, or any building to which such a system
is added on or after April 20, 1977, to the extent of any amount by
which the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with such
a system exceeds the valuation at which such real property would be
assessed if built using conventional construction techniques in lieu of
construction related to such a system, as determined by the assessing
officer of the municipality, shall be exempt from taxation, provided this
exemption shall only apply to the first fifteen assessment years following
construction of such building or addition of any such system to a
building. Any portion of a hybrid solar energy heating or cooling system
which is allowed an exemption under § 95-5 shall not be eligible for
exemption under this section.
B. As used in this section, "passive solar energy heating or cooling system"
means a system which utilizes the structural elements of a building for
the collection of incident solar energy and its storage and distribution for
use in water heating or space heating or cooling, which building absent
such system would require a conventional energy resource, such as
petroleum products, natural gas or electricity, and which system meets
standards established by regulation, in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 54 of the Connecticut General Statutes, by the Secretary
of the Office of Policy and Management; and "hybrid system" means a
solar energy heating or cooling system which consists of both active and
passive elements and which meets the standards established for both.
C. Any person claiming the exemption provided in this section for any
assessment year shall, on or before the first day of November in such
assessment year, file with the Assessor a written application claiming
such exemption. Failure to file such application in the manner and form
as provided by such Assessor in the time limit prescribed shall constitute
a waiver of the right to such exemption for such assessment year. Such
application shall not be required for any assessment year following that
for which the initial application is filed, provided that, if such passive
or hybrid solar energy heating or cooling system is altered in a manner
which would require a building permit, such alteration shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to such exemption until a new application, applicable
with respect to such altered system, is filed and the right to such
exemption is established as required initially.
§ 95-6.2. Cogeneration systems.
A. Subject to the provisions of Subsection B of this section, any
cogeneration system installed on or after July 1, 2007, shall be exempt
from taxation, provided that this exemption shall only apply to the first
15 assessment years following the installation of such system. This
exemption shall not apply to additions to resource recovery facilities
operating on October 1, 1994, or to resource recovery facilities
constructed on and after that date or to property acquired by eminent
domain for the purpose of qualifying for the exemption.
§ 95-6.1 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-6.2
93:195
B. As used in this section, "cogeneration system" means equipment which
is designed, operated and installed as a system which produces, in
the same process, electricity and exhaust steam, waste steam, heat
or other resultant thermal energy which is used for space or water
heating or cooling, or industrial, commercial, manufacturing or other
useful purposes and which meets standards established by regulation, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 54, by the Secretary of the
Office of Policy and Management.
C. The Town may enter into a written agreement with an applicant for the
exemption, which may require the applicant to make payments to the
municipality in lieu of taxes. The agreement may vary the amount of
the payments in lieu of taxes in each assessment year of the agreement,
provided the payment in any assessment year is not greater than the
taxes which would otherwise be due in the absence of the exemption.
Any agreement negotiated under this section shall be submitted to the
Representative Town Meeting for its approval or rejection;
D. Any person claiming the exemption provided in this section for any
assessment year and whose application has been approved in
accordance with Subsection C of this section, shall, on or before the
first day of November in such assessment year, file with the Assessor a
written application claiming the exemption. Failure to file the application
in the manner and form as provided by such Assessor a within the time
limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to the exemption
for such assessment year. Such application shall not be required for
any assessment year following that for which the initial application is
filed, provided that, if such cogeneration system is altered in a manner
which would require a building permit, such alteration shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to such exemption until a new application, applicable
with respect to such altered system, is filed and the right to such
exemption is established as required initially.
§ 95-6.2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 95-6.2
93:196
ARTICLE III
Tax Relief for Elderly and Disabled Homeowners
[Adopted 9-20-1982; amended in its entirety 9-23-2013]
§ 95-7. Enactment of tax relief; purpose; effective date.
The Town of Fairfield hereby enacts a tax relief program for elderly
homeowners or permanently and totally disabled homeowners pursuant to
Section 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes for eligible residents
of the Town of Fairfield on the terms and conditions provided herein.
This article is enacted for the purpose of assisting elderly or permanently
disabled homeowners with a portion of the costs of property taxation.
This program shall become effective for the assessment year commencing
October 1, 2012.
§ 95-8. Conditions for eligibility.
A. Any person who owns real property in the Town of Fairfield or is liable
for payment of taxes thereon pursuant to Section 12-48 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and who occupies said real property as
a residence and fulfills the following eligibility requirements shall be
entitled to tax relief on the Grand List immediately preceding the
application period provided for in § 95-9 below. The reference to
"person" pursuant to this subsection shall hereinafter mean either
"applicant" or "recipient."
B. After the applicant's claim has been filed and approved, such applicant
shall be required to file such an application biannually. All persons
receiving Town tax relief under the article on the October 1, 2011, Grand
List shall refile for such tax relief for October 1, 2012, and biennially
thereafter based on the year of the initial claim. If a tax payer's initial
year of filing was for an odd-numbered grand list year, refiling will occur
for an odd-numbered Grand List year. If a tax payer's initial year of filing
was for an even-numbered Grand List year, refiling will occur for an
even-numbered grand list year."
C. The applicant shall be entitled to tax relief if all the following conditions
are met:
(1) Such applicant (or a spouse domiciled with such applicant) has
attained age 65 or over at the end of the preceding calendar year
or is 60 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer
qualified for tax relief under this program at the time of his or her
death; or has not attained the age of 65 years and is eligible in
accordance with the federal regulations to receive permanent total
disability benefits under social security or has not been engaged
in employment covered by social security and accordingly has not
qualified for benefits thereunder, but has qualified for permanent
total disability benefits under any federal, state or local government
retirement or disability plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act
and any teacher's retirement plan in which requirements with
respect to qualifications for such permanent total disability benefits
are comparable to such requirements under social security.
§ 95-7 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-8
93:197
(2) Such applicant shall have been a taxpayer of the Town of Fairfield
and have paid taxes for at least one year as of October 1 of the
current Grand List year. [Amended 5-29-2018]
(3) The property for which the benefit is claimed is the legal residence
of such applicant and is occupied for than 183 days of each year by
such applicant. [Amended 5-29-2018]
(4) Such applicant(s) shall have applied for property tax relief under any
state statutes applicable to persons 65 and over and the permanently
and totally disabled for which he or she is eligible. If such applicant
has not applied for tax relief under any state statutes because he
or she is not eligible, he or she shall so certify by filing on a form
acceptable to the Assessor an affidavit attesting to his or her
inability.
(5) Such persons shall have individually, if unmarried, or jointly, if
married, qualifying income in an amount not to exceed limits
described below for each program for the tax year ending
immediately preceding the application for tax relief benefits.
"Qualifying income" is defined as adjusted gross income, as defined
in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as may be amended from time
to time, plus the nontaxable portion of any social security benefits,
railroad retirement benefits, any tax shelter losses, income from
other tax-exempt retirements and annuity sources and income from
tax-exempt bonds and any other income not includable in adjusted
gross income. Unreimbursed gross medical and dental expenses
(qualifying as and included on a federal income tax return of the
calendar year immediately preceding the year of application as an
itemized deduction before application of the 7.5% or other
limitation) of such person and the spouse are deductible from their
income in arriving at qualifying income to the extent such expenses
exceed 30% of their qualifying income determined before this
medical deduction.
(6) Such person shall have applied or reapplied in person to the
Assessor for the tax relief during the application period established
in § 95-9 below. [Amended 5-29-2018]
(7) Benefits granted under this article shall be prorated by the office
of the Assessor in the event of the sale or transfer of the affected
real estate or the death of the applicant and the surviving spouse, if
applicable.
(8) 34Any application and spouse who qualify for property tax relief
under this article shall have a qualifying total asset value (QTAV)
not exceeding $650,000. Qualifying total asset value shall consist
of any and all assets of the applicant and spouse as of the date of
application but shall specifically exclude the value of the applicant's
primary legal residence and all tangible personal property contained
therein. Each applicant to whom QTAV applies shall make a sworn
statement in a form satisfactory to the Assessor that such applicant's
QTAV does not exceed $650,000.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(8), which stated that taxpayers shall not be delinquent
in payment of real property, personal, or motor vehicle taxes, sewer use charges, or sewer
§ 95-8 FAIRFIELD CODE § 95-8
93:198
D. A married homeowner whose spouse is a resident of a health-care facility
or nursing home in Connecticut that is receiving payment related to such
spouse under Title XIX (Medicaid) need not declare the spouse's social
security income. Proof that the spouse is in a facility must be provided,
including the period of time said spouse was in the facility, the time
that Title XIX commenced, and the name and address of the facility. The
statement of proof must be on the facility's letterhead and signed by the
administrator or other official of the facility.
§ 95-9. Application. [Amended 5-29-2018]
In order to be entitled to the tax relief provided herein, an application must
be filed with the Assessor not earlier than February 1 and not later than
May 15 preceding the fiscal year in which the tax is payable.
A. Any eligible taxpayer, or his/her authorized agent, shall file applications
for tax relief and tax deferral under this chapter with the Town of
Fairfield Assessor, any time from the first of February to the 15th day
of May, prior to the commencement of the tax year for which tax relief
is claimed, on a form or forms prescribed and furnished by the Town
of Fairfield. In making such application, the taxpayer shall present to
the Assessor, in substantiation of his/her application, a copy of his/her
federal income tax return for the calendar year immediately preceding
the year of application, a copy of the Social Security Act Administration
Form 1099, or, if not required to file a return, such other evidence
of qualifying income which the Assessor may reasonably require to
establish compliance with the income qualifications provided in § 95-15
of this article. The applicant, or his/her authorized agent, shall sign a
sworn affidavit in the presence of the Assessor affirming the accuracy of
the statements in the application.
B. When the Assessor is satisfied that the applying taxpayer qualifies under
this article, he/she shall compute the amount of such tax relief and tax
deferral and cause certificates of tax credit and tax deferral to be issued
in such form as to permit the Tax Collector to reduce the amount of
tax levied against the taxpayer and make proper record thereof, and a
copy thereof shall be delivered to the applicant. Neither the Assessor nor
the Tax Collector shall unreasonably withhold the issuance of such a tax
credit and tax deferral to a properly qualifying taxpayer. The tax credit
shall be applied to the tax payments.
C. Affidavits or applications or other documents presented in support of
the application for tax relief or tax deferral shall not be open for public
inspection and shall not be disclosed except in connection with claims of
fraud.
D. An eligible taxpayer may make his/her application for tax relief or tax
deferral to the Assessor up until August 15th of the claim year if
approved for extension by the Assessor. The Assessor may grant such
extension in the case of extenuating circumstance due to illness or
assessments for any period extending back more than one year immediately preceding the
date of their application, was repealed 5-29-2018. This ordinance also renumbered former
Subsection C(9) as Subsection C(8).
§ 95-8 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-9
93:199
incapacitation as evidenced by a [physician's] certificate signed by a
physician or an advanced practice registered nurse, or if the Assessor
determines there is good cause for doing so. Reference Public Act 12-197
amending 12-170w of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 95-10. Amount of tax relief per person limited. [Amended
5-29-2018]
No property tax relief provided for any person shall exceed in the aggregate
75% of the tax which would, except for the benefits provided by state
statutes and the program(s), be laid against such person.
§ 95-11. Amount of relief granted through program limited.
The total of all relief granted under the provisions of these programs shall
not exceed an amount equal to 2.5% of the total real property tax levied in
Fairfield in the preceding fiscal year. The total amount that can be deferred
under § 95-15B is limited to a maximum of $500,000 in any tax year. In the
event that either foregoing limitation on relief is reached, relief shall be
prorated among qualified applicants.
§ 95-12. Relief per parcel of property limited to eligible persons.
[Amended 5-29-2018]
Only one tax relief benefit shall be allowed for each parcel of real property
eligible for tax relief under the programs. In the event that title to real
property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his or her spouse who
are eligible for tax relief and any other person or persons, the tax relief
under the programs shall be prorated to allow a tax relief benefit equivalent
to the fractional share in the property of such taxpayer or spouse, and the
person or persons not eligible shall not receive any tax relief.
§ 95-13. Effect on other benefits. [Amended 5-29-2018]
The tax relief provided to any person under the programs shall not
disqualify such person with respect to any benefits for which such person is
eligible under any state statute, and any tax relief provided under the article
shall be in addition to any such benefits.
§ 95-14. Partial waiver of lien rights.
The Town of Fairfield hereby waives any lien rights given to it by Section
12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to the tax freeze
and tax credit programs but will exercise such rights as provided below with
respect to the tax deferral program.
§ 95-15. Tax relief programs.
An applicant may not apply, in any assessment year, for more than one of
the following Town tax relief programs:
§ 95-9 FAIRFIELD CODE § 95-15
93:200
A. Tax freeze. Any taxpayer meeting the eligibility requirements of § 95-8 and
having qualifying income not exceeding $50,600 may elect to apply for a freeze
under which such taxpayer shall pay the gross tax levied on applicable property,
calculated for the first year the application is granted (the "freeze amount") and
shall be entitled to continue to pay no more than the freeze amount for each
subsequent year in which the taxpayer, or his surviving spouse, continues to
meet such qualifications, subject to the following:
(1) In the event that the applicant shall make improvements to his property
resulting in an increase in his assessment, an amount calculated by
multiplying the increase in the taxpayer's assessment attributable to the
improvement by the mill rate in effect in the year such reassessment takes
place shall be added to the freeze amount then applicable to obtain a
revised freeze amount which will be the freeze amount for subsequent
assessment years;
(2) The applicant or his or her spouse must be at least 65 years of age at the
time of such application;
(3) Relief under this tax freeze is limited to not more than six consecutive years
(not including the initial year that is used as the year to determine the
freeze amount). Should the applicant choose to apply for the tax deferral
program, described below, in the year following the last year of tax freeze
eligibility, the freeze amount shall be used as the deferral base under that
program;
(4) An applicant and/or his or her spouse may only receive tax relief under the
tax freeze program once during his or her life with an individual also being
deemed to have received such tax relief under the tax freeze program if
their spouse received such benefits while they were married;
(5) The qualifying income threshold of $50,600 for the tax freeze program
indicated in § 95-15A above shall be adjusted in the same manner as
described in § 95-15C(2) with respect to the tax credit program; and
(6) If a decrease in the mill rate lowers the normal tax bill below the original
frozen tax level, the applicant will pay the normal tax. When the normal tax
bill exceeds the original frozen tax bill, the applicant will pay his original
frozen tax bill. The counting of the six-year period specified in § 95-15A(3)
shall be suspended during the period in which the applicant pays the normal
tax.
B. Tax deferral. Any taxpayer age 75 or older at the end of the preceding calendar
year and meeting the eligibility requirements of § 95-8 and having qualifying
income not exceeding $80,000 may elect to apply for a deferral of up to 50% of
the gross tax levied on applicable property each year in which the taxpayer, or
his surviving spouse, continues to meet such eligibility requirements, subject to
the following:
(1) The recipient shall enter into a written agreement with the Town providing
for reimbursement, which shall be recorded in the land records of the
Town and shall constitute a lien on the property payable upon death or
conveyance.
(2) All benefits shall be reimbursed to the Town upon the death of the recipient,
unless the recipient's surviving spouse applies for benefits under this
program and also qualifies under § 95-8, or conveyance of the real property
subject to taxation.
§ 95-15 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-15
93:201
(3) All benefits shall be subject to an interest charge at the greater of the
annual percentage rate of 3% or the rate on ten-year United States Treasury
Notes. The rate for the purposes of this subsection shall be set by the Chief
Fiscal Officer of the Town of Fairfield on January 31 in each calendar year
or, if such day is a day on which the fiscal office of the Town of Fairfield
is not open, on the next prior day on which it is open. Such rate shall be
effective for the following year. Such interest shall be simple interest, not
compounded, and shall accrue from the date of deferral until the date of
repayment.
(4) Total deferments, including accrued interest, for all years shall not exceed
70% of the most recent assessed value of the real property.
(5) The qualifying income threshold of $80,000 for the tax deferral program
indicated in § 95-15B above shall be adjusted in the same manner as
described in § 95-15C(2) with respect to the tax credit program.
(6) If a decrease in the mill rate lowers the normal tax bill below the original
deferral base, the applicant will pay the normal tax. When the normal tax
bill exceeds the original deferral base, the applicant will pay the original
deferral base.
(7) Taxpayers between the age 65 and 75 who had participated in the tax
deferral option as of the 2012 Grand List may reapply for their original
deferral base (deferring tax above that base), provided their qualifying
income for the preceding year did not exceed $80,000.
C. Tax credit.
(1) Any applicant meeting the eligibility requirements of § 95-8 and having
qualifying income shown in the table below, adjusted annually as provided in
Subsection C(2) below, shall be entitled to a tax credit of up to a maximum (as
limited by § 95-10) provided in the following table, effective for the assessment
year beginning October 1, 2012, and for each assessment year thereafter:
Qualifying Income
Over To
Tax Credit
(percentage of
tax due)
Cap
(not to exceed)
$0 $16,700 67% $5,000
$16,701 $23,900 60% $4,500
$23,901 $29,500 50% $3,700
$29,501 $35,300 42% $3,500
$35,301 $43,400 33% $2,700
$43,401 $50,600 25% $2,000
$50,601 $70,000 15% $1,400
For prior credit option participants, tax credit will not be less than calculated
for 2012/2013, based upon 2012/2013 qualification levels.
(2) The amounts of qualifying income shown in the above table shall be adjusted
annually in a uniform manner to reflect the annual inflation adjustment in social
security income, with each adjustment of qualifying income determined to the
§ 95-15 FAIRFIELD CODE § 95-15
93:202
nearest $100. Each such adjustment shall be prepared by the Secretary of the
Office of Policy and Management, State of Connecticut, in relation to the annual
inflation adjustment in social security, if any, becoming effective at any time
during the twelve-month period immediately preceding the first of October of
each year, and shall be the amount of such adjustment which is distributed to
the Assessor as of December 31 next following. Adjustments for any bracket
of qualifying income not included in the adjustments made by the Secretary
of the Office of Policy and Management shall be made by the Assessor by
applying the same percentage used by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management in making its adjustments and with each adjustment of qualifying
income determined to the nearest $100.
§ 95-15.1. Report by Assessor.
The Assessor shall report to the RTM every June on the tax relief program
established under Article III of Chapter 95.
§ 95-15.2. Severability.
In the event that any provision of §§ 95-7 through 95-15 of the Fairfield
Town Code is found to be unlawful, only such unlawful provision shall be
ineffective, and all other provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 95-15.3. When effective.
The amendments to §§ 95-7 through 95-15.2 shall become effective
immediately after the period for subjecting them to a referendum has
expired.
§ 95-15.4. RTM Review Committee. [Amended 2-23-2015;
5-29-2018]
At its first regularly scheduled meeting in January 2020, the Representative
Town Meeting shall convene a special committee to review Article III of
Chapter 95, Tax Relief for Elderly and Disabled Homeowners.
§ 95-15 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-15.4
93:203

ARTICLE IV
Tax Bills
[Adopted 3-22-1982]
§ 95-16. Bills for tax less than $10. [Amended 5-24-2010]
Commencing with the Grand List of October 1, 2009, the Tax Collector shall
not send out any tax bills for property tax on any property located within
the Town of Fairfield when the original calculation of such tax totals less
than $10. Any person who owns property in the Town of Fairfield or is liable
for payment of taxes thereon pursuant to Section 12-48 of the Connecticut
General Statutes and who, except for the foregoing, would have received a
property tax bill relating to said property in an amount less than $10 for the
tax year shall have such tax waived.
§ 95-17. Construal.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve any person from any
tax obligations presently existing, irrespective of the amount of said tax.
§ 95-16 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-17
93:205

ARTICLE V
Duplicate Tax Bills; Delinquent Motor Vehicle Taxes
[Adopted 3-22-1982]
§ 95-18. Charge for duplicate tax bill. [Amended 12-4-1998]
The Tax Collector is authorized in the exercise of his duties to impose
a charge of $2 for each duplicate tax bill, or each replacement tax bill,
prepared to meet the requirements of recordkeeping needs of the Town.
§ 95-18.1. Payment of delinquent motor vehicle taxes. [Added
1-26-2004]
A. In order for a taxpayer to obtain an immediate motor vehicle clearance,
delinquent property taxes applicable with respect to any motor vehicle
shall be paid only in cash, by certified check, or by money order. Any
taxpayer not requiring an immediate motor vehicle clearance may pay by
personal check. If the check clears, a taxpayer paying by personal check
will receive a motor vehicle clearance 10 days after such taxpayer's
payment is received by the Tax Collector.
B. Each taxpayer who has been delinquent in the payment of any property
tax or installment thereof on any motor vehicle and whose delinquency
was reported to the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles pursuant to
Connecticut General Statutes Section 14-33, in addition to the
delinquent taxes and all interest thereon, shall pay to the Tax Collector a
fee of $5 for each such reported delinquency.
C. For purposes of this section, the term "delinquent" shall have the same
meaning as in Connecticut General Statutes Section 12-145.
§ 95-18 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-18.1
93:207

ARTICLE VI
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 5-23-1983; amended in its entirety 11-24-1986]
§ 95-19. Amount of exemption; conditions; application.
A. Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance
with Subdivision (19) of Section 12-81 of the General Statutes shall
be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in the amount of
$1,000, provided that the total of such veteran's adjusted gross income
as determined for purposes of the federal income tax, plus any other
income of such veteran not included in such adjusted gross income,
individually, if unmarried, or jointly, if married, in the calendar year
ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to
which such additional exemption is allowed is not more than $16,000 if
such veteran is married or not more than $14,000 if such veteran is not
married.
B. Any municipality, upon approval by its legislative body, may provide that
any veteran's surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property
tax in accordance with Subdivision (22) of Section 12-81 shall be entitled
to an additional exemption applicable to the assessed value of property
up to the amount of $1,000, provided that the total of such spouse's
adjusted gross income as determined for purposes of the federal income
tax, plus any other income of such spouse not included in such adjusted
gross income, in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the
assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is
allowed is not more than $14,000.
C. Any such veteran submitting a claim for such additional exemption shall
be required to file an application, on a form prepared for such purpose
by the Assessor, not later than 60 days preceding the assessment date
with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. Each such
application shall include a copy of such veteran's federal income tax
return or, in the event that such return is not filed, such evidence related
to income as may be required by the Assessor for the tax year of such
veteran ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to
which such additional exemption is claimed.
§ 95-20. Applicability.
The dwelling house and the lot whereupon the same is erected, belonging
to or held in trust for any citizen and resident of this state, occupied as
his domicile, shall be fully exempt from local property taxation if he is
a veteran who served in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard or
Air Force of the United States and has received financial assistance for
specially adapted housing under the provisions of 38 U.S.C. § 801 and has
applied such assistance toward the acquisition of such dwelling house.
The same exemption shall be allowed on such housing units owned by
the unremarried surviving spouse of such veteran or by such veteran and
spouse while occupying such premises as a residence.
§ 95-19 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-20
93:209

ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Ambulances
[Adopted 2-24-1986]
§ 95-21. Exemption granted; conditions.
Pursuant to Taxation Document No. 346, statutes pertaining to the
assessment and collection of local property taxes and miscellaneous
pertinent Sections 12-81c, there is hereby created an exemption from
personal property taxation for any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is
used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated
individual, except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for
payment.
§ 95-21 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-21
93:211

ARTICLE VIII
Exemption for Blind Persons
[Adopted 10-26-1987]
§ 95-22. Grant of exemption; income limits.
A. Any person entitled to the exemption from property tax applicable to
the assessed value of property up to the amount of $3,000, as provided
under Subdivision (17) of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, shall be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax
in an amount up to $2,000 of such assessed value, provided that the
total of such person's adjusted gross income as determined for purposes
of the federal income tax, plus any other income of such person not
included in such adjusted gross income, individually, if unmarried, or
jointly, if married, in the calendar year ending immediately preceding
the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is
allowed is not more than $16,000 if such person is married or not more
than $14,000 if such person is not married.
B. Any person submitting a claim for the additional exemption as provided
under Subsection A of this section shall be required to file an application,
on a form prepared for such purpose by the Assessor, not later than
the date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional
exemption is claimed. Each such application shall include a copy of
such person's federal income tax return, or in the event that a return
is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by the
Assessor for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to the
approval of a claim for such additional exemption, provided that such
person's qualifying income does not exceed the applicable maximum
amount as provided under Subsection A of this section or as
subsequently provided under the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 95-23. Applicability of article.
This article shall take effect 14 days from its passage and shall be applicable
to the assessment year commencing October 1, 1987, and each assessment
year thereafter.
§ 95-22 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-23
93:213

ARTICLE IX
Property Acquired by Tax-Exempt Organizations
[Adopted 5-24-199335]
§ 95-24. Date of conveyance.
All properties which shall be acquired by any organization given a property
tax exemption by any of Subsections (7) to (16), inclusive, of Section 12-81
of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be exempt from taxation from the
date of conveyance to such organization.
§ 95-25. Application for exemption.
A tax-exempt organization, as defined in Section 12-18(7) to (16) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, shall apply for exemption in writing to the
Tax Collector. Such application shall contain all information that the Tax
Collector requires, including certified copies of instruments of conveyance
to the applicant.
§ 95-26. Reimbursement procedures.
The Tax Collector shall provide all the necessary procedures for
reimbursement of the tax-exempt organization for any tax paid by it for a
period subsequent to said conveyance date and for any tax paid by the prior
owner for a period subsequent to said date for which such organization
reimbursed such owner on the transfer of title to such property.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall have no retroactive effect or
application.
§ 95-24 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 95-26
93:215
Chapter 99
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
§ 99-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSIENT MERCHANT —
§ 99-2. License required.
All transient merchants shall be prohibited from conducting business within
the Town without first obtaining a license. The Chief of Police for the
Fairfield Police Department shall issue any transient merchant a license
authorizing such transient merchant to sell, exhibit for sale, or exhibit for
the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, in the Town, his goods
or merchandise only after such transient merchant has fully complied with
§ 99-3 below and made payment in accordance with the schedule of fees as
enumerated in § 99-5.
§ 99-3. Application.
A. The transient merchant shall make application to the Chief of Police for
a license at least 10 days prior to the date of his contemplated sale or
exhibit to be held in the Town, which application shall be in the form of
a sworn affidavit stating:
(1) The full name and home and business address of the transient
merchant;
(2) A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant's
age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;
(3) The location of his principal office and place of business;
Means and includes all persons who engage in itinerant business in
the Town or selling, or offering for sale, any goods, printed matter
or merchandise, including photographs or portraits, or exhibiting the
same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders
for the sale thereof.
A.
The term "transient merchant" shall not include a farmer or gardener
selling the produce of his own farm or garden; salesmen selling goods
to retail or wholesale establishments within the Town for resale;
vendors at fairs of the Town of Fairfield or Board of Education property
or vendors operating under a valid lease with the Board of Parks and
Recreation at Town parks or beaches; persons requested or invited to
call upon private residences by any owner or occupant thereof; a person
using a roadside or outside stand or booth located on the same site as
an established business owned and operated by the same person; any
person under 18 years old (and any adult chaperone for that youth) who
is selling on behalf of or under the authority of a 501c3 nonprofit or
selling his or her own goods (such as lemonade).
B.
§ 95-26 FAIRFIELD CODE § 99-3
93:216
(4) The designated agent for service of process within the state or, if
none, the names and addresses of the officers if it is a corporation,
and the partnership name and names and addresses of all partners
if the transient merchant is a firm;
(5) The names and addresses of all the transient merchant's agents and
employees who will represent the transient merchant in the Town
as salesmen;
(6) A statement showing the kind and character of the goods or
merchandise to be sold, offered for sale, or exhibited;
(7) A statement as to the period not to exceed 90 days, during which
the applicant intends to solicit orders;
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has registered with
the nearest local office of the Better Business Bureau;
(9) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
any felonies or misdemeanor(s), or has such charges pending; and
(10) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been refused a
license or permits to sell in or ever had a license or permit revoked
by the Town or by any other municipality or state.
B. The applicant shall submit:
(1) Identification in the form of a government issued ID;
(2) A specimen of his signature;
(3) A photograph (two inches by two inches);
(4) A copy of the applicant's State of Connecticut sales and use tax
permit;
(5) When applicable, a copy of a valid Health Department certificate
enforceable for the same period of time as the requested permit;
(6) When applicable, a copy of a certificate from the State Sealer of
Weights and Measurers indicating that all weights and measures
used by the applicant in his or her business have been approved
and stamped;
(7) The application fee in the amount described in this chapter;
(8) Proof of insurance;
(9) If the applicant is from out of state, a certificate in good standing
from the Secretary of the State providing that the firm or
corporation is qualified to conduct business in the State of
Connecticut; and
(10) Identifying information for the motor vehicle, including a copy of
the registration thereof, if any, to be used by the applicant.
(11) If the application is for a temporary license, the desired date of
commencement.
(12) If the applicant is selling on behalf of or under the authority of
a 501c3 nonprofit, proof of recognition by the Internal Revenue
Service as a 501c3 or proof of registration by the State of
Connecticut as a charitable organization.
C. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and photographed, and any such
fingerprints may, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, be sent to
the Federal Bureau of Investigation and to the Connecticut State Police
Investigation Department for further investigation.
§ 99-3 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 99-3
93:217
D. The signature on the application shall by witnessed by the Chief of
Police, or his or her agent.
E. Any applicant proposing to place or operate a roadside or outside stand
or both shall also exhibit a certificate of zoning compliance with respect
to any such location.
§ 99-4. Issuance of license.
A. Upon compliance by the applicant with the foregoing provisions, the Police
Department shall retain one original application and stamp and, within 10
days, return to the applicant a duplicate copy, which shall constitute a
license hereunder.
B. The stamp applied to the applicant's license shall bear the legend:
License No: ..............................................................
Date of Issue: ..............................................................
Date of Expiration: ..............................................................
Police Department, Fairfield, Connecticut
C. The license must be signed by the Chief of Police or his or her agent.
D. The license shall be nontransferable and nonassignable.
E. Any license issued shall be accompanied by a notice which will contain the
following language: "No person shall sell or offer for sale upon a public
street, sidewalk or other public place any spray string, stink bomb or other
substantially similar article pursuant to Chapter 99 of the Code of the Town
of Fairfield.
F. Reasons for denial. The Chief of Police may refuse to issue a transient
merchant's license if:
(1) The location and time of the activities described in the application would
endanger the safety and welfare of the applicant or its customers;
(2) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the
application;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving
a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts
against persons or property;
(4) The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or
conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered
within the five years immediately preceding the date of application;
(5) There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent
to the principal;
(6) The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the
immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the
satisfaction of the Chief of Police, or his or her agent, that the reasons
for such earlier denial no longer exist; or
(7) The applicant failed to supply the requested application information
outlined in § 99-3.
§ 99-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 99-5
93:218
§ 99-5. Fees.
Except as hereinafter provided, the following fees shall be charged for
transient merchants' licenses:
A. Nonresident.
(1) For a one-year transient merchants' license, a fee of $350.
(2) For a temporary transient merchants' license, a fee of $200.
B. Resident.
(1) For a one-year transient merchant's license, a fee shall be charged
based on the cost of processing said license. The fee, however, shall
be no less than $75 or no more than $100.
(2) For a temporary transient merchant's license, a fee shall be charged
based on the cost of processing said license. The fee, however, shall
be no less than $50 or no more than $75.
(3) For any person under the age of 16, no fee.
(4) Any resident of the Town of Fairfield who has reached his or her
62nd birthday at the time the license is applied for shall if he or she
otherwise qualifies for a license be issued said license without fee.
All other provisions of this Chapter 99 shall be complied with.
C. Exemptions:
(1) Pursuant to Section 21-30 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
United States military veterans shall be licensed under this chapter
without paying a license fee, provided that the veteran:
(a) Has resided in the state for two years preceding the date of
application for such license;
(b) Served in time of war as defined by Section 27-103 of the
Connecticut General Statutes; and
(c) Was honorably discharged from military service. The veteran
shall produce his/her certificate of honorable discharge from
military service or a copy thereof certified by the City/Town
Clerk from the records of the City/Town where such certificate
of discharge is recorded as provided in Section 12-93 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, for inspection, together with a
certificate from the City/Town Clerk that the applicant is a
resident of the state.
(2) Any person who is seeking to sell under the auspices of a 501c3
nonprofit organization recognized by the Internal Revenue Service
as a 501c3 may apply for a license under this chapter at no fee.
D. Any person who makes a false representation for the purpose of
obtaining a license under this section shall be fined not more than $250,
and said license shall be automatically revoked.
E. Fingerprinting fees are separate from the transient merchant fees:
(1) An amount in accordance with the current State of Connecticut
fingerprinting fee payable to the Treasurer of the State of
Connecticut.
(2) An amount in accordance with the current Town of Fairfield
fingerprinting fee payable to the Fairfield Police Department.
(3) Fingerprinting is mandatory every year.
§ 99-6. Display of badge.
§ 99-5 SWIMMING POOLS, RESIDENTIAL § 99-6
93:219
A. Each person holding a license shall, when engaged in the sales activities
regulated herein, prominently display a suitable badge furnished by
the Chief of Police, or his or her agent, indicating that such person is
a licensed transient merchant. The badge shall contain the transient
merchant's license number, name, photograph, and date of expiration of
such license and signature of the licensee.
B. Each licensee who uses a motor vehicle shall plainly and conspicuously
display on the front windshield of such motor vehicle a sign issued by
the Chief of Police indicating that such person is a licensed transient
merchant. Such sign shall contain the license plate number, the transient
merchant's license number, and the date of expiration of the license.
§ 99-7. Term of license; hours of solicitation.
A. The transient merchant's license shall expire one year from the date
of issuance, except for temporary transient merchant's licenses, which
shall be issued by the Chief of Police for periods not exceeding 10
consecutive days.
B. The hours of solicitation by transient merchants shall be from 10:00 a.m.
through 5:00 p.m. However, the following exceptions will apply:
(1) Food and/or ice cream truck transient merchant hours of solicitation
shall be 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(2) Parade vendor transient merchant hours of solicitation shall be 8:30
a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
§ 99-8. Conduct of transient merchants.
Any person operating in the Town as a transient merchant, whether or not
exempt from the licensing provisions of this chapter, shall conform to the
following regulations:
A. The transient merchant shall conduct himself/herself at all times in an
orderly and lawful manner.
B. The transient merchant shall immediately identify himself/herself by
means of a firm or corporate identification card and/or a valid state
motor vehicle driver's license.
C. The transient merchant shall, prior to a solicitation of a sale at the
residence of a buyer or prospective buyer, clearly, affirmatively and
expressly reveal at the time the seller initially contacts the buyer or
prospective buyer and before making any other statement or asking the
buyer any question, that the purpose of the contract is to effect a sale,
stating in general terms the goods or services the seller has to offer.
D. The transient merchant shall give a written receipt to the purchaser for
all orders taken within the Town where a down payment is received,
which receipt shall be signed by the solicitor and shall set forth a
brief description of the goods, wares, merchandise or services ordered,
the total purchase price thereof, and the amount of the down payment
received by the solicitor from the purchaser.
E. No solicitation shall be conducted door to door during the period prior
to 10:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. On all solicitations to sell, whether made
in person, by telephone or otherwise, the licensee shall state his name,
§ 99-6 FAIRFIELD CODE § 99-8
93:220
his principal's name and his permit number upon request. The permit is
valid only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
F. No solicitation will be conducted in a manner as it obstructs or prevents
the free and convenient use of any street or sidewalk within the Town.
G. Transient merchants are prohibited from selling or offering for sale upon
any public street, sidewalk, or other place, any of the following articles
or similar articles: spray string, stink bombs, and substantially similar
devices.
§ 99-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or making any
false statements or misrepresentation of the facts for the purpose of
obtaining permission to conduct himself or herself as a transient merchant
in the Town shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500, for each
solicitation or sale which occurred. Penalties may be imposed in addition to
violation of any and all violation of law.
§ 99-10. Revocation.
A. The license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Board
of Police Commissioners of the Town, after notice and hearing, for any of
the following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares, or merchandise.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful
manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee, at his known address, at least five days prior to the date set for
the hearing.
Chapter 100
UNFIT PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings — See Ch. 56. Fire prevention — See Ch. 64.
§ 99-8 UNFIT PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURES § 99-10
100:221

ARTICLE I
Unfit Buildings
[Adopted 9-28-198736]
§ 100-1. Statement of purpose.
The following general provisions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article:
A. Legislative finding. It is hereby found that there exists, and may in the
future exist, within the Town of Fairfield, premises, dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units or parts thereof, commercial structures and
industrial structures which, by reason of their construction, equipment,
sanitation, maintenance, overuse or occupancy, affect or are likely to
affect adversely the public health (including the physical, mental and
social well-being of persons and families), safety and general welfare.
To correct and prevent the existence of such adverse conditions and to
achieve and maintain such levels of residential environmental quality
as will protect and promote public health, safety and general welfare,
it is further found that the establishment and enforcement of minimum
dwelling and adjacent property standards are required.
B. Purposes. It is hereby declared that the purpose of this article is to
protect, preserve and promote the physical and mental health and social
well-being of the people, to prevent and control the incidence of
diseases, to regulate privately owned dwellings and commercial and
industrial structures for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation
and public health and to protect the safety of the people and to promote
the general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all
dwellings and commercial and industrial structures now in existence and
henceforth constructed. It is hereby further declared that the purpose of
this article is to ensure that the quality of housing and other structures
is adequate for protection of public health, safety and general welfare
through administration and enforcement thereof.
§ 100-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following items shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING CONSTITUTING A MENACE TO PUBLIC SAFETY — Applies to
any dwelling or dwelling unit and any commercial or industrial structure,
with the exception of excluded structures, which shall be found by the
Board of Condemnation to have any of the following defects:
One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety
of the occupants or the public.
A.
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally designated as Ch. 64 of the Code.
§ 100-1 UNFIT PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURES § 100-2
100:223
BUILDING INSPECTOR/OFFICIAL — The Town of Fairfield Building
Inspector and Assistant Building Inspector appointed by the First
Selectman.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Refers to the final inspection process,
being either conditional or nonconditional in context and applies to all
newly constructed dwellings as well as all structural renovations to existing
dwellings. The certificate of occupancy issuance is an administrative
procedure of the Building Inspector/Official.
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES — Include the following: places of retail
business; hotels, inns and motels; professional office facilities and
professional services facilities; brokerage and real estate offices; and public
and private restaurants as well as food stands marketing processed
products.
CONTIGUOUS OR ADJACENT PROPERTY TO A STRUCTURE — Applies to
all land, subterranean services and aboveground objects contained within
the taxable boundaries. Examples of land include but are not limited to land,
rivers, riverbeds and driveways. Examples of subterranean services include
but are not limited to artesian or other forms of potable water wells, natural
gas feeder lines; septic tanks, feeder pipe and fields; municipal sanitary
sewer feeder pipe; and underground electrical utility feeder service if not
owned or leased by the utility company servicing the region. Examples of
aboveground objects include but are not limited to detached structures;
trees in excess of 12 feet in height; statuary in excess of 10 feet in height;
gasoline-, diesel- or kerosene-fueled engines, including automobiles and
campers, propane- or natural-gas-fired cooking grills; and temporary
storage of boats in excess of 21 feet in length, and engineering structures.
DWELLING — Applies to single-family, dual-family and multiple-family
usages of a shelter which is wholly or partly used or arranged or designed
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
EXCLUDED STRUCTURES — Include the following: free standing churches
and temples of worship; federal and state owned or leased facilities,
municipally owned facilities, public and private educational facilities at all
levels; excepting nursery, preschool and child day-care centers; including
on-site dormitory space.
FIRE MARSHAL — The Town of Fairfield Fire Marshal or Deputy Fire
Marshal as appointed by the Fire Commission.
One which lacks hallway and porch illumination, ventilation, heating
facilities (minimum of 55° F.) or sanitation facilities adequate to protect
the health or safety of the occupants or the public.
B.
One which, because of its general condition or location, is unsanitary
or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or the
public.
C.
On which, for want of proper initial construction or proper repairs or
by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any other cause, may
cause a fire or presents an unreasonable threat to life.
D.
§ 100-2 FAIRFIELD CODE § 100-2
100:224
HEALTH, DIRECTOR OF — The Town of Fairfield Director of Health or
Assistant Director appointed by the Board of Health with the approval of the
First Selectman.
INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES — Include the following: manufacturing
facilities, raw material processing facilities, office facilities, trucking
transfer docks and warehousing facilities.
OWNER — The holder of the record title and all recorded interests therein
on the day upon which a notice of condemnation hearing is issued.
PUBLIC SAFETY — The condition of being free from danger and hazard
which may cause disease or accidents to all persons within, passing through
or adjacent to a dwelling whose constructional qualifications are in
jeopardy.
§ 100-3. Board of Condemnation.
There shall be created a Board of Condemnation which shall consist of the
Director of Health, the Building Inspector and the Fire Marshal of the Town.
§ 100-4. Designation of dwelling as unfit.
With the exception of excluded structures, the designation of dwellings,
dwelling units and commercial and industrial structures or contiguous or
adjacent property to a structure which constitute a menace to public safety
shall be carried out by the Board of Condemnation pursuant to the definition
of a "building constituting a menace to public safety" after a hearing. Such
designation shall be initiated by a complainant, in writing, identifying a
possible public safety problem or by the Board of Condemnation's own
action. Such Board may, as part of such hearing, inspect such building or
adjacent property and the facts observed by such Board at such inspection
shall constitute evidence upon which it may base its findings. Notice of the
hearing shall be given by the Board (Building Inspector/Official) by posting
it in a conspicuous place on such building or adjacent property at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing, a notice directed to all persons having
or claiming any interest in such building or adjacent property, designating
the building or adjacent property sought to be condemned, the reasons
therefor and the time and place of the hearing. A copy of such notice shall
be sent by registered mail, at least 10 days prior to such hearing, to each
owner at his last known address, or, if such address cannot, after due
diligence, be ascertained, then to such owner at Fairfield, Connecticut.
§ 100-5. Determinations of Board; service of notice.
A. If the Board of Condemnation shall determine that a building or adjacent
property constitutes a menace to public safety, it shall find and
determine what repairs or alterations are necessary or whether the total
destruction of such building or adjacent property is necessary in order
that such building or adjacent property shall not constitute a menace to
public safety. Such Board shall also determine and limit the length of
time within which such repairs, alterations or destruction of any such
§ 100-2 UNFIT PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURES § 100-5
100:225
building or adjacent property shall be completed. The time so limited
shall begin to run from the date upon which service of such findings shall
be made on the owner of the premises, and such Board may for good
cause extend such time for a further period not exceeding 30 days.
B. The findings of the Board shall be in writing and shall be served upon the
owner personally or sent by registered mail to his last known address by
the Building Inspector within 10 days. If, after due diligence, the owner
cannot be found or his address shall be unknown, such findings shall, in
lieu of such service or registered mail notice, be posted for 10 days in a
conspicuous place on the building or adjacent property.
C. If any action is taken that would result in eviction, it would be the
duty of the Board to notify the Department of Social Services. [Added
7-26-1999]
§ 100-6. Abatement of nuisance; collection of costs; lien.
Every building or adjacent property found by the Board of Condemnation
to constitute a menace to public safety shall, if not destroyed, altered or
repaired within the time allowed by and in accordance with the findings
of the Board, be deemed to be a public nuisance and every such nuisance
may be abated summarily or by civil action. The municipality shall have
a lien on the premises for the cost of such abatement, which lien shall
take precedence over any other encumbrance originating after the
commencement of the abatement work, provided that a notice of lis
pendens thereof is recorded in the land records within 60 days after the
completion of the abatement work. The municipality may recover the cost
of such work from the owner by a civil action upon complaint of the Board
of Condemnation. The total recovery by the municipality from such lien and
civil action shall not exceed the amount of its cost plus court costs.
§ 100-7. Removal of placards by Board.
No dwelling, dwelling unit or adjacent property which has been condemned
and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human
habitation and no commercial or industrial structure which has been
condemned and placarded shall again be used for their intended purposes
until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by,
the Board of Condemnation. The Board of Condemnation shall remove such
placard whenever the defects upon which the condemnation and placarding
action were based have been eliminated.
§ 100-8. Defacing or removing placard.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling
unit, commercial or industrial structure or adjacent property which has
been condemned as unfit for human habitation or other intended purposes
and placarded as such.
§ 100-5 FAIRFIELD CODE § 100-9
100:226
§ 100-9. Certificates of occupancy required. [Amended 7-26-1999]
For all buildings constructed after the adoption of this article, whether
implicitly, explicitly or not at all so stated in Section 29-252 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code
or any Town building code derived therefrom, this article shall require,
for public safety reasons, a certificate of occupancy prior to overnight
occupancy and at the sale of said building to a second owner or transfer of
said building to an estate.
§ 100-10. Right to appeal.
Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Town or findings of the
Board as provided in § 100-5, acting through the Board of Condemnation,
shall have the right of appeal to the Superior Court for the Judicial District
of Fairfield at Bridgeport within 15 days after receipt of notice of the
findings.
§ 100-11. Effect on prior conditions.
Prior conditions, before the adoption of this article, of dwellings deemed
unfit for habitation and commercial or industrial structures deemed unfit
for their intended purposes under this article shall comply with all sections
of the article; however, a one-time-only grace period of 60 days is granted.
§ 100-12. Penalties for offenses.
A. If any building shall be found by the Board of Condemnation to constitute
a menace to public safety, and the owner thereof shall, after service of
the findings of the Board as provided in § 100-4, neglect to destroy, alter
or repair such building in accordance with the findings and within the
time limited by the Board, provided that he shall have the legal power
to destroy, alter or repair the same, such owner shall be punished as
provided below. Any owner who shall disable himself from destroying,
altering or repairing such building after receiving the notice of a hearing
of the Board relative thereto as provided in this article shall likewise be
punished pursuant to said section.
B. The penalty for violating any provision of this article shall be a fine in an
amount not in excess of $100 or not more than 30 days in jail, or both.
§ 100-13. Abridgment of powers.
Nothing contained within this article shall abridge the legal authority of
any board, commission or agency of the Town of Fairfield to make, publish,
adopt, repeal, change or amend its rules, regulations or bylaws in
accordance with law.
§ 100-14. Severability.
Each section of this article is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 100-9 UNFIT PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURES § 100-14
100:227
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 100-15. When effective.
This article shall be effective 14 days after its adoption.
§ 100-14 FAIRFIELD CODE § 100-15
100:228
Chapter 102
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
parking areas — See Ch. 24, Art. II.
Motor vehicle beach stickers for Lake
Mohegan — See Ch. 50, Art. II.
Vehicles on sidewalks — See Ch. 91.
Parking violations — See Ch. 103.
§ 100-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 100-15
102:229

ARTICLE I
Parking Authority; Operation of Vehicles
[Adopted as Ch. 12 of the Code of the Town of Fairfield 1968]
§ 102-1. Creation of Authority; purpose.
A Parking Authority is hereby created in accordance with the provisions
of Section 7-203 of the Connecticut General Statutes for the purpose of
creating and establishing off-street parking facilities. Such Authority shall
consist of five members appointed by the First Selectman and shall have all
the powers and duties conferred upon parking authorities by the provisions
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 102-2. Operation of vehicles in public parks. [Added 6-28-1971]
The operation of motor vehicles in the public parks, recreation facilities
and properties of the Town of Fairfield shall be limited to the roadways and
parking areas, or other areas as specified for the use of such vehicles by the
proper authority, provided specifically for the use of said motor vehicles.
§ 102-3. Penalties for offenses. [Added 6-28-1971]
Any person who operates a motor vehicle in said parks, recreation facilities
or properties of the Town of Fairfield on other than the aforesaid roadways
or parking areas or other areas as specified for the use of such vehicles by
the proper authority shall be fined not more than $25 for each offense.
§ 102-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 102-3
102:231
Chapter 103
VIOLATIONS, PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 102.
§ 103-1. Purpose.
The intention of this chapter is to provide a hearing procedure for review of
parking violations within the Town of Fairfield.
§ 103-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING VIOLATION — Any ticket issued by a police officer or special
police officer of the Town of Fairfield for a violation of parking statutes,
laws, ordinances or regulations.
PARKING VIOLATION HEARING OFFICER — An elector of the Town of
Fairfield, other than policemen or persons who issue parking tickets or work
in the Police Department, appointed by the First Selectman to conduct the
hearings authorized by Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-152b.
TERM OF OFFICE — The term shall be at the discretion of the First
Selectman.
§ 103-3. Hearing procedure.
A. The Superior Court shall be authorized to enforce the assessments and
judgments provided for under this section.
B. Notice; hearing; fines.
(1) The Town of Fairfield may, at any time within 12 months from the
expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines,
penalties, costs or fees for any alleged violation under any ordinance
adopted pursuant to Section 7-148 or Sections 14-305 to 14-308,
inclusive, send notice to the motor vehicle operator, if known, or
the registered owner of the motor vehicle, by first class mail to the
address according to the registration records of the Department of
Motor Vehicles. Such notice shall inform the operator or owner of
the allegations against such person and the amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees due; that such person may contest liability
before a parking violations hearing officer by delivering in person or
by mail written notice within 10 days of the date thereof; that if there
is no such demand for a hearing, an assessment and judgment shall
be entered against the operator or owner; and that such judgment
may issue without further notice. Whenever a violation of such an
ordinance occurs, proof of the registration number of the motor
§ 102-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 103-3
103:232
vehicle involved shall be prima facie evidence in all proceedings
provided for in this section that the owner of such vehicle was the
operator thereof, provided that the limitations on the liability of a
lessee under Section 14-107 shall apply.
(2) If the person who is sent notice pursuant to Subsection B(l) wishes
to admit liability for any alleged violation, the person may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated
by the Town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding,
civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other
person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or
mail written demand for a hearing within 10 days of the date of the
first notice provided for in Subsection B(1) shall be deemed to have
admitted liability, and the designated Town official shall certify such
person's failure to respond to the hearing officer as such person did
not choose to contest the violation citation. The hearing officer shall
thereupon cause to have entered and assessed the fines, penalties,
costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall
follow the procedures set forth in Subsection B(4) of this section.
(3) Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice
of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of
the mailing of notice, provided that the hearing officer shall grant,
upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested
party for postponement or continuance. An original or certified copy
of the initial notice of violation issued by a policeman or other
issuing officer shall be filed and retained by the Town, be deemed a
business record within the scope of Section 52-180 and be evidence
of the facts contained therein. The presence of the policeman or
issuing officer shall be required at the hearing if such person so
requests. A person wishing to contest such liability shall appear at
the hearing and may present evidence to that effect. A designated
Town official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence
on behalf of the Town. If such person fails to appear, the hearing
officer may enter an assessment by default against such person upon
finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes
or ordinances. The hearing officer may accept from such person
copies of police reports, Motor Vehicle Department documents and
other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that
the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer
shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such
methods of proof as the hearing officer deems fair and appropriate.
The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly
applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
The hearing officer shall announce the decision at the end of the
hearing. Upon determination that the person is not liable, the
hearing Officer shall dismiss the matter and enter such
determination in writing accordingly. Upon determination that the
person is liable for the violation, the hearing officer shall forthwith
§ 103-3 VIOLATIONS, PARKING § 103-3
103:233
cause to have entered and assessed the fines, penalties, costs or fees
against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of the
Town.
(4) If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing
officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more
than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of
assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for the geographical
area in which the Town is located, together with an entry fee of
$8. The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a
record of assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments
against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of
assessment. The Clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such
record of assessment and court costs of $8, against such person
in favor of the Town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered
as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a
levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice
to such person.
§ 103-4. Judicial review.
A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this
section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be
instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by
filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an
amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to Section
52-259, in the Superior Court for the geographical area in which the Town
is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with
the rules of the Judges of the Superior Court.
§ 103-5. (Reserved)37
Chapter 104
VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 91.
37.Editor's Note: Former § 103-5, Applicability, was repealed 11-25-1991.
§ 103-3 FAIRFIELD CODE § 103-5
104:234
ARTICLE I
Machines on Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-23-1981]
§ 104-1. Permit required.
No person or firm, including any principal or agent thereof, shall place
or cause to be placed on any public street, highway, curb or sidewalk
within the Town any vending machine used for the self-service dispensing
of merchandise, or any other such equipment used or to be used for any of
the foregoing purposes without first obtaining a permit, in writing, from the
Chief of Police.
§ 104-2. Application.
Each application for a permit required under this article shall be made, in
writing, to the Chief of Police upon blank forms provided by the Town and
made available by such officer. Each application shall be sworn to by the
applicant. The written application shall contain the following information:
A. The principal ownership of any such equipment, together with the name
and address of the agent of service thereof.
B. The specific location of any such equipment, including but not limited
to the street name, the street side and an accurate description of the
direction to and of the distance from the nearest street intersection
expressed in the number of feet thereto.
C. A representation that such equipment is not and will not be attached
by chain or any other such device to any utility pole or traffic sign in
violation of any other ordinance of the Town or the General Statutes of
Connecticut pertaining thereto.
D. Any such information and conditions as the Chief of Police shall deem
necessary to assure that such equipment is located in accordance with
regulations that may be adopted by the Fairfield Police Commission for
the placement of said vending machines to achieve and ensure the public
health and safety.
§ 104-3. Fees.
Except as hereinafter provided, a fee to be set by the Police Commission
shall be charged for one year, said fee shall be payable with the written
application and thereafter on the anniversary date thereof. The fee shall
be commensurate with the costs of administering the licenses. In the event
that any such equipment for which a permit had previously been granted
in accordance with this article is relocated to a site which is less than 25
feet from its original location and to a site which also meets the regulations
set forth in § 104-2D hereof, no additional fee shall be charged; provided,
however, that any further such relocation shall require a new application
and fee.
§ 104-1 VENDING MACHINES § 104-4
104:235
§ 104-4. Permit.
If a person shall fail to obtain a permit as provided in this article, the Chief
of Police may, by registered letter, order the owner of such equipment to
relocate it in a manner satisfactory to that officer until a permit has been
granted, provided that, if the owner of such equipment fails to complete
such relocation and fails to make application for a permit within 30 days
after mailing of such order, then the Chief of Police may cause such work to
be done and charge the expense thereof to the owner of the equipment.
§ 104-5. Investigation and issuance of permit.
A. Upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of § 104-2 hereof,
the Police Department shall forthwith cause an investigation of the area
to determine whether or not the location of such equipment at that site
is in accordance with such regulations.
B. The applicant shall, within 18 calendar days, be notified if said permit is
granted or denied.
C. In the event that the Chief of Police shall determine that the locating
of such equipment at any such site is not in accordance with said
regulations and may cause a hazard to the public health and safety, he
shall refuse to issue a permit for such location and shall so notify that
applicant in writing, together with the reasons for such denial.
D. In the event that such officer shall determine that any such site is in
accordance with said regulations, the Police Department shall retain the
original application and shall immediately forward to the applicant a
permit bearing a legend containing the following information: the permit
number, the expiration date, the owner's name and the specific location
of such equipment.
§ 104-6. Display of permit.
Each person holding a permit shall, when engaged in the sales activity
regulated herein, display upon the equipment at all times a suitable copy of
the permit furnished by the Chief of Police.
§ 104-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or making any
false statements or misrepresentations in fact for the purpose of obtaining
a permit hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, in addition to other
penalties provided by law, be subject to a fine not to exceed $25, each
violation being deemed a separate offense, and he shall be subject to
revocation of his permit for such location.
§ 104-4 FAIRFIELD CODE § 104-7
104:236
Chapter 108
WEAPONS
§ 104-7 WEAPONS § 104-7
108:237

ARTICLE I
Non-Powder-Propelled Guns
[Adopted as Ch. 18 of the Code of the Town of Fairfield 1968]
§ 108-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DEALER — Any person selling, bartering or renting at retail any nonpowdered-
propelled gun.
MINOR — A person under the age of 21 years.
NON-POWDER-PROPELLED GUN — Any rifle or pistol which is designed
to expel a projectile by the use of compressed air or gas or of a spring or
elastic, and includes sling shots and similar implements by whatever name
known, but not including a firearm or a bow and arrow.
§ 108-2. Sale to minors prohibited; exception.
No person shall sell, lend, rent, barter, give or otherwise transfer any nonpowder-
propelled gun to any minor, except where the relation of parent and
child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil exists between such
person and such minor.
§ 108-3. Dealer to require proof of age.
Every dealer shall require proof of the age of any person applying to him to
sell, rent, lend, barter or otherwise transfer to him a non-powder-propelled
gun and shall be entitled to rely upon reasonable proof so furnished on
behalf of any person so applying.
§ 108-4. Penalties for offenses; false representation.
Any person who violates any provision of this article or who falsely
represents himself or any other person as being over the age of 21 years
in order to enable the person so represented to receive, borrow, barter
or otherwise obtain any non-powder-propelled gun shall be fined not more
than $100.
§ 108-5. Conditions for possession.
No person shall have in his possession any non-powder-propelled gun,
except when such gun is:
A. Kept within his residence or upon private property and used under such
circumstances that when discharged or operated it will not endanger
persons or property or cause the projectile to traverse any property or
space outside the limits of the private property upon which the same is
discharged or operated.
B. Used at an indoor or outdoor rifle range either by an adult or minor
who is a duly enrolled member of a club, team or society organized for
§ 108-1 WEAPONS § 108-5
108:239
educational purposes and maintaining such range as part of its facilities
or having written permission to use the same for said purposes, or
possessed, loaded or discharged at such a range under the supervision,
guidance and instruction of an adult.
§ 108-6. Requirements for carrying in public place.
No person shall carry any non-powder-propelled gun on any public highway
or public place within the Town, unless the same is carried unloaded in
either a suitable case or securely wrapped.
§ 108-7. Discharge on target range.
No person shall discharge any non-powder-propelled gun from or across any
sidewalk or public highway or public place within the Town, except upon a
properly conducted target range.
§ 108-5 FAIRFIELD CODE § 108-7
108:240
Chapter A115
PROCEEDINGS OF REPRESENTATIVE TOWN MEETING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Representative Town Meeting — See Charter,
Art. V.
Ethics — See Ch. 21.
§ A115-1. Rules established.
The following shall be the rules to regulate the proceedings of the
Representative Town Meeting for the current session and all subsequent
sessions, as amended.
The Moderator
1. The Moderator shall assume the podium on each meeting day, usually
the fourth Monday of each month at the hour to which the Meeting
stands adjourned. The Moderator shall, thereupon, call the Meeting to
order and after the Pledge of Allegiance and moment of silence, if a
quorum is present, proceed to business.
2. In the absence of a quorum, the Moderator may adjourn the Meeting
to the next month or impose Rule Number 36. At all other times,
an adjournment shall be pronounced by the Moderator on motion,
excepting Rule Number 26, which shall be considered a recess.
3. The Moderator shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all
questions of order, upon which no debate shall be allowed except at
the Moderator's request; but the Moderator's decision shall be subject
to an appeal to the Meeting, which must be seconded and upon which
no member shall speak more than once. No other business shall be in
order until such appeal is disposed of.
4. If there is any disturbance, disorderly conduct or other activity in or
about the Meeting Hall which, in the opinion of the Moderator may
impede the orderly transaction of the business of the Meeting, the
Moderator may take such action as the Moderator deems necessary to
preserve and restore order.
5. At each annual organizational meeting, the duly elected Moderator
shall, during the introductory comments, forewarn the members of
their obligations to:
(a) Ethics.
(b) Conduct.
(c) Freedom of Information Act matters.
(d) Conflicts of interest.
The Clerk
§ 108-7 PROCEEDINGS OF REPRESENTATIVE TOWN § A115-1
A115:241
6. The Town Clerk, or his or her designee, shall be the clerk of the
Meeting and shall maintain accurate minutes, but not verbatim
transcripts, of each meeting and distribute such to each member by
mail, with the Warning of the next Meeting.
7. Regarding attendance at Town Meetings, any member appearing after
the roll has been called shall make such fact known to the Clerk.
The Clerk shall preserve a permanent record of attendance. Any
Representative who leaves the Meeting prior to adjournment shall
notify the Clerk.
8. All items to be included in the Warning of a regular monthly Meeting
must be received in the Clerk's office at or before 10:00 a.m. on
the fourteenth day preceding the meeting. Supplemental Warnings
are permitted at the discretion of the Clerk. Upon direction of the
Moderator, resolutions shall be assigned to the appropriate standing
or special committees. The Warning shall be sent by mail at least five
days before the meeting, and a copy of such notice shall be published
in a newspaper having circulation in the Town. Committees to which
each item is referred shall be included, along with the sponsors of each
resolution, ordinance or other item (except honorary resolutions).
Members
9. If any member transgresses the rules of order, the Moderator shall,
and any member may, call the transgressor to order and, if speaking,
the transgressor shall sit down unless permitted to explain.
10. Each member, having been elected to a position of trust, is obligated to
represent the constituents to the best of the member's ability, but shall
not vote on a question which the member or member's spouse, or any
relative of the member whether living in the same household or not,
has a direct personal interest or any pecuniary interest not common to
the other members of this body, and the member alone has the right to
determine whether this obligation can be fulfilled by participating in
or abstaining from a vote on any question before this body.
Committees and Members
11. There shall be five standing committees, each of which shall consist
of 1/5 of the body, equal in number, and each Representative shall
serve on one committee but not more than two standing committees.
The membership of each committee shall, as closely as practical,
reflect the proportional representation of the minority and majority
of the meeting as a whole. Notwithstanding, the foregoing minority
representation shall be at least two members on each committee. The
standing committees shall be as follows:
(a) A committee on Education and Recreation shall have cognizance
of and report to the Meeting on all matters relating to
elementary, secondary, and adult education items, libraries and
recreation.
§ A115-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § A115-1
A115:242
(b) A committee on Finance which shall have cognizance of and
report to the Meeting on all matters relating to finance and
issuance of notes and bonds.
(c) A committee on Public Health and Safety which shall have
cognizance of and report to the Meeting on all matters relating
to public health, social services, police and fire safety.
(d) A committee on Legislation and Administration which shall have
cognizance of and report to the Meeting on all matters relating
to labor settlements, property conveyances, leases, legal
matters, ordinances, contractual items and board, commission,
and committee appointments.
(e) A committee on Public Works and Planning which shall have
cognizance of and report to the Meeting on all matters relating
to public works, parks, marinas, utilities and Town planning,
including those in which the Town is regionally involved.
In addition to the above responsibilities, at the Meeting immediately
preceding the annual Budget Meeting, each committee shall present a
report on the budget items for which it is responsible.
12. The RTM shall have the power to appoint special committees as it
shall determine necessary. The membership of standing committees
and special committees shall be chosen by a special legislative
management committee (Committee on Committees) to consist of two
members of the minority party and three members from the majority
party. In the event that no majority or minority party exists as
composed, the Committee on Committees shall consist of two
members from each of the two parties with the highest number of
members and one member as selected by the First Selectman. Terms
of assignment shall coincide with the members' terms of office as
Meeting members. Special committees shall report to the body as a
whole, as appropriate.
13. A quorum of a committee is a simple majority. A committee shall take
no action unless a quorum is present. Members of the public may
speak on each item upon such terms and conditions as the chairman
shall impose.
14. A Standing Committee may hold an item in committee by a vote of 2/3
of the members present. At any subsequent Meeting, the item may be
taken from the committee by a vote of 2/3 of the members present. Any
item taken from the Committee shall be immediately placed before the
meeting.
§ A115-1 PROCEEDINGS OF REPRESENTATIVE TOWN § A115-1
A115:243
15. Standing committee reports to referred items on the Warning or
elsewhere, shall be in writing and include only the votes of those
members attending the committee meeting. Committee reports shall
recognize by name those members present and absent. No report of a
committee vote shall be changed once a committee meeting has been
adjourned. The absence of a committee report shall not delete the
item on the Warning. Reports and filing thereof shall be in accordance
with the Freedom of Information Act. Minority reports may be filed
immediately following the respective majority report.
Regular Order of Business
16. The regular order of business shall be as follows:
(a) Roll call.
(b) Pledge of Allegiance; moment of silence.
(c) Approval of minutes of the previous meeting.
(d) Honorary resolutions.
(e) Consent calendar (Rule No. 22).
(f) Business on the Warning.
(g) Old business.
(h) Committee reports (not related to the Warning).
(i) New business.
(j) Adjournment.
Within the above listing and concerning the order of Business on the
Warning, the Clerk of the Meeting shall list Commission appointment
resolutions first followed by other resolutions received by the Clerk in
the order received at the Clerk's office.
17. Special meetings may be held whenever the First Selectman,
Chairman of the Board of Finance or Moderator shall deem them
necessary, and a special meeting shall also be held within 10 days after
the submission to the Town Clerk of a written application signed by
1% of the electors of the Town or upon petition by 10 members of the
body.
18. This body shall, with all proper decorum, receive the First Selectman
or designee for the purpose of hearing the State of the Town message
at the regularly scheduled meeting in January. This item shall
immediately follow the moment of silence.
19. When so established by a higher body, no resolution or ordinance
that conflicts with the laws of the nation, the state, or the Town's
Charter shall become effective. Ordinances approved by this Meeting
shall either be absent of conflict with existing ordinances or shall
include repeal of the existing ordinance. This body may not alter the
regulations of any other Town body duly constituted under the Town
Charter unless authorized by the Charter or State Statutes.
§ A115-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § A115-1
A115:244
20. When the meeting place permits, Meeting members shall be seated
in the center section of the assembly. Town officials, Board and
Commission members shall be seated to the Moderator's right side.
Members of the general public shall be seated to the Moderator's left
side.
21. Members of the public may speak once on each item upon such terms
and conditions as the Moderator shall impose. Speakers addressing a
resolution properly before the body shall identify themselves and use
one of the microphones available.
Parliamentary Practice
22. With the unanimous approval of each committee having a quorum
present, resolutions before that committee or committees will be
placed on a Consent Calendar for concurrent voting at the Meeting
without debate. Within Committee a resolution may be amended but
when put, must also receive unanimous approval if it is to be placed on
the Consent Calendar. The Consent Calendar shall be in the possession
of the Meeting, upon pronouncement by the Moderator that the
Resolution Numbers _____ and _____, meeting the above requirements,
have been received from the Committees without amendment or as
amended. The Moderator shall read the resolution(s) as amended.
Proposed ordinances shall not be placed on the Consent Calendar.
Any member may have the Consent Calendar divided for purposes of
debating and/or voting.
23. No debate shall be allowed after an item is put to a vote by the
Moderator and while it remains undecided.
24. For all resolutions on the Warning and subsequent amendments
thereto, excepting unanimous votes, the Moderator and the Clerk shall
record for the minutes individual member votes as yea (yes), nay (no)
or abstention as imposed by Connecticut General Statutes. At the
discretion of the Moderator or in the event that 1/3 of the members
present and voting request a roll call vote, it shall be so taken. The
Clerk will ask on a positive vote who are the members voting in the
negative, and shall so record their names.
25. No member may change his vote on a roll call after the vote has been
announced by the Moderator.
26. During any Meeting, the majority and minority leader may each call
for one ten-minute recess, without the need for a vote, for the purpose
of holding a political caucus.
Rules and Motions
27. Unless an item is initiated by the electors of the Town pursuant to
Article IV, § 4.3C, of the Charter adopted by the electors on November
7, 2006, all business conducted at any Meeting shall be initiated by a
resolution, which shall be in writing, by a Meeting member, including
ex officio members, signed by the sponsor and seconded by a non ex
officio Meeting member.
§ A115-1 PROCEEDINGS OF REPRESENTATIVE TOWN § A115-1
A115:245
28. Before any resolution is received by the body, a brief statement of its
objective shall be made by the sponsor.
29. When a motion is made, it shall be restated to the Meeting by the
Moderator before any debate is held thereon, and every motion shall
be reduced to writing if the Moderator so directs or any members
requests it.
30. When a motion is restated by the Moderator it shall be deemed to be
in the possession of the Meeting. It may, however, be withdrawn by the
mover at any time prior to decision or amendment.
31. If any question under debate consists of two or more independent
propositions any Member may have the same divided.
32. All proposed ordinances shall initially be referred to the Committee
on Legislation and Administration and thereafter to any appropriate
standing or special committee as referred by the Moderator for
consideration. All proposed ordinances shall subsequently be formally
listed on the Warning for two Meetings and discussed by appropriate
committees prior to each Meeting as provided herein.
33. Any matter not on the Warning for a meeting except: a) honorary
resolutions and b) matters previously held in committee, may be
discussed at such meeting but shall not be acted or voted upon until
the resolution stands over one meeting. The body may, by a majority
vote, limit the time to be allotted for such discussion.
34. When an item is before the Meeting, no motion shall be received
except:
(a) To adjourn.
(b) To recess.
(c) To lay on the table.
(d) To call the previous question if the public has had a chance to
speak to it.
(e) To close the debate at a specified time but permitting public
comment.
(f) To postpone to a specific time.
(g) To commit to a committee.
(h) To amend.
(i) To postpone indefinitely.
35. The rules of parliamentary practice found in the latest edition of
General Robert's Rules of Order shall govern procedures and protocol
of the Meeting except as otherwise specifically provided by any rules
or Freedom of Information Act now governing the conduct of the
RTM or hereafter adopted. The same rules shall apply to standing
committee meetings, however, a quorum need not be present to
review, receive public comment, and debate an item.
Suspension of the Rules
§ A115-1 FAIRFIELD CODE § A115-1
A115:246
36. In order to give all items on the Meeting agenda equal and proper
consideration, the Moderator of the Meeting will not start any item
after 11:00 p.m. No agenda item or any matter which may be
presented to said Meeting, and which may be properly acted upon
under the rules of the Meeting shall be discussed after 11:30 p.m. If
not waived, any item not completed or voted upon at any scheduled
meeting shall be continued to the next day at the same place and
starting time.
37. These rules shall not be amended except by the concurrent vote of
at least 2/3 of the members present. No amendment to these rules,
however, shall be acted upon which shall not have been laid over for
at least one meeting or which shall not have been specifically in the
Warning as part of the business to be transacted at such meeting.
38. Motions to suspend the rules shall be in order during any meeting.
Suspensions of the rules shall be for a specified purpose. The Freedom
of Information Act shall be adhered to during suspension.
Sense of the Meeting
39. An advisory resolution is defined as any "sense of the meeting"
resolution or any other resolution which does not exercise a power
conferred on the Meeting by the Charter or State Law. No advisory
resolution shall pass except upon the affirmative vote of 2/3 of those
present.
§ A115-1 PROCEEDINGS OF REPRESENTATIVE TOWN § A115-1
A115:247

ZONING REGULATIONS
TOWN PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION
Adopted August 26, 1925
Amended to May 23, 2017
Effective dates of various sections are shown in Appendix B
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION TITLE PAGE
1.0 TITLE, JURISDICTION AND DISTRICTS 1.1 TITLE 1
1.2 JURISDICTION 1
1.3 DISTRICTS 1
1.4 ZONING MAP 1
2.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS 2
2.1 GENERAL 2
2.2 CHANGE IN USE 2
2.3 CHANGE IN PLANS, CONSTRUCTION OR USE 2
2.4 PROHIBITED USES 3
2.5 TRAILERS 3
2.6 NON-CONFORMANCE 3
2.7 ACCESS AND REAR LOTS 3
2.8 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES 3
2.9 ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING USES 4
2.10 RECONSTRUCTION, RESTORATION AND REPAIR 4
OF NONCONFORMING USES AFTER CASUALTY
2.11 REQUIRED REPAIR OF NONCONFORMING BLDGS 5
2.12 FLOOD MANAGEMENT 5
2.13 BOARD OF APPEALS 6
2.14 COASTAL SITE PLAN 6
2.15 EROSION AND SEDIMENT MANAGEMENT PLAN 8
2.16 WETLANDS 8
2.17 PUBLIC TREES 8
2.18 (reserved)
2.19 (reserved)
2.20 PROCEDURES AND HEARINGS 8
2.30 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 10
3.0 (reserved)
4.0 (reserved)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
5.0 REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 14
5.1 GENERAL, PERMITTED USES, AND LOT SIZE 14
5.2 ACCESS, HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS, OFF-STREET PARKING, 19
SETBACKS FROM STREET AND PROPERTY LINES, LOT
COVERAGE, BULK AND FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLINGS
6.0 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS 25
6.1 INTENT AND PURPOSE 25
6.2 DEFINITIONS 25
6.3 CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 25
6.4 APPLICATION PROCEDURE 26
6.5 DURATION 27
6.6 SALE OF RESIDENCE 27
7.0 (reserved)
8.0 (reserved)
9.0 (reserved)
10.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED RESIDENCE DISTRICT 28
10.1 GENERAL 28
10.2 PURPOSE 28
10.3 PERMITTED USES 28
10.4 SPECIAL PERMIT USES 28
10.5 PROHIBITED USES 29
10.6 DENSITY AND MINIMUM LOT AREA 29
10.7 ACCESS 31
10.8 UTILITIES 31
10.9 NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS 32
10.10 SETBACKS 32
10.11 HEIGHT 33
10.12 COVERAGE AND BULK 33
10.13 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLING 34
10.14 STORAGE AND OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 34
10.15 LANDSCAPING 34
10.16 STREET AND ROADWAYS 34
10.17 ADDITIONAL PROVISION FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING 35
DEVELOPMENT
SECTION TITLE PAGE
11.0 REGULATIONS FOR BEACH DISTRICT 37
11.1 PERMITTED USES 37
11.2 VARIANCES 38
11.3 CONFORMING LOTS 38
11.4 MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS 38
11.5 OFF-STREET PARKING 38
11.6 FRONTAGE AND ACCESS 39
11.7 HEIGHT 39
11.8 ROOFTOP DECKS 39
11.9 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 39
11.10 LOT COVERAGE 39
11.11 SIDEYARD SETBACKS 39
11.12 SETBACKS FROM LONG ISLAND SOUND 40
11.13 SETBACK FROM FAIRFIELD BEACH ROAD, OLD DAM 40
ROAD, FRENCH STREET, PINE CREEK AVENUE
11.14 SETBACKS FROM PINE CREEK 40
11.15 SETBACKS FROM OTHER STREETS 41
11.16 REAR YARD SETBACK FOR LOTS FRONTING ON FRENCH 41
STREET, PINE CREEK AVENUE AND OLD DAM ROAD
12.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED BUSINESS DISTRICTS 42
12.1 GENERAL 42
12.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES 42
12.3 CENTER DESIGNED BUSINESS DISTRICT USES 42
12.4 DESIGNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT USES 45
12.5 NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGNED BUSINESS DISTRICT USES 48
12.6 STORAGE AND DISPLAY, OFF-STREET PARKING AND 50
LOADING, SIGNS AND LANDSCAPING
12.7 ACCESS, LOT AREA, SHAPE HEIGHT. LOT COVERAGE, 51
FLOOR AREA AND SETBACKS
12.8 STREETS AND ROADWAYS 54
12.9 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 54
12.10 ARCHITECTURAL AND COMMUNITY APPEARANCE 55
STANDARDS
13.0 REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCE DRIVE AREA 62
DESIGNED DISTRICT
13.1 GENERAL 62
13.2 PERMITTED USES 62
13.3 PROHIBITED USES 62
13.4 STORAGE AND DISPLAY 62
13.5 OFF STREET PARKING & LOADING 63
13.6 SIGNS 63
13.7 ACCESS 63
13.8 LOT SHAPE & AREA 63
13.9 HEIGHT 63
13.10 LOT COVERAGE 63
13.11 TOTAL FLOOR AREA 64
13.12 SETBACKS 64
13.13 DESIGN STANDARDS 64
13.14 TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT PARK 66
14.0 (reserved)
15.0 (reserved)
16.0 (reserved)
17.0 (reserved)
18.0 (reserved)
19.0 (reserved)
20.0 (reserved)
21.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 71
21.1 GENERAL 71
21.2 PERMITTED USES 71
21.3 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 72
21.4 OUTSIDE STORAGE AND DISPLAY 72
21.5 PROHIBITED USES 73
21.6 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 73
21.7 LOT AREA AND SHAPE 73
21.8 ACCESS 73
21.9 SETBACKS 73
21.10 HEIGHT 74
21.11 COVERAGE AND BULK 74
21.12 LANDSCAPING 74
21.13 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 74
21.14 SIGNS 74
21.15 STREETS AND ROADWAYS 74
21.16 TRANSPORTATION/COMMERCIAL PARK 74
SECTION TITLE PAGE
22.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED RESEARCH DISTRICT 80
22.1 GENERAL 80
22.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES 80
22.3 PROHIBITED USES 80
22.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 81
22.5 LOT AREA 81
22.6 ACCESS 81
22.7 SETBACKS 82
22.8 HEIGHT 82
22.9 COVERAGE AND BULK 82
22.10 LANDSCAPING 82
22.11 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 82
22.12 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA 82
22.13 STORAGE 82
22.14 STREETS AND ROADWAYS 82
23.0 REGULATIONS FOR FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT 83
23.1 GENERAL 83
23.2 OBJECTIVES 83
23.3 PERMITTED USES 83
23.4 SPECIFIC PROHIBITED USES 84
23.5 GENERAL PROHIBITED USES 84
23.6 SPECIAL EXCEPTION 85
23.7 PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF LOT AND STRUCTURES 85
24.0 LAND EXCAVATION AND FILL REGULATIONS 86
24.1 SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIRED 86
24.2 PURPOSE 86
24.3 REGULATED ACTIVITIES 86
24.4 EXEMPTIONS 86
24.5 APPLICATION 87
24.6 PUBLIC HEARING 87
24.7 CONDITIONS OF SPECIAL PERMIT 88
24.8 SECURITY 89
24.9 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION 89
24.10 CHANGE OF CONDITION 89
SECTION TITLE PAGE
25.0 SPECIAL PERMITS IN DESIGNED DISTRICTS 90
25.1 GENERAL 90
25.2 APPLICATION 90
25.3 REVISIONS AND EXTENSIONS 93
25.4 PROCEDURE 93
25.5 PUBLIC HEARING CONDUCT 93
25.6 REAPPLICATION 93
25.7 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL 93
25.8 ZONE CHANGES AND SPECIAL PERMIT 95
25.9 BOND RELEASE 96
26.0 OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION PLANS 97
26.1 SPECIAL EXCEPTION 97
26.2 PURPOSE 97
26.3 APPLICATION 97
26.4 THE STANDARDS 98
26.5 OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION 99
26.6 COMMISSION ACTION 100
26.7 INAPPLICABILITY OF SECTION 27.0 100
27.0 SPECIAL EXCEPTION REGULATIONS 101
27.1 GENERAL 101
27.2 APPLICATION 101
27.3 PUBLIC HEARING 102
27.4 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL 102
27.5 TIME FOR COMPLETION 104
28.0 REGULATIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING 105
28.1 SCOPE 105
28.2 GENERAL 105
28.3 SUBSURFACE PARKING 105
28.4 PARKING SPACE 105
28.5 LOADING SPACES 106
28.6 PARKING SPACE STANDARDS 106
28.7 LOADING SPACE STANDARDS 110
28.8 MULTIPLE USES 111
28.9 SHARED ACCESS 111
28.9a JOINT USAGE 111
28.10 CONSTRUCTION 112
28.11 DESIGN STANDARDS 113
28.12 EXEMPTION AREA 115
SECTION TITLE PAGE
29.0 REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS 116
29.1 GENERAL 116
29.2 ALTERATIONS OR REPLACEMENT 116
29.3 REMOVAL 116
29.4 CLASSIFICATION 116
29.5 DEFINITIONS 116
29.6 SIGN AREA 117
29.7 EXEMPTIONS 118
29.8 STANDARDS FOR ALL SIGNS 118
29.9 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENCE, DESIGNED RESIDENCE, 120
BEACH AND FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICTS
29.10 SIGNS PERMITTED IN DESIGNED BUSINESS, DESIGNED 122
RESEARCH AND DESIGNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
29.11 SIGNS WHICH FACE A RESIDENCE, DESIGNED 122
RESIDENCE, BEACH OR FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
29.12 SIZE AND LOCATION OF GROUND OR POLE SIGNS 122
29.13 DESIGN CRITERIA 123
29.14 PURPOSE 124
30.0 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 125
30.1 GENERAL 125
30.2 LOCATION AND CLASSIFICATION 125
30.3 DISCONTINUANCE 125
31.0 DEFINITIONS 126
31.1 GENERAL 126
31.2 SPECIAL DEFINITIONS 126
32.0 FLOOD PROTECTION 135
33.0 (reserved)
34.0 (reserved)
35.0 (reserved)
36.0 (reserved)
SECTION TITLE PAGE
37.0 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 146
37.1 GENERAL 146
37.2 PURPOSE 146
37.3 EXCLUSIONS 146
37.4 ACTION BY COMMISSION
37.5 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN 146
37.6 CERTIFICATION 148
37.7 ALTERATION OF CERTIFICATION 148
37.8 BOND 148
37.9 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION 148
37.10 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 149
37.11 CIVIL ACTION 149
38.0 AMUSEMENT DEVICES 150
38.1 DEFINITION 150
38.2 PERMITTED USE 150
38.3 DESIGN STANDARDS 150
APPENDIX A PARKING DIAGRAMS 151
APPENDIX B EFFECTIVE DATES 155
1
SECTION 1.0 – TITLE, JURISDICTION AND DISTRICTS
1.1 Title These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Regulations
of the Town of Fairfield, Connecticut.”
1.2 Jurisdiction Within the Town, no land, building or other structure shall be used and
no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended,
moved or structurally altered except in conformity with these regulations.
1.3 Districts For the purpose of these regulations, the Town of Fairfield is hereby
divided into the following classes of districts:
District Zoning Map Code
Residence “AAA” District AAA
Residence “AA” District AA
Residence “R-3” District R-3
Residence “R-2” District R-2
Residence “A” District A
Residence “B” District B
Residence “C” District C
Beach District BD
Designed Residence District DRD (with cross hatching)
Center Designed Business District CDBD
Designed Commercial District DCD
Neighborhood Designed Business District NDBD
Designed Industrial District DID
Designed Research District DRD
Flood Plain District FPD
1.4 Zoning Map The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on a
map entitled “Building Zone Map,” dated February 4, 1930, signed by the zoning
commission, Town of Fairfield, Connecticut, Arthur M. Marsh, Chairman,
C.L. Gellatly, Secretary, including subsequent amendments thereto, which map and
amendments are hereby declared to be a part of these regulations.
2
SECTION 2.0 – GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.1 General
No building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, extended, moved or structurally altered until an application for a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance has been approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the
Town Plan and Zoning Commission, hereinafter called the “Commission”. No land,
building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be used or occupied, or changed in
use, until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance therefore has been issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer certifying conformity with the Zoning Regulations. No
Certificate of Zoning Compliance, however, is required for a nursery, truck garden or
farm when no building or other structure is proposed to be erected or used.
2.2 Change in Use
Unless the Zoning Regulations otherwise specifically provide, change shall not be required in the designated use of any land, buildings or other structures for which a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer pursuant to law.
2.3 Change in Plans, Construction or Use
Nothing in the Zoning Regulations shall require any change in the plans, construction
or designated use of any buildings or other structures for which an application for a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been approved by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer pursuant to law and any required building permit shall have been issued by the
building inspector, the construction of which shall be lawfully in progress on the effective
date of the Zoning Regulations or any amendments thereto, provided construction shall be promptly and diligently prosecuted. Such approved application for a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance authorizing plans, construction or any amendment thereto shall
become null and void if a building permit is not obtained within six (6) months or the
construction is not completed within one (1) year from approval. The Commission may
grant one extension of such construction period for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year for good cause shown.
2.3.1 Notwithstanding the provision of Section 2.3 of the Zoning Regulations, no application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer authorizing plans, construction or a designated use which does not conform to any proposed amendment of the Zoning Regulations if the first notice of a hearing on such amendment has been published in a newspaper as required by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. If, however, the proposed amendment has not been adopted and made effective within sixty-five (65) days from the date of such published notice, the
3
application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer if such application conforms to the Zoning Regulations.
2.4 Prohibited Uses
Uses which are not specifically permitted under the Zoning Regulations are hereby
declared to be prohibited uses.
2.5 Trailers
No trailer, mobile home or other vehicle designed to be moved shall be used as a dwelling.
2.6 Nonconformance
No lot or land shall be subdivided, sold, encumbered or transferred so as to make a lot nonconforming, or more nonconforming, to make use, building or other structure
nonconforming or more nonconforming, to reduce any setback, yard, court, open space
or off-street parking and loading spaces to less than is required by the Zoning
Regulations or to make any nonconforming setback, yard, court, open space or off-street
parking and loading spaces more nonconforming.
2.7 Access and Rear Lots
No rear lot as defined in Section 31.2.28 shall be used or occupied in Zones R-3, R-2,
A, B, C, Flood Plain or Beach District, for anything other than a farm building not
used for human occupancy. No lot shall be used for or occupied by a building or other structure except for a farm building not used for human occupancy unless such lot has
frontage on an improved public street equal to that of the required lot square width in the District in which it is located or in the AA and AAA Zones such lot may also have the required frontage on a private street pursuant to the subdivision regulations. If the location or character of such frontage is such that an Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Permit or Special Permit for excavation and fill will be required to make use of it for driveway purposes, the Commission may require that such permit be obtained before the requirements of this section are deemed satisfied.
2.8 Continuation of Nonconforming Uses
Any use of land, buildings and other structures, and any buildings or other structures,
lawfully existing on the effective date of the Zoning Regulations, or any amendment thereto, which use does not conform to one or more of the provisions of the Zoning
Regulations, may be continued in accordance with the following provisions:
2.8.1 No nonconforming use of land, building or any other structure:
4
2.8.1.1 shall be enlarged or extended to include any other building, land or other structure or part thereof, which is not subject to such nonconformity; or
2.8.1.2 shall be changed to another use unless such new use is substantially a conforming use;
2.8.1.3 which shall have been discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months shall thereafter be resumed or be replaced by any other nonconforming use.
2.8.2 No nonconforming use, building or other structure
2.8.2.1 if once changed to conform with the Zoning Regulations, shall
thereafter be changed so as to be nonconforming again; or
2.8.2.2 if once changed to more nearly conform with the Zoning Regulations,
shall be changed so as to less conforming again; or
2.8.2.3 shall be affected with respect to the right to continue such use by a
change in title, possession or the right of possession; or
2.8.2.4 shall be penalized by elimination or reduction of the nonconformity,
for example, with respect to minimum floor area for a dwelling, off-street
parking and loading spaces, landscaping, outside display and storage,
performance standards and removal of nonconforming portions of a
building or structure, provided that all other requirements of the Zoning
Regulations are met.
2.8.2.5 shall be penalized or otherwise require a variance for setback or lot
coverage to elevate an existing structure to the required elevation
standards of the National Flood Insurance Program and for the
necessary entrance and egress stairs and landings required as a result
of elevation.
2.9 Enlargement of Nonconforming Uses
A nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged, provided such enlargement
does not affect the nonconformity of the building or structure. Enlargement, extension or
structural alteration of a building or other structure or on the use of a lot, as defined in
Section 31.0 of the Zoning Regulations is permitted, provided:
(1) the lot has the required access on a street; and
(2) the use is not a special exception use; and
(3) the use, building or other structure conforms to
all the requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
2.10 Reconstruction, Restoration and Repair of Nonconforming Uses after Casualty
5
No nonconforming building, structure, nonconforming portion of either, or nonconforming use thereof, shall be reconstructed or restored after damage by fire or
other casualty unless:
2.10.1 such damage is not more than fifty (50) percent of its fair market value as
determined by the Town Tax Assessor at the assessment of taxes last completed
before the fire or other casualty; and
2.10.2 an application for a building permit for such reconstruction or restoration is made
within six (6) months and the construction completed within twelve (12) months
from the approval of the application; and
2.10.3 if the existing building or other structure did not have sufficient off-street
parking spaces to comply with Section 28.0 of the Zoning Regulations, the
replacement shall contain no more floor area than the existing building or
structure and the number of existing off-street parking spaces shall not be
reduced.
2.11 Required Repair of Nonconforming Buildings
Except in the event of fire or other casualty as provided in Section 2.10 of the Zoning Regulations, nothing in the Zoning Regulations shall be deemed to prohibit work on
any nonconforming building or structure when required by law to protect the public
health or safety and when ordered by the building inspector, fire marshal or director of
health; provided such work does not increase the nonconformity. Nothing in this
section shall be deemed to prohibit ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconforming
building or structure or replacement of existing materials with similar materials.
2.12 Flood Management
All property and structures located within an area of special flood hazard shall be subject
to the provisions of Section 32.0 of the Zoning Regulations pertaining to Flood Plain
Management requirements.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Fairfield County, Connecticut
dated July 8, 2013, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) dated July 8,
2013, (Panels 09001C0418G, 09001C0419G, 09001C0438G, 09001C0556G,
090010557G) and June 18, 2010 (Panels 09001C0404F, 09001C0406F,
09001C0407F, 09001C0408F, 09001C0409F, 09001C0412F, 09001C0416F,
09001C0417F, 09001C0426F, 09001C0428F, 09001C0437F), and other supporting data applicable to the Town of Fairfield and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AE, and VE, including
6
areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Zone VE is also identified as a Coastal High Hazard Area. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified. With the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. The FIS and FIRM are on file in the FIS for a specific location. The FIS and FIRM are on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
2.13 Board of Appeals
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed by the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and may adopt rules and procedures necessary to exercise its authority, however, it shall not have power to grant variances relating to use of land and buildings or other structures, in districts in which such uses
are not otherwise allowed.
2.14 Coastal Site Plan
2.14.1 Coastal Site Plan Review Required
All buildings, uses and structures fully or partially within the coastal boundary
as defined by Section 22a-94 of the Connecticut General Statutes and as
delineated on the Coastal Boundary Map for the Town of Fairfield, shall be
subject to the coastal site plan review requirements and procedures in
Sections 22a-105 through 22a-109 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
2.14.2 Coastal Site Plan Review Exceptions
a. Pursuant to Section 22a-109 (b) of the Connecticut General Statutes,
the following activities are exempt from coastal site plan review
requirements:
(1) Gardening, grazing and the harvesting of crops;
(2) Minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings or
detached accessory buildings, such as garages and utility sheds;
(3) Construction of new or modification of existing structures
incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential
property, including but not limited to, walks, terraces, driveways,
swimming pools, tennis courts, docks and detached accessory
buildings;
(4) Construction of the following new, or modification of, existing
on-premises structures, fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric gas telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs and such other
7
minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural
character of coastal resources as defined by Section 22a-93 (7) of the Connecticut General Statutes or restrict access to the public beach;
(5) Construction of an individual single family residential structure
except in or within one hundred feet of the following coastal
resource areas as defined by Section 22a-93 of the Connecticut
General Statutes; tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments,
beaches and dunes.
(6) Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or
preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife and
other coastal land and water resources;
(7) Interior modifications to buildings;
(8) Minor changes in use of a building, structure, or property
except those changes occurring on property adjacent to or
abutting coastal waters.
b. The foregoing exemptions from coastal site plan review requirements
shall apply to the following site plans, plans and applications:
(1) Site plans submitted to the Plan and Zoning Commission in
accordance with Section 22a-109 of the Connecticut General
Statutes;
(2) Application for a Special Exception submitted to the Plan and
Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 8-2 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and Section 27.2 of these regulations;
(3) Applications for a variance submitted to the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with subdivision (3) of Section 8-6 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and Section 2.13 of these
regulations;
(4) A referral of a proposed municipal project to the Plan and Zoning
Commission in accordance with Section 8-24 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
8
2.15 Erosion and Sediment Management Plan
Any proposed development in which the disturbed area is cumulatively more than
one-half acre, soil erosion and sediment control plan conforming to the requirements
of Section 37 shall be provided. This requirement shall not apply to a single family
dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land.
2.16 Wetlands
Any application requiring an action by the inland wetlands agency shall not be
accepted by the Plan and Zoning Commission until such action has been taken
by the wetlands agency.
2.17 Public Trees
Planting or removal of any tree or shrub on any Town of Fairfield property or
right-of-way requires a permit from the Town Tree Warden pursuant to Section 23.59 of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
2.20 PROCEDURES AND HEARINGS
2.21 Disposition by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
Application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance involving a Residence District or the
Beach District not requiring a Special Exception or a Special Permit and excluding a Designed Residence District shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior
to the construction, reconstruction, extension, enlargement, moving or structural
alteration of any building or other structure and prior to the use or occupancy of any land,
building or other structure.
2.21.1 The application shall be accompanied by a plan drawing or drawings in duplicate
(one of which will be returned after a decision is made) showing the following:
a) exact dimensions and area of the lot sufficient to “close” the lot
consistent with the standards of a certified A-2 survey.
b) height, dimensions, use, floor area, ground coverage and location
of all buildings and other structures, whether existing or proposed;
c) location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading spaces and
the means of access to such spaces; and
d) such additional information as may be necessary to determine compliance
with the Zoning Regulations.
9
2.21.2 Signs An application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is required to permit the erection of a new sign or change of a sign which constitutes a substantial alteration of an existing sign and shall be submitted to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission for approval in accordance with the requirements for issuance of Special Permits in Designed Districts as stated in Section 25.0.
2.21.3 Off-Street Parking Facilities An application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is required to permit the establishment of off-street parking
facilities or enlargement of existing off-street parking facilities and shall be submitted for approval to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission in accordance with the issuance of special permits in Designed Districts as stated in Section 25.0.
2.21.4 The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall do the following with respect to the
application:
2.21.4.1 inspect the property or cause the same to be inspected; and
2.21.4.2 act on the application either by (1) disapproving the same and noting that decision on the records of the Commission, including the reason therefore, or (2) approving the application or approving it with
modification, and in the case of the latter:
2.21.4.3 either:
(a) issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance permitting the activity, when the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that all requirements of the Zoning Regulations have been complied with,
or
(b) may issue a temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the temporary use of land, buildings and other structures in the process of completion in conformity with the Zoning Regulations, later issue a final Certificate of Zoning compliance when that determination can be made.
2.22 Disposition by the Commission
Applications involving matters not to be disposed of by the Zoning Enforcement Officer under Section 2.21 of the Zoning Regulations shall be submitted to him, but for reference to and action by the Commission, prior to any construction, reconstruction, extension,
enlargement, moving or structural alteration of any building or other structure and prior
to the use of any land, building or other structure.
10
2.23 Public Hearing and Decision
Whenever a public hearing on any application is to be held pursuant to the requirements of the foregoing sections of the Zoning Regulations, other than the public hearing for an amendment to the Zoning Regulations, the procedure for which is set forth in Section
2.39 of the Zoning Regulations, the Commission shall proceed in accordance with the
requirements of the Connecticut General Statutes.
2.24 Security and Its’ Release
Whenever security is required by the Commission under the Zoning Regulations, the applicant shall file with the Commission either cash, savings account pass book or letter
credit in such form and with a surety acceptable to the Commission in such amount as
the Commission deems sufficient.
2.24.1 Bond Release
If a bond is filed, and thereafter the work is substantially completed as evidenced by the Town Engineer, then upon the written request of the applicant, the Commission in its discretion may release not in excess of fifty (50) percent of the original amount or value of such bond. The release of the remainder shall be conditioned upon the following:
2.24.1.1 a further written request;
2.24.1.2 a public hearing with notice that such release has been requested, which notice shall be published in accordance with the requirements of Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations, and shall identify the site, the name of the applicant and the amount of the remainder of the bond or mortgage sought to be release;
2.24.1.3 a post construction survey by a land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut establishing the actual location of the required improvements, their grades, and such other matters as shall be required by the Town Engineer; and
2.24.1.4 a final written inspection report of the Town Engineer.
2.30 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
2.31 Zoning Enforcement Officer
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall (a) be appointed by the Commission, (b) work under the supervision of the Plan and Zoning Director, and (c) have the responsibility and authority to enforce the Zoning Regulations. No application for a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance, Order to Comply or other zoning enforcement document shall be issued
11
unless signed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
2.32 Enforcement by Town
The Town, acting through the Selectmen, the Commission or the Director of Public Works, may take such action as it may deem advisable to enforce any provision of the
Zoning Regulations.
2.33 Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any provision of the Zoning
Regulations shall be subject to penalties in accordance with the General Statutes of the
State of Connecticut. Such penalties may include a fine of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) and ten days imprisonment for each day the violation continues.
2.33.1 After notice to the owner of the property in question and following a public hearing
confirming a zoning violation, the Plan and Zoning Commission may record on the
Fairfield Land Records, with respect to the title of the property, a summary of the nature
of the nature of the violation and the actions required for its resolution. A copy of such
Notice of Violation shall be sent by Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested to the
violator.
2.33.2 Following resolution of the violation in which a Notice of Violation has been Recorded,
the Plan and Zoning Commission shall record on the Fairfield Land Records, a Notice of
Resolution of Violation.
2.34 Revocation and Suspension
Any Special Permit or Special Exception issued pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning
Regulations may be:
2.34.1 revoked by the Commission, after notice and hearing held by the Commission, for
(a) violation of any condition of such permit or exception; or
(b) violation of any provision of the Zoning Regulations or any other law or
regulation relating to the activity; or
(c) any condition or any act constituting or creating a nuisance or endangering life or
property; or
2.34.2 suspended by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a period not exceeding five (5)
days without a hearing. If the violation exists beyond the five day period, a
hearing will be held in accordance with Section 2.34.1
2.34.3 The notice referred to in Section 2.34.1 of the Zoning Regulations shall describe the violation charged and may either be delivered personally to the holder of the
12
permit or exception or sent by certified mail return receipt requested to the
address contained in the application for such permit or exception.
2.35 Rules and Procedures
The Commission may adopt administrative rules and procedures necessary to enforce the
Zoning Regulations.
2.36 Fees, Charges and Expenses
The Commission shall establish and may revise, from time to time, a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and a collection procedure for applications, petitions, site,
architectural and other plans, maps, Certificates of Zoning Compliance, permits,
inspections, the giving and mailing of notices and the publication thereof, and such other
items as are deemed appropriate by the Commission, pertaining to the Zoning Regulations. Until all applicable fees have been paid, no application shall be deemed complete.
2.37 Compliance with Documents or Conditions
Compliance with any maps, documents, statements and stipulations submitted to and approved by the Commission or the Board of Appeals in connection with a Special Permit application, Special Exception application, Variance or other action of the Commission or Board as required by the Zoning Regulations, and any condition of such approval attached by the Commission or Board, shall be conditions for the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
2.38 Records
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep records of all
2.38.1 applications and Certificates of Zoning Compliance,
2.38.2 identifiable complaints of any violations of the Zoning Regulations,
2.38.3 inspections made under the Zoning Regulations, and
2.38.4 notices of violation served by him and the action taken thereof,
2.39 Amendment or Change
The Zoning Regulations, including the Zoning Map which is a part thereof,
may from time to time be amended or changed by the Commission only after due
notice and public hearing as required by the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut. Any petition for the amendment or change of the Zoning Regulations or
Zoning Map shall be submitted to the Commission in accordance with such rules and
13
procedures as the Commission may adopt.
2.40 Effective Date
The Zoning Regulations, and any amendments thereof, shall be effective from the date
established by the Commission in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut.
2.41 Repeal and Rights
The “Zoning Regulations of the Town of Fairfield” adopted by the Zoning Commission on August 26, 1925, and all amendments thereto, are repealed coincident with the
effective date of these Zoning Regulations. Such repeal shall not affect or impair any act
done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or any liability, penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal took effect, but the same
may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, or prosecuted and fully and to the same extent as if
such repeal had not been effected.
2.42 Severability
If any section or provision of the Zoning Regulations is declared to be unconstitutional,
invalid or unlawful, or become inoperative by virtue of the operation of any law or
otherwise, such declaration or inoperability shall not affect the validity of the Zoning
Regulations as a whole or any part thereof, other than the section or provision so declared
to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative.
2.43 Documents
Whenever any number of documents is specified to be submitted to the Commission under the Zoning Regulations, the Commission may change the number of documents
required.
2.44 Affordable Housing
Any petition for an amendment of the Zoning Regulations or for a change in the Zoning
Map in connection with an Affordable Housing Application shall be accompanied by a
conceptual site plan, prepared by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer, describing
the proposed development’s total number of housing units and their arrangement on the
property and the proposed development’s roads and traffic circulation, sewage disposal,
storm drainage and water supply.
14
SECTION 5.0 REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
5.1 General, Permitted Uses, and Lot Size
Except as to Designed Residence District which is provided for in Section 10, and the
Beach District which is provided for in Section 11 of the Zoning Regulations, there shall
be seven (7) Residence Districts, “AAA”, “AA”, “R-3”, “R-2”, “A”, “B” and “C”. No use shall be permitted in said Districts, except as these Residence District Regulations provide. The uses of land, buildings and other structures shall be solely for the following purposes:
5.1.1 As to Dwellings
Residence Permitted Minimum Minimum Square
District Use Lot Size Required on Lot (feet
AAA A single two (2) acres two hundred (200)
detached
dwelling for
one (1) family
AA Same as above one (1) acre one hundred thirty
five (135)
R-3 Same as above twenty thousand one hundred (100)
(20,000) square ft.
R-2 Same as above fourteen thousand eighty (80)
(14,000) square ft.
A Same as above nine thousand three seventy-five (75)
hundred seventy five
(9,375) square ft.
B Same as above six thousand (6000) sixty (60)
square ft.
A single detached nine thousand (9000) sixty (60)
dwelling for two square ft.
(2) families
C A single detached five thousand (5000) fifty (50)
dwelling for one square ft.
(1) family
15
Residence Permitted Minimum Minimum Square
District Use Lot Size Required on Lot (feet)
C (cont’d) A single detached seven thousand fifty (50)
dwelling for two five hundred (7500)
(2) families square ft.
A single detached ten thousand (10,000) fifty (50)
dwelling for three square ft.
(3) families
A single detached twelve thousand five fifty (50)
dwelling for four hundred (12,500)
(4) families square ft.
5.1.1.1. For provisions relating to open Space Subdivision, see
Section 26 of these Regulations.
5.1.2 As to Leasing of Rooms, Taking of Boarders, and Home Occupations
RESIDENCE DISTRICT PERMITTED USE
All Residence Districts Customary home occupations,
leasing of rooms, taking of boarders
as defined in Section 31.0 and/or the
office of a clergyman in a dwelling,
subject to the following conditions:
a) The person or persons conducting
the home occupation or office
shall reside in the dwelling.
b) No evidence of the occupation or
or office shall be visible outside
the dwelling.
c) The total floor area for conduct of the occupation or office shall
not exceed 25 percent of the floor
area of the dwelling.
16
5.1.3 As to Nurseries, Truck Gardens and Farms
RESIDENCE DISTRICT PERMITTED USE
All Residence Districts Nurseries, truck gardens and farms,
provided any buildings or holding
pens or corrals in which horses, cows, pigs or other large animals or
poultry, are kept are not less than
sixty (60) feet from any property or
and provided that fenced pasture areas shall be designed to prevent
animals from overhanging any
property line.
5.1.4 As To Additional Permitted Uses
RESIDENCE DISTRICT PERMITTED USE
All Residence Districts Subject to the securing of a Special
Exception from the Commission in
accordance with Sect. 27.0 of the
Zoning Regulations the following:
a) Buildings, uses and facilities of
the Town; and
b) Public utility substations and
public utility water supply
reservoirs, well, water towers,
water treatment facilities and
water pumping station; and
c) Hospitals, homes for the aged,
rest homes, chronic and
convalescent nursing homes and
buildings, assisted living
facilities, uses and facilities of
the Federal Government or other
governmental agencies; and
17
d) When not conducted as a
business, or for profit, schools,
colleges or universities, churches,
places of worship, parish halls,
museums, charitable institutions,
membership clubs, recreational
facilities, nature preserves and
wildlife sanctuaries, a school or
day nursery in conjunction with a
church or place of worship, and
e) Commercial greenhouses,
provided that any building or
structures are kept not less than
sixty (60) feet from any property
or street line.
f) A child day care center, as
defined in Section 19a-77 of the
Connecticut General Statutes,
provided that such use shall be
limited to properties located in
“C” residence districts that abut
a Business or Industrial district
and which contain a minimum
site area of 12,500 square feet.
5.1.5 As To Accessory Uses
RESIDENCE DISTRICT PERMITTED USE
All Residence Districts The following accessory uses
customary with and incidental to any
aforesaid permitted use, shall
likewise be permitted.
a) The accessory use shall be located
on the same lot with the permitted
use to which it is an accessory;
and no detached accessory
structure shall contain any facility
for cooking or sleeping separate from the dwelling.
18
b) Accessory uses may include off-
street parking spaces and private
garages; boat house, landings and
docks; storage of a boat, boat trailer,
camper, camp trailer, horse trailer,
motor home, snowmobile or utility
trailer, provided that such storage
is not located in any area required
for setback of an accessory building
from any property or street line and
non-commercial kennels provided
that any such kennel occupied by
more than three (3) dogs and any
run
connected therewith is located not
less than one hundred (100) feet
from any property or street line;
provided that any building or
holding pens or corrals in which
horses, cows, pigs or other large
animals or poultry are kept are not
less than sixty (60) feet from any
property or street line and provided
that fenced pasture areas shall be
designed to prevent animals from
overhanging any property line.
c) Except in connection with a
permitted nursery, truck garden,
farm or commercial greenhouse,
there shall not be more than one
commercial vehicle parked or stored
on the premises, and such vehicle
shall not exceed one and one-half
(1 1/2) tons capacity and shall be
parked or stored within a garage.
There shall be no overnight on-street
parking of commercial vehicles.
19
d) Family day care for no more than
six (6) full time children and up to
three (3) part time school age
children unrelated to the provider,
subject to State of Connecticut
regulations and requirements, and
group day care to the extent
required by Section 8-2 of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
5.1.6 As to Signs
RESIDENCE DISTRICT PERMITTED USE
All Residence Districts Signs as provided in and subject to
Section 29.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
5.1.7 Prohibited Uses
Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for
the general principle applicable to prohibited uses.
5.2 Regulations as to Access to a Public Street, Height of Buildings or Other Structures,
Off-Street Parking and Loading, Setbacks from Street or Property Lines, Lot Coverage,
Bulk and Floor Area for Dwellings.
5.2.1 RESIDENCE DISTRICT REGULATION
All Residence Districts
Access: Subject to the provision of Section 2.7 of the Zoning Regulations, each
lot shall have a frontage on a public street equal to that of the required lot square width in the District in which it is located or in the AA and AAA Zones such lot
may also have the required frontage on a private street pursuant to the subdivision regulations. However, no walk or driveway shall be permitted giving access to any business or industrial use or district. The required frontage shall be of such character and location so as to provide a safe and practical means of access to the lot, to permit a convenient driveway across said frontage into the lot and to allow the physical construction of a driveway at least ten (10) feet in width. If the location or character of such frontage is such that an Inland Wetland and Watercourses Permit or Special Permit for excavation and fill will be required to make use of it for driveway purposes, the Commission may require that such permit be obtained before the requirements of this section are deemed satisfied.
5.2.2 As to Height No building or other structure shall exceed the following height:
20
RES. DIST. HEIGHT
AAA, AA, R-3, R-2 Three (3) stories or forty (40) feet, whichever is less.
A, B, C Two and one half (2 ½) stories or thirty-two (32) feet,
whichever is less except that dwellings located within the
100-year flood zone are allowed one foot of additional
height for every two (2) feet of vertical distance between
existing average grade and the base flood elevation.
5.2.3 As to Off-Street Parking and Loading Off-Street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section 28.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
5.2.4 As to Setbacks No building or other structure shall extend within the following
feet of any street or property line:
RES. STREET SIDE PROPERTY REAR PROPERTY
DIST. LINE LINE LINE
AAA sixty (60) thirty (30) fifty (50)
AA fifty (50) twenty-five (25) forty (40)
R-3 forty (40) but on a corner fifteen (15) thirty (30)
lot any building or other
structure, except an
attached accessory building
RES. STREET SIDE PROPERTY REAR PROPERTY
DIST. LINE LINE LINE
or structure, may extend to
within thirty (30) feet of one
(1) street line.
R-2 thirty (30) but on a corner ten (10), but the sum of thirty (30)
lot any building or other the setbacks from the two
structure, except an (2) side lot lines shall not
unattached accessory be less than twenty-five
building or structure, may (25) feet.
extend to within twenty
two (22) feet of one (1) street line.
21
A thirty (30) but on a corner seven (7) but the sum of thirty (30)
lot any building or other the setbacks from the two
structure, except an (2) side lot lines shall not
unattached accessory less than twenty (20) feet
building or structure may for buildings of one (1)
extend to within seventeen story and not less than
(17) feet of one street line twenty-five (25) feet for
for a one (1) story building buildings of more than
and twenty-two (22) feet one (1) story.
from one street line if more
than one (1) story.
B & C twenty (20) but on a corner five (5) but the sum of the twenty (20)
lot any building or other setbacks from the side lot
structure, except an lines shall not be less than
unattached accessory fifteen (15) feet for buildings
building or structure, may of one (1) story and not less
Extend to within twelve less than twenty (20) feet for
(12) feet of one street line for buildings of more than
for a one (1) story building one (1) story.
and seventeen (17) feet of
street line if more than
one (1) story.
The following are exceptions to the foregoing setback regulations:
5.2.4.1 Marquees, canopies, decks, eaves, chimneys, open fire escapes and
similar projections without projecting walls may project into the
area required for setback from property or street line not more than
the following distances:
RESIDENCE DISTRICT DISTANCE
AAA, AA and R-3 five (5) feet
R-2 and A two (2) feet but five (5) feet for open
fire escapes
B and C two (2) feet
5.2.4.2 Ground story unenclosed porches may extend into the area
required for setback from a street line the following distances:
22
RESIDENCE DISTRICT DISTANCE
AAA, AA, R-3, R-2 and A ten (10) feet
B and C eight (8) feet, but six (6) feet for a
two story unenclosed porch
5.2.4.3 Unattached accessory buildings or structures not exceeding fifteen (15)
in height and having the floor area indicated below may extend within
the side and rear property and street lines but shall not extend within the following feet of any street or property line:
MAXIMUM
RESIDENCE FLOOR PROPERTY STREET
DISTRICT AREA LINE LINE
AAA one hundred (100) ten (10) feet sixty (60) feet
square feet
AA one hundred (100) ten (10) feet fifty (50) feet
square feet
R-3 none ten (10) feet forty (40)
R-2, A, B
and C none four (4) feet but to thirty (30) feet
within ten (10) feet
if the height exceeds
fifteen (15) feet and/or
the location is within
less than sixty (60) feet
of any street line.
5.2.5 As to Coverage and Bulk Neither the aggregate lot coverage of all
buildings and structures on any lot, nor the total area of all buildings and
other structures on any lot, excluding basements, shall exceed the following
percentages of the area of the lot:
23
RESIDENCE DISTRICT LOT COVERAGE TOTAL FLOOR AREA
AAA ten (10) percent fifteen (15) percent
AA ten (10) percent twenty (20) percent
R-3 and R-2 fifteen (15) percent thirty (30) percent
A twenty (20) percent forty (40) percent
B thirty (30) percent fifty (50) percent
C thirty (30) percent fifty (50) percent
5.2.5.1 With respect to college and university uses designated in
Section 5.1.4 (d) which are located in Zoning District AA, neither the
aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and structures on the lot, nor the
total area of all buildings and other structures on any lot, excluding basements, shall exceed the following percentages of the area of the lot:
Lot Coverage Total Floor Area
fifteen (15) percent thirty (30) percent
5.2.5.2 With respect to Special Exception uses designated in Section 5.1.4 which
are located in Zoning District AAA, neither the aggregate lot coverage of
all buildings and structures on any lot, excluding basements, shall exceed
the following percentages of the area of the lot.
Lot Coverage Total Floor Area
ten (10) percent twenty (20) percent
5.2.5.3 With respect to building uses and facilities of the Town designated in
Section 5.1.4 (a), which are located in Zoning District R-3, the
aggregated lot coverage of all buildings and structures on the lot shall
not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the lot.
5.2.6 As to Minimum Floor Area for Dwelling Each one story dwelling on the
ground floor, each split level on all floors and each dwelling with two (2) or more
floors shall have the minimum square feet of floor area indicated below:
24
RESIDENCE ONE STORY SPLIT TWO (2) STORIES
DISTRICT DWELLING LEVEL OR MORE
AAA & AA one thousand one thousand one thousand (1,000) on the
two hundred five hundred the ground floor and one
(1,200) (1,500) thousand five hundred (1,500) in the aggregate.
R-3 & R-2 nine hundred one thousand eight hundred (800) on the
(900) two hundred ground floor and one
(1,200) thousand two hundred (1,200) in the aggregate.
A seven hundred one thousand six hundred and fifty (650)
and fifty (750) (1,000) on the ground floor and one
thousand (1,000) in the aggregate.
B and C seven hundred and one thousand six hundred and fifty (650) fifty (750) (1,000) on the ground floor and one
thousand (1,000) in the aggregate; and each dwelling
for two (2) or more families
shall have a minimum floor area of
five hundred (500) for each family.
5.2.7 Streets and Roadways Streets and roadways within a special exception use
shall conform to the standards contained in Section 3 of the Subdivision Regulations.
25
SECTION 6.0 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS
6.1 Intent and Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to address the identified need of providing and
preserving affordable and secure housing for all the population of the Town, while
preserving the appearance and character of the Town’s neighborhoods; by permitting, as
an accessory use, the creation of a separate, self-contained living unit within, incidental
and subordinate to, an existing single-family residence. The creation of such accessory
apartments will promote the general welfare of the Town, without increasing the number
of residential buildings, by allowing all the population to continue to live in our Town,
either in their present homes or in the accessory apartments permitted hereunder.
6.2 Definitions
6.2.1 For the purposes of this regulation, the term “accessory apartment” shall be
defined as a separate, self-contained living unit within, and subordinate to, an existing single-family residence.
6.2.2 For purposes of this regulation, the term “primary dwelling” shall be defined as
the unconverted portion of an existing single-family residence.
6.2.2 For purposes of this regulation, the term “principal owner” shall be defined as the
owner of not less than a fifty (50) percent interest in the residence.
6.3 Conditions and Requirements
A one-family residence located within lawful setbacks and situated in AAA, AA, A, R-3
and R-2 Zones may be converted into a one-family dwelling with a single accessory
apartment, subject to the following conditions and requirements:
6.3.1 A principal owner of the residence must reside in either the primary dwelling or
the accessory apartment throughout the duration of the permit, referred to in Sect. 6.4.1.
6.3.2 The accessory apartment shall contain not less than 450 square feet and not more
than forty (40) percent or the floor area of the originally existing residence.
6.3.3 The originally existing residence shall have been in existence for a minimum of
five (5) years and shall not have undergone any exterior alterations for a minimum of five (5) years except such alterations as may have been made on the existing foundation, unless the owner of the premises has entered into a contract with the Town of Fairfield or its designated agent to establish the apartment or primary dwelling as an “affordable housing” unit as defined in Sect. 31.0.
6.3.4 Any exterior alterations to the originally existing residence shall be made on the
26
existing foundation, with the exception that alterations made solely for the
purpose of providing access and egress need not be made on the existing
foundation. No separate access to the accessory apartment from the outside shall
be in the front facade of the residence. The fire escape or outside stairway, if any,
shall be enclosed.
6.3.5 The number of off-street parking spaces for the accessory apartment shall be not
less than one.
6.3.6 The occupancy of the accessory apartment shall be limited to not more than two
persons unless such apartment is contracted with the Town of Fairfield or its
designated agent to be an “affordable housing” unit as defined in Sect. 31.0, then such occupancy shall be limited to three persons.
6.3.7 If public water and sewer are not available to the residence, the use of private
water and septic systems for the accessory apartment shall be subject to approval
by the Department of Health. The accessory apartment shall comply with all
applicable housing, building, fire and health code requirements.
6.3.8 The owner of the residence shall file with the Zoning Enforcement Officer on or
before January 31st of each year an affidavit on a form to be supplied by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, certifying that the primary dwelling and accessory
apartment are in compliance with the conditions and requirements set forth above.
6.4 Application Procedure
6.4.1 No conversion contemplated by this regulation shall occur, nor shall any associated Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy be issued until the owner
of the residence to be converted has received a written permit from the
Commission or its lawfully authorized designee. The applicant shall first submit
such supporting data as the Commission, or its lawfully authorized designee may
reasonably request, including the following:
6.4.1.1. An affidavit substantially in the form mentioned in Sect. 6.3.8.
6.4.1.2 Sufficient architectural drawings or clear photographs to show the exterior
building alterations proposed.
6.4.1.3 Interior floor plans showing the floor area of the proposed accessory apartment
and primary dwelling.
6.4.2 The Commission shall have the right to require that any application hereunder be
submitted for formal site plan review.
6.4.3. The Town of Fairfield or its designated agent may apply for permits for conversion to create “affordable housing” as defined in Sect. 31.0, provided that a
27
principal owner shall reside in the primary dwelling or apartment upon issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
6.5 Duration
The permit and any other form of approval for a dwelling conversion issued hereunder
shall be subject to revocation by the Commission upon:
6.5.1 The failure of the Owner of the residence to file with the Zoning Enforcement
Officer each year an Affidavit as required in Sect. 6.3.8.
6.5.2 Notwithstanding the filing of such affidavit, a finding by the Commission, or its
lawfully authorized designee, that there is in fact non-compliance with the
conditions and requirements contained in Sect. 6.3.
6.6 Sale of Residence
Upon sale of a residence containing an accessory apartment, the new owner of said
residence shall file with the Zoning Enforcement Officer within thirty days of the transfer
of title to such residence, a notice on a form to be supplied by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, stating whether or not such new owner intends to continue the accessory
apartment use.
28
SECTION 10.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
10.1 General There shall be one (1) Designed Residence District and the following
regulations shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures in this District.
10.2 Purpose The purpose of this District is to provide for flexibility in site design and
housing construction which will provide a variety of housing opportunities including the
encouragement of elderly and affordable housing.
10.3 Permitted Uses For the purpose of this section and other sections of these Designed
Residence District regulations, “underlying residential zone” shall mean the residential
Zoning District which existed prior to the amendment of the zoning map establishing the
Designed Residence District. Land, buildings, and other structures shall be used for a
special permit use permitted in paragraph 10.4, except that if the underlying residential
zone is a Residence “AAA”, “AA”, “R-3”, “R-2”, “A”, “B:, “C: or Flood Plain District,
land, buildings and other structures may also be used for any use permitted in such prior district. On all other parcels, land, buildings and other structures may only be used as paragraph 10.4 provides. Land in the Beach District shall not be eligible for Designed Residence District designation.
Notwithstanding the above, in the Fairfield Housing Authority Pine Tree Development as
defined in Section 31.2.43, the land shall be used for a “Affordable Housing Development” as defined by Section 8-30g of the Connecticut General Statutes, or any amendment thereto without the need for a Special Permit.
10.4 Special Permit Uses In addition to the foregoing permitted uses, the use of land, buildings and other structures shall be
(1) subject to securing a Special Permit from the Commission as provided for in Section
25.0 of the Zoning Regulations,
(2) solely for:
(a) a dwelling for one (1) or more families and accessory uses, customary with and
incidental to such use, located on the same lot, including playgrounds and
recreational facilities designed for use by residents of the premises and the
following, located on the lot, so as to conform to the setback requirements for
any accessory building from any property or public street line; off-street parking
and private garages, boat houses, and storage of boats, provided that kennels
occupied by more than three (3) dogs, or the parking and or storage of a vehicle
in excess of 3/4 ton capacity or any activity for gain, or any walk or driveway
giving access to such activity or to any Designed Business or Designed
Industrial District shall not be construed as an accessory use; and provided no
detached accessory structure shall contain any facility for cooking or sleeping
separate from the dwelling.
(b) customary home occupations, leasing of rooms, taking of boarders as defined as
29
Section 31.0 and/or the office of a clergyman in a dwelling subject to the
following conditions:
(1) the person or persons conducting the home occupation or office shall reside
in the dwelling.
(2) no evidence of the occupation or office shall be visible outside the dwelling.
(3) the total floor area for conduct of the occupation or office shall not exceed
25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling.
10.5 Prohibited Uses Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for
the general principle applicable to prohibited uses.
DESIGN STANDARDS
10.6 Density and Minimum Lot Area
10.6.1 Where the underlying residential zone is “AAA”, the maximum allowable
dwelling unit density shall be 0.5 units per acre and each lot shall have a
minimum of 30 acres.
10.6.2 Where the underlying residential zone is “AA”, the maximum allowable dwelling
unit density shall be 1.0 units per acre and each lot shall have a minimum of 10
acres.
10.6.3 Where the underlying residential zone is “R-3”, the maximum allowable dwelling
unit density shall be 3.2 units per acre and each lot shall have a minimum of
acres.
10.6.4 Where the underlying residential zone is “R-2” the maximum allowable dwelling
unit density shall be 4.6 units per acre and each lot shall have a minimum area of
2 acres.
10.6.5 Where the underlying residential zone is “A”, the maximum allowable dwelling
unit density shall be 6.9 units per acre and each lot shall have a minimum area of
1 acre.
10.6.6 Where the underlying residential zone is “B” or “C”, the maximum allowable
dwelling unit density shall be 10.0 units per acre and each lot shall have a
minimum area of 1 acre.
10.6.7 Where the underlying zone is Designed Industrial District or Designed Business
Districts and such District is located within one half mile of an exit or entrance
ramp to Interstate 95 or within one half mile of a train station, the maximum
allowable dwelling unit density shall be 17 units per acre and each development
30
area shall be not more than 4 acres in area. Notwithstanding conformity with the
criteria set forth in this section, no such District shall be permitted within four
(4) miles of an other such District developed pursuant to the provisions of this
Section, unless those Districts are located within the Transit Oriented
Development Park.
10.6.8 On all other parcels, the maximum allowable dwelling unit density shall be 10.0
units per acre and each lot shall have a minimum area of 1 acre.
10.6.9 Notwithstanding any of the limitations of density established in Sections 10.6.1
through 10.6.7 inclusive, in developments meeting the definition of an “elderly
family development as defined in Section 31.2.12, the maximum allowable
dwelling unit density may be increased by 50% as to new construction, provided
that at least twenty percent (20%) of all dwelling units within such developments
shall be conveyed with restrictions requiring that, for at least forty (40) years
after
the date of initial occupancy, such dwelling units shall be sold or rented at, or
below, prices which will preserve the units as housing for which persons pay
thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual income, where such income is less
than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the median income as defined by Section
8-30g (a) of the Connecticut General Statutes or amendment thereto and subject
to the additional standards provided in Section 10.17.
10.6.10 Notwithstanding any of the limitations of density established in Sections 10.6.1
through 10.6.7 inclusive, the maximum allowable dwelling unit density may be
increased by 50% provided that at least twenty percent (20%) of all dwelling
units within such developments shall be conveyed with restrictions requiring that
for at least forty (40) years after the date of initial occupancy, such dwelling units
shall be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as
housing for which persons pay thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual
income, where such income is less than or equal to eighty percent 80% of the
median income as defined by Section 8-30g (a) of the Connecticut General
Statutes or any amendment thereto and subject to the additional standards
provided in Section 10.17.
10.6.11 Notwithstanding any of the limitations of density established in Section 10.6.7, if
the Commission shall determine that 25% or more of units within a particular
development will likely be occupied by Elderly Families as defined in Section
31.2.12, then the Commission may, in its discretion, increase the maximum
allowable dwelling unit density permitted by Section 10.6.7 by 25%. In making
such determination, the Commission shall review all factors which the
Commission shall deem relevant including, without limitation, the current and
predicted future housing market within the town and the neighborhood in which
the development is to be located, the design and layout of the development
and the proposed units therein, and the recreational facilities or other amenities
proposed within the development.
31
10.6.12 Where the underlying zone is Designed Commercial District and Residence C,
and such District abuts a state highway, the provisions of Section 10.6, and
10.6.8
regarding minimum lot area and, maximum allowable dwelling unit density may
at the discretion of the Commission be waived if a petition for a change in the
zone map is made in connection with a “Set-aside Development” as defined by
Section 8-30g(6) of the Connecticut General Statutes or any amendment thereto
and subject to the additional standards provided in Section 10.17; provided
however, in no event may the minimum lot area be less than one half (1/2) acre
and the maximum allowable dwelling unit density greater than thirty (30) units
per acre on a pro rata basis.
10.6.13 Where the underlying zone is Residence R-3, the maximum allowable dwelling
unit density shall be 17 dwelling units per acre in developments qualifying as a
Fairfield Housing Authority, Pine Tree Development as defined in Section
31.2.43 and subject to the additional standards provided in Section 10.17. In
addition, each lot shall have a minimum area of three acres.
10.7 Access
Each lot shall have a frontage of fifty (50) feet or more on a public street which is
classified as a major or collector road as shown on the Fairfield Master Plan map
entitled “Fairfield Master Plan, Fairfield, Conn. 1980” or any amendment thereto.
An unobstructed easement of access or right-of-way which is everywhere fifty (50) feet or
more in width to such a street may also serve as access.
10.7.1 The requirement for major or collector road status shall not apply if the
development qualifies as a Fairfield Housing Authority Pine Tree
Development as defined in Section 31.2.43 or if the owner or contract
purchaser has entered into a contract with the Town of Fairfield or its
designated agent to establish an Elderly Family Development as defined in
Section 31.2.12 which shall qualify as Affordable Housing as defined in
Section 31.2.3.
10.7.2 The requirement for major or collector road status and minimum frontage may
at the discretion of the Commission be waived within the Transit Oriented
Development Park.
10.7.3 The requirement for major or collector road status shall not apply if the
underlying zone is Designed Industrial District and the property abuts the Center
Designed Business District.
10.8 Utilities
10.8.1 All utilities on the lot shall be underground.
32
10.8.2 Each lot must be served by and each unit must be connected to public sanitary
sewers.
10.8.3 Each unit must be connected to a public water supply.
10.8.4 Hydrants shall be provided with the water storage and rates of flow available to
the satisfaction of the Town Fire Marshal.
10.8.5 Each development shall provide for the disposal of storm drainage to the
satisfaction of the Town Engineering Department.
10.8.6 Proper site lighting shall be provided and such lighting shall not be directed toward or spread to adjoining properties.
10.9 Number of Dwelling Units
10.9.1 There shall be no more than four (4) dwelling units in any single building and
each dwelling unit shall have an entrance providing direct access to the exterior
which access shall not be shared in common with any other dwelling unit.
10.9.2 The Commission may adjust the requirements of Sect. 10.9.1 if the
underlying zone or adjoining property is a Designed Business District,
Designed Industrial District or Residence B or C Zones.
10.9.3 In developments qualifying as a Fairfield Housing Authority Pine Tree
Development as defined in Section 31.2.43 there shall be no more than
eight (8) dwelling units in any single building and each dwelling unit
shall have an entrance providing direct access to the exterior which access shall
not be shared in common with any other dwelling unit.
10.10 Setbacks
The setback requirements from any street or property line shall be those which existed in the prior zoning classification of the property or thirty (30) feet, whichever is greater except that where the prior zoning classification and location of the property is in accordance with Section 10.6.12 and the developer proposes a “Set-aside Development” as defined by Section 8-30g(6) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the setback requirement to any street or property line shall be ten (10) feet, and further except that:
(1) canopies, decks, chimneys, eaves and similar projections without projecting walls
may project not more than two (2) feet into the required setback;
(2) open fire escapes may project not more than five (5) feet into the required setback;
(3) ground story unenclosed porches may project not more than eight (8) feet into the required setback;
33
(4) an unattached accessory building or structure not exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height may extend not more than fifteen (15) feet into the required setback.
(5) where the prior zoning classification is Designed Industrial District and the Commission has determined that 25% or more of the units are likely to be
occupied by elderly families in accordance with Section 10.6.11, the setback
requirements shall be as set forth in Sect. 21.9.
In developments qualifying as a Fairfield Housing Pine Tree Development as defined in
Section 31.2.43 the setback requirements shall be as follows: fifteen (15) from any side
property line and ground story unenclosed porches, decks and patios may project no more
than eight (8) feet into the required setback.
10.10.1 Except where the prior zoning classification and location of the property is in
accordance with Section 10.6.12 and the developer proposes a “Set-aside
Development” as defined by Section 8-30g(6) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the minimum distance between buildings shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet.
10.11 Height No building or other structure shall exceed a height of three (3) stories or forty
feet, whichever is less.
10.12. Coverage and Bulk The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures on
any lot shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the lot, except that in
developments to be occupied exclusively by elderly families and developments which
solely contain affordable housing, the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other
structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the area of the lot. The total floor
area of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not exceed fifty (50) percent
of the area of the lot.
Notwithstanding the above, where the prior zoning classification is Designed Industrial
District and the Commission has determined that 25% or more of the dwelling units are
likely to be occupied by elderly families in accordance with Sect. 10.6.11, the aggregate
lot coverage and floor area ratio of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall be as
set forth in Section 21.11.
Where the prior zoning classification and location of the property is in accordance with
Section 10.6.12 and the developer proposes a “Set-aside Development” as defined by
Section 8-30g(6) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the aggregate lot coverage of all
buildings and other structures shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the area of the lot
and the total floor area of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed eighty (80)
percent of the area of the lot.
34
10.13 Minimum Floor Area for Dwelling Minimum floor area in square feet for dwellings shall be as follows:
(1) one (1) story - seven hundred and fifty (750);
(2) split level - one thousand (1,000) on all floors; and
(3) two (2) stories or more - ground floor six hundred and fifty (650) and a total of one
thousand (1,000); and dwellings for two (2) or more families - five hundred (500) for
each family.
(4) Notwithstanding the above provisions with regard to minimum floor area, where
government programs are being used to finance either the development or
redevelopment or the mortgage or rental financing of affordable units, the minimum
floor area shall meet those program requirements if applicable.
In developments qualifying as a Fairfield Housing Authority, Pine Tree Development as
defined in Section 31.2.43, the minimum floor area in square feet of each dwelling unit in
a one (1) story dwelling shall be 650 square feet.
10.14 Storage and Off-Street Parking and Loading All storage of supplies and refuse shall
be located in a building or in enclosed containers. Off-street parking and loading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with Section 28 of the Zoning Regulations.
10.15 Landscaping All portions of the lot not used for buildings and other structures or for
paved driveways, sidewalks or off-street parking and loading areas shall be suitably
landscaped. The area required for a minimum setback from any Residence District,
Designed Residence or Flood Plain District boundary line shall be provided with a
buffer consisting of fences, walls or embankments in combination with other landscaping
in such a manner as to screen the use from view to a height of five (5) feet at such boundary line or shall be provided with evergreen shrubs and/or trees. The Commission
may adjust the aforesaid landscaping requirements to particular circumstances of lot
lines, topography, soil conditions and site design while preserving the purpose and intent
of such requirements.
10.16 Street and Roadways Street and roadways in multi-family developments shall conform
to the standards contained in the Subdivision Regulations except the Commission may
reduce the width of pavement where appropriate while still providing for adequate traffic
flow and safety.
35
10.17 Additional Provisions for Affordable Housing Development The applicant shall submit
to the Commission a contract with the Town or its designated agent which outlines how
the affordable units are to be provided and maintained and shall include but not be
limited to the following criteria:
10.17.1 Construction Affordable units shall be similar in construction quality
and have the same exterior finish materials as the market rate units.
10.17.2 Dispersion Affordable units shall be equally distributed throughout the
development. The site plan shall indicate the designation of affordable
units to the satisfaction of the Commission.
10.17.3 Bedrooms Where the prior zoning classification and location of the
property is in accordance with Section 10.6.12 and the developer proposes
a “Set-aside Development” as defined by Section 8-30g(6) of the
Connecticut General Statutes, affordable units may contain no less than
one (1) bedroom. In developments qualifying as a Fairfield Housing
Authority, Pine Tree Development as defined in Section 31.2.43, there
shall be a minimum of one (1) bedroom per unit.
10.17.4 Phasing For developments built in phases, construction of the required
affordable units shall be proportional to the market rate units constructed.
10.17.5 Affordability Plan The applicant shall submit to the Commission an
affordability plan pursuant to Section 8-30g of the Connecticut General
Statutes or any amendment thereto:
(1) initial sales/rental prices
(2) selection criteria to determine eligible persons or families for
rental or purchase of units
(3) disposition of the ownership of lots upon which affordable
units are built
(4) a copy of resale/re-rent restrictions
The above criteria shall be predicated on preserving the units as affordable
housing as defined in Sect. 31.2.3 for a minimum period of forty
(40) years from the date of initial occupancy.
36
10.17.6 Covenants Affordable housing units shall be sold or rented by instruments
containing covenants or restrictions as referred to in Section 8-30g of the
Connecticut General Statutes, which covenants shall run with the land and
shall be enforceable by the Town until its release by the Town.
37
SECTION l1.0 REGULATIONS FOR BEACH DISTRICT
The purpose of the Beach District Regulations is to provide zoning guidelines that promote a shorefront residential land use that does not adversely impact the coastal
resources and preserves and protects the quality of life that has developed. These
regulations provide a basis for administering the goals and objectives of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act. These regulations prohibit degradation and encroachment on the shorefront in order to ensure that the beneficial characteristics inherent to the shorefront remain intact.
11.1 Permitted Uses
No use shall be permitted in the Beach District, except as these Beach District Regulations provide. The use of land, buildings and other structures shall be for the
following purposes:
11.1.1 A single detached dwelling for one family and not more than one such dwelling
per lot, except as provided in Section 11.4 of these Beach District Regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 31.2.13, no dwelling or dwelling unit
in the Beach District may be occupied by more than four (4) unrelated persons.
11.1.2 Customary home occupations, leasing of rooms, taking of boarders and other occupations as defined in Section 31.0, subject to the following conditions:
a) The person or persons conducting the home occupation shall reside in the
dwelling.
b) No evidence of the occupation or office shall be visible outside the dwelling.
c) The total floor area for conduct of the occupation shall not exceed 25 percent
of the floor area of the dwelling.
11.1.3 Subject to securing a Special Exception from the Town Plan and Zoning
Commission in accordance with Section 27.0, buildings, uses and facilities of
the Town of Fairfield.
11.1.4 Accessory uses customary with and incidental to the aforementioned permitted
uses, subject to the following additional standards and conditions:
11.1.4.1 The accessory use shall be located on the same lot with the permitted
use to which it is accessory, and no detached accessory structure shall
contain any finished livable floor area, plumbing fixtures or heat.
38
11.1.4.2 Accessory uses may include off-street parking spaces and private
garages; boat houses, landings and docks; and storage of a boat not exceeding twenty two (22) feet in length, provided that such storage is not located in any area required for setback of a building from the property line; the parking or storage of a commercial vehicle not in excess of 1 1/2 tons capacity only when parked or stored in a garage.
11.1.4.3 Accessory uses shall not include any overnight on street parking of
commercial vehicles or any activity conducted for gain, any walk or
driveway giving access to such an activity or any use otherwise
specifically excluded by these regulations.
11.2 Variances
No use may be established or permitted by variance if such use is not otherwise permitted by these Beach District Regulations.
11.3 Conforming Lots
All lots existing in the Beach District as of September 1, 1989, are hereby declared to be conforming lots with regard to Section 2.7 (Access) of the Zoning Regulations, except
that no rear lots shall be permitted. Each lot shall have minimum area of nine thousand three hundred seventy five (9,375) square feet and shall be of such shape that a square
with fifty (50) feet on each side will fit on the lot.
11.4 Multiple Dwelling Units
As to a lot in one ownership which contains more than one (1) dwelling, one or more
buildings in place of such existing dwellings and containing no more than the existing
number of housing units as contained in such dwellings may be erected subject to all
other requirements imposed by these Beach District Regulations and subject to securing a
Special Exception from the Town Plan and Zoning Commission in accordance with
Section 27.0. The purpose of this Section is to provide flexibility in upgrading existing
properties to protect the natural resources while preserving the characteristics of the
surrounding properties.
11.5 Off-Street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 28 of the Zoning
Regulations.
39
11.6 Frontage and Access
For the purposes of this Section each lot shall have a frontage of twenty (20) feet or more
on a public street or shall have an unobstructed easement of access at least twenty (20)
feet in width on a public street or an easement or private right-of-way which is everywhere twenty (20) feet or more in width to a public street. However, no walk or
driveway shall be permitted giving access to any business or industrial use.
11.7 Height
No building or other structure shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty (30) feet,
whichever is less in height except that one foot of additional height shall be permitted for every two (2) feet of vertical distance between existing average grade and the base flood elevation. Notwithstanding Section 31.2.16, this Section shall also apply to church steeples, ornamental towers, silos and water towers or to elevator, heating, ventilation or air-conditioning equipment on the roof of a building.
11.8 Rooftop Decks
Subject to securing a Special Exception from the Town Plan and Zoning Commission in
accordance with Section 27.0, rooftop decks may be permitted except that the total area
of all decks shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area of any such roof.
11.9 Minimum Floor Area
Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum habitable floor area of 750 square feet.
11.10 Lot Coverage
For the purposes of this Section, existing lot coverage shall mean the aggregate of all
building foundations, decks and impervious patio surfaces existing as of the date of the
adoption of these Beach District Regulations. The maximum lot coverage permitted shall be the same as the existing lot coverage or twenty (20) percent of the lot area, whichever
is greater. In calculating lot coverage for new construction, or reconstruction in
conjunction with Section 11.4, all impervious surfaces shall be included. No paved
driveways or walks in excess of three (3) feet in width shall be permitted.
11.11 Side-yard Setbacks
11.11.1 Sideyard setbacks for lots having an average width of less than forty (40) feet
shall be as established by the existing foundation of the principal structure, or
if there shall be no existing structure, then the cumulative sideyard setback shall
be twenty (20) percent of the average width of the lot, but not less than four (4)
feet on any side.
40
11.11.2 For lots having an average width of between forty (40) to and including fifty
(50) feet, the cumulative sideyard setback shall be twenty (20) percent of the
average width of the lot, but not less than five (5) feet on any side.
11.11.3 For lots having an average width of over fifty (50) feet, the cumulative sideyard
setback shall be thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3) percent of the average width
of the lot, but not less than six (6) feet on any side.
11.11.4 This section shall also apply to all structures or surfaces impervious to the passage of water such as driveways, patios and similar surfaces.
11.12 Setbacks from Long Island Sound
The minimum setback of buildings and structures from Long Island Sound shall not be
closer than the front wall of the building existing as of the date of the adoption of these
Beach District Regulations facing Long Island Sound, or if a vacant lot, then no closer to the mean high water line of Long Island Sound than a line drawn between the two (2)
closest front corners of the closest houses on either side, including porches, but not open decks on the ground floor, except that in no case shall the setback be less than
twenty-five (25) feet. This setback shall also apply to fences and other structures more than one foot above the ground.
11.13 Setback from Fairfield Beach Road, Old Dam Road, French Street, Pine Creek Avenue
The minimum setback of buildings and structures from Fairfield Beach Road, Old Dam
Road, French Street and Pine Creek Avenue shall be as follows:
11.13.1 as to lots bounded by Long Island Sound, not less than forty-five (45) from the
center line of the street, and
11.13.2 as to lots bounded by Pine Creek, not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the
center line of the street
11.14 Setbacks from Pine Creek
The minimum setback of buildings and structures from Pine Creek for lots on Fairfield
Beach Road and Old Dam Road shall be not less than ten (10) feet. This setback shall
also apply to fences and other structures more than one foot above the ground.
11.14.1 As to buildings and structures on Pine Creek Avenue, the minimum setback from Pine Creek shall not be closer than the front wall of the building existing as of the date of the adoption of these Beach District Regulations facing Pine Creek, or if a vacant lot, then no closer to the mean high water line of Pine
Creek than the line drawn between the two (2) closest front corners of the closest
41
houses on either side, including porches, but not open decks on the ground floor, except that in no case shall the setback be less than ten (10) feet. This setback shall apply to fences and other structures more than one foot above the ground.
11.15 Setbacks from Other Streets
The minimum setbacks of buildings and structures on streets within the Beach District,
other than those addressed in Section 11.13 of these Beach District Regulations, shall
be fifteen (15) feet from the street line.
11.16 Rear Yard Setback for Lots Fronting on French Street, Pine Creek Avenue and
Old Dam Road
For lots fronting on French Street, Pine Creek Avenue and Old Dam Road which are not bounded by Pine Creek or Long Island Sound, the minimum rear yard setback shall not be less than five (5) feet.
42
SECTION 12.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED BUSINESS DISTRICTS
12.1 General
There shall be three (3) Designed Business Districts, designated Center Designed
Business District, Designed Commercial District and Neighborhood Designed
Business District. No use shall be permitted in any of those Districts, except as these
Designed Business District Regulations provide, and except that, if the Zoning District
existing prior to the amendment of the zoning map establishing Center Designed
Business District, Designed Commercial District, or Neighborhood Designed Business
District was a Residence “AAA”, “AA”, “R-3”, “A”, “B”, or “C” District, land, buildings and other structures may also be used for any use permitted in such prior Zoning District, subject to all the requirements of such prior District.
12.2 Special Permit Uses
In addition to the foregoing pre-existing permitted uses, the use of land, buildings and
other structures shall be solely for the purposes set forth in Section 12.3 for Center
Designed Business District, Section 12.4 for Designed Commercial District and
Section 12.5 for Neighborhood Designed Business District. A Special Permit under
Section 25.0 of the Zoning Regulations shall be required for any new construction,
re-construction, exterior alterations, or addition for a use permitted in Section 12.3, 12.4,
and 12.5 or for any proposed Formula Neighborhood Business as defined in Section
31.2.41 of the Zoning Regulations. Change from one permitted use to another permitted
use not involving new construction, re-construction, exterior alterations, additions or a
Formula Neighborhood Business shall require an application to the Commission for a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance under Section 2.22 of the Zoning Regulations subject
to the standards of Section 25.7.
12.3 Center Designed Business District
The purpose of this district is to encourage the concentration of a wide variety of stores,
services and activities serving the entire Town as shopping and Community centers.
Permitted Uses in Center Designed District
12.3.1 Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town.
12.3.2 Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations, including customary accessory
services therein, but not including switching, freight yards, terminals or storage
sidings.
12.3.3 Business and professional offices when located on upper floors.
12.3.4 Business and professional establishments which primarily provide services to
customers and clients on the premises.
43
12.3.5 Financial institutions,
12.3.6 Medical and dental clinics,
12.3.7 Indoor theaters and assembly halls,
12.3.8 Indoor recreational facilities,
12.3.9 Retail service stores for cleaning and pressing laundry, including dry cleaning,
12.3.10 Self-service laundry provided there shall be no use of inflammable liquids or
steam,
12.3.11 Undertaker’s establishments,
12.3.12 Printing and publishing establishments occupying not more than 5,000 square
feet of floor area,
12.3.13 Bakeries, catering establishments and confectionery stores,
12.3.14 Restaurants and food service (including non-table service restaurants and catering),
12.3.15 Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served
only when seated at tables or counters and at least three-quarters of the customer
seats are located within an enclosed building. Such uses may include a food
take-out service incidental to the primary permitted use, but shall not include
establishments where customers are served in motor vehicles, or served primarily at food take-out counters.
12.3.16 Residential uses provided it shall not be located on a ground floor and not to
exceed more than 50 percent of the total floor area of the building and no
building of mixed residential business shall contain more than two stories
devoted to residential use. Each dwelling unit must have a minimum floor area
of 750 square feet, except that with respect to dwelling units to be occupied
exclusively by elderly families, as defined in Section 31.0 or dwelling unit
classified as affordable housing as defined in Section 31.0, minimum floor are
for such units shall be consistent with the requirements of State and Federal
programs for elderly and affordable housing.
12.3.17 Notwithstanding the above provision with regard to total floor area, residential use may occupy up to 66 2/3 percent of the total floor area of the building provided that those units in excess of 50 percent of the area of the building are
contracted with the Town of Fairfield or its designated agent as “affordable housing” as defined in Section 31.0.
44
12.3.18 Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut. Federal government or
other governmental agencies, which buildings shall not include institutions of a
correctional nature or for the insane.
12.3.19 Off-street parking,
12.3.20 Schools, colleges and universities,
12.3.21 Churches and other places of worship, parish halls, museums and charitable
institutions,
12.3.22 Membership clubs,
12.3.23 Barber shops and beauty parlors,
12.3.24 Package stores for the sale, and establishments for the service, of alcoholic
liquors, beer, ale or wine,
12.3.25 Stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service is
rendered primarily at retail,
12.3.26 Veterinary hospitals, provided that there shall be no commercial boarding of
animals; that the maximum size of each veterinary hospital shall not exceed
2,000 square feet and no building or premises shall be used either in whole or
in part for the veterinary hospital use if any entrance to such building or
premises is within a radius of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any
entrance to another building or premises where a veterinary hospital exists,
12.3.27 The manufacture, processing or assembly of goods:
1. When accessory and subordinate to a permitted use which is being conducted
on the same premises;
2. When located within an enclosed building;
3. When such process does not occupy more than one-third of the floor area of
the premises containing and occupied by the permitted uses; and
4. When such manufacturing, processing or assembly does not involve the use
of machinery or equipment requiring more than a total of five (5
horsepower.
12.3.28 The following uses are permitted subject to securing a Special Exception in accordance with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations:
45
12.3.28.1 Homes for the aged, rest homes, chronic and convalescent nursing homes
12.3.28.2 Day nurseries
12.3.28.3 Public utility substations and water pumping stations
12.3.28.4 Gasoline filling stations; automobile repair facilities, including automobile, trailer and farm equipment repairing; painting and upholstery; establishments for motor vehicle washing; establishments for the sale of new or used
automobiles or the rental thereof.
12.4 Designed Commercial District
The purpose of this zone is to provide for retail uses as well as business and
professional offices.
Permitted Uses in Designed Commercial District
12.4.1 Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town
12.4.2 Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations including customary accessory services therein, but not including switching, freight yards, terminals or
storage sidings
12.4.3 Business and professional offices
12.4.4 Financial institutions
12.4.5 Medical and dental clinics
12.4.6 Indoor theater and assembly halls
12.4.7 Hotels and motels
12.4.8 Indoor recreational facilities
12.4.9 Retail service stores for cleaning and pressing laundry, including dry cleaning.
12.4.10 Self-service laundry, provided there shall be no use of inflammable liquids or
steam.
12.4.11 Undertaker’s establishments
46
12.4.12 Veterinary hospitals
12.4.13 Printing and publishing establishments occupying not more than 5,000 square
feet of floor area
12.4.14 Bakeries, catering establishments and confectionery stores
12.4.15 Restaurants and food service (including non-table service restaurants
and catering)
12.4.16 Drive-through restaurants, provided that a stacking area having a shape
of not less than ten (10) feet by one hundred fifty (150) feet per window
is provided.
12.4.17 Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served
only when seated at tables or counters and at least three-quarters of the customer
seats are located within an enclosed building. Such uses may include food take- out service incidental to the primary permitted use, but shall not include
establishments where customers are served in motor vehicles.
12.4.18 Residential uses provided it shall not be located on a ground floor and not to
exceed more than 50 percent of the total floor area of the building, and not to
exceed more than 70 percent of the total floor area of the building, when located
within the Commerce Drive Area Designed District, and no building of mixed
residential business shall contain more than two stories devoted to residential
use. Each dwelling unit must have a minimum floor area of 750 square feet,
except that with respect to dwelling units to be occupied exclusively by elderly
families, as defined in Section 31.0 or dwelling units classified as affordable
housing as defined in Section 31.0, minimum floor area for such units shall be
consistent with the requirements of State and Federal programs for elderly and
affordable housing.
12.4.19 Notwithstanding the above provision with regard to total floor area,
residential use may occupy up to 66 2/3 percent of the total floor area of the
building provided that those units in excess of 50 percent of the area of the
building are contracted with the Town of Fairfield or its designated agent as
“affordable housing” as defined in Section 31.0.
12.4.20 Building, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal Government
or other governmental agencies, which buildings shall not include institutions
of a correctional nature or for the insane
12.4.21 Off-street parking
12.4.22 Schools, colleges and universities
47
12.4.23 Churches and other places or worship, parish halls, museums and charitable
institutions
12.4.24 Barber shops and beauty parlors
12.4.25 Package stores for the sale, and establishments for the service, of alcoholic
liquors, beer, ale or wine
12.4.26 Stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service
is rendered primarily at retail
12.4.27 The manufacture, processing or assembly of goods:
1. When accessory and subordinate to a permitted use which is being
conducted on the same premises;
2. When located within an enclosed building;
3. When such process does not occupy more than one-third of the floor
area of the premises containing and occupied by the permitted uses; and
4. When such manufacture, processing or assembly does not involve the use
of machinery or equipment requiring more than a total of five horsepower.
12.4.28 The following uses are permitted subject to securing a Special Exception
in accordance with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
12.4.28.1 Membership clubs
12.4.28.2 Homes for the aged, rest homes, chronic and convalescent nursing
homes
12.4.28.3 Day nurseries
12.4.28.4 Public utility substations and water pumping stations
12.4.28.5 Gasoline filling stations: automobile repair facilities, including automobile, trailer and farm equipment repairing; painting and upholstery; establishments for motor vehicle washing; establishments for the sale of new or used automobiles or the rental thereof.
12.4.28.6 Assisted living Facilities
12.4.28.7 Dog Day Care: Use may include Commercial Dog Day Care
provided that there is no overnight kenneling: not occupied by
48
more than one (1) dog per 50 square feet of indoor space; must
provide an outdoor run connected therewith which is fenced in.
Fence shall be designed to prevent animals from overhanging any
property line. The facility must be inspected and licensed by the
State of Connecticut. Use cannot abut a residential district.
12.5 Neighborhood Designed District
The purpose of this district is to provide local neighborhoods with needed and desirable
convenience goods and services in a manner which will not be detrimental to the
surrounding residential areas. The uses permitted in this zone shall be limited to those
which will primarily serve the local neighborhood and are consistent with the purpose for
which this district was designed.
Permitted Uses in the Neighborhood Designed District
12.5.1 Retail uses limited to: antiques, art galleries, art studio, art supplies, books, clothing, driving schools, drugs, dry goods, flowers, fruits, furniture, garden and farm supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, interior decorating, meats, periodicals, pets and related supplies, sandwiches, shoe repair, stationery, toilet articles; provided no individual retail establishment shall have an interior floor area exceeding 4,000 square feet.
12.5.2 Business and professional offices which primarily provide services to customers
and clients on the premises provided that no individual tenant shall have an
interior floor area exceeding 4,000 square feet.
12.5.3 Banks and Financial institutions having a maximum interior floor area of 4,000
square feet.
12.5.4 Self-service laundry having a maximum interior floor area of 4,000 square feet,
provided that there shall be no use of inflammable liquids or steam.
12.5.5 Residential uses provided it shall not be located on a ground floor and not to
exceed more than 50 percent of the total floor area of the building and no
building of mixed residential business shall contain more than two stories devoted to residential use. Each dwelling unit must have a minimum floor area of 750
square feet, except that, with respect to dwelling units to be occupied exclusively
by elderly families, as defined in Section 31.0 or dwelling units classified as
affordable housing as defined in Section 31.0 minimum floor area for such units
shall be consistent with the requirements of State and Federal programs for
elderly and affordable housing.
12.5.6 Notwithstanding the above provision with regard to total floor area, residential
49
use may occupy up to 66 2/3 percent of the total area of the building provided
that those units in excess of 50 percent of the area of the building are contracted
with the Town of Fairfield or its designated agent as “affordable housing” as
defined in Section 31.0.
12.5.7 Bakeries and confectionery stores having a maximum interior floor area of 4,000
square feet.
12.5.8 Barber shops and beauty parlors having a maximum interior floor area of 4,000
square feet.
12.5.9 Package stores for the sale, and establishments for the service, of alcoholic
liquors, beer, ale or wine having a maximum interior floor area of 1,500 square
feet.
12.5.10 Churches and other places or worship, parish halls, museums and charitable
institutions
12.5.11 Boat houses, landings, docks and marinas
12.5.12 Off-street parking
12.5.13 Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town
12.5.14 Railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations, including customary accessory
accessory services therein, but not including switching, freight yards, terminals
or storage siding.
12.5.15 Restaurants and other food service establishments having a maximum interior
floor area of 4,000 square feet and, where customers are served only when seated at tables or counters and at least three-quarters of the customer seats are located within an enclosed building. Such uses may include a food take-out service incidental to the primary permitted use but shall not include establishments where customers are served in motor vehicles or served primarily at food
take-out counters.
12.5.16 Veterinary hospitals, provided that there shall be no commercial boarding of
dogs.
12.5.17 The following uses are permitted subject to securing a Special Exception in
accordance with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations:
12.5.17.1 Day nurseries
12.5.17.2 Public utility substations and water pumping stations
50
12.5.17.3 Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal Government or other governmental agencies, which buildings shall not include institutions of a correctional nature or for the insane.
12.5.17.4 Homes for the aged, rest homes, chronic and convalescent nursing homes
12.5.17.5 Dance studios
12.5.17.6 Assisted living facilities
12.6 Storage and Display, Off-Street Parking and Loading, Signs and Landscaping.
In the Center Designed Business District, Designed Commercial District and
Neighborhood Designed Business District, the following design requirements shall
apply:
12.6.1 Storage and Display
All display of merchandise and automobiles for sale shall be located in a
building unless exterior use is permitted, pursuant to a Special Permit
granted by the Commission thereunder where the nature of the proposed
display will not create a traffic hazard, or unsightly conditions, or obstruct
pedestrian access. All storage of merchandise, supplies and refuse shall be
located in a building, or in the case of refuse, in enclosed containers located
within an enclosure. Storage of automobiles may be outside of a building
but on the same premises as the principal place of business of the dealer and
setback in accordance with Section 27.4.8.2 and screened from public view in accordance with Section 27.4.8.5 of the Zoning Regulations.
12.6.2 Off-Street Parking and Loading
For any permitted use of premises, off-street parking and loading spaces shall
be provided in accordance with Section 28.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
12.6.2.1 Enclosure
Off-street parking or loading areas which extend under all or a portion
of a building or other structure more than ten (10) feet, shall be enclosed.
The facade of this enclosure shall be the same as the building or
structure above it. When this parking or loading area is five (5) feet or
more above ground level, this parking or loading area shall be considered
a story.
51
12.6.3 Signs
Signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 29.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
12.6.4 Landscaping
All portions of the lot not used for buildings and other structures or for paved
driveways, sidewalks or off-street parking and loading areas shall be suitably
landscaped. The area required for a minimum setback from any Residence
District, Designed Residence or Flood Plain District boundary line, or use
permitted in these zones, shall be provided with a buffer consisting of fences, walls or embankments in combination with other landscaping in such a manner
as to screen the use from view to a height of five (5) feet at such boundary line
or shall be provided with evergreen shrubs and/or trees. The Commission may
adjust the aforesaid landscaping requirements to particular circumstances of lot
lines, topography, soil conditions and site design while preserving the purpose
and intent of such requirements.
12.7 Access, Lot Area, Shape, Height, Lot Coverage, Floor Area and Setbacks
12.7.1 Access
Each lot shall have a frontage on, or unobstructed easement of access or private
right-of-way, to a public street equal in width to the following:
Center - twenty (20) feet
Designed Commercial - thirty (30) feet
Neighborhood - twenty (20) feet
12.7.2 Size
Each lot shall have a minimum area as follows:
Center - no minimum
Designed Commercial - ten thousand (10,000) square feet
Neighborhood - no minimum
12.7.3 Shape
Each lot shall have a shape such that a square with the following dimensions will fit on each lot:
Center - no minimum
Designed Commercial - seventy-five (75) feet
Neighborhood - no minimum
52
12.7.4 Height
No building or structure shall exceed the following heights:
Center - five (5) stories or fifty (50) feet
whichever is less in height
Designed Commercial - four (4) stories or forty (40) feet
whichever is less in height except that
buildings located within the 100 year
flood zone are allowed one foot of
additional height for every one foot of
vertical distance between the existing
average grade and the base flood elevation,
provided that the building does not reduce
flood storage capacity.
Neighborhood - three (3) stories or thirty (30) feet
whichever is less in height
12.7.5 Coverage and Bulk
On any lot the aggregate lot coverage and the total floor area of all buildings
and structures shall not exceed the following percentages of the lot area:
12.7.5.1 Lot Coverage
Center - ninety (90) percent
Designed Commercial - seventy five (75) percent
Neighborhood - seventy five (75) percent
12.7.5.2 Total Floor Area
Center - two hundred (200) percent
Designed Commercial - one hundred fifty (150) percent
Neighborhood - one hundred (100) percent except that no
individual building shall exceed a maximum of 14,000 gross square feet.
12.7.6 Setbacks
No building or structure shall be closer to street or property lines, or any
Residence District boundary, than the following:
12.7.6.1 Street Line Setback
53
In Center Designed Business District and Neighborhood
Designed Business District, ten (10) feet except that a
building or structure may extend to the street line or any
street which is one hundred (100) feet or more in width, and
in Designed Commercial District the setback shall be
twenty-five (25) feet.
12.7.6.2 Side Property Line Setback
Zero on one (1) side and not less than ten (10) feet on the
other side, except that adjoining owners may by mutual
agreement recorded on the land records, agree to reduce the
setback from the common property line to a minimum of
ten (10) feet between adjacent structures
12.7.6.3 Rear property Line Setback
Ten (10) feet
12.7.6.4 Adjacent Residence District Boundary
Setback shall be ten (10) feet or the same as that of the
adjacent Residence District setback requirement, whichever
is greater.
12.7.6.5 Projections into Required Setback Area
12.7.6.5.1 Marquees, canopies and eaves may project not more than two (2) feet into the area required for setback from any property line.
12.7.6.5.2 Fire escapes, ground level open porches and other projections without projecting walls may project not more than five (5) feet into the area required for setback from the rear property line.
12.7.6.5.3 Retractable awnings shall be excluded from all setback requirements, but shall be subject to such conditions as the Commission may fix in the special permit relating to the structure to which the awning is attached.
54
12.7.6.6. Additional Setback
Any building or other structure, or portion thereof,
exceeding a height of thirty (30) feet shall be
set back one (1) foot, in addition to the applicable
minimum setback requirement, for each three (3)
foot or fraction thereof, by which such building
or other structure or portion thereof exceeds thirty (30)
feet in height.
12.8 Streets and Roadways
Streets and roadways in Designed Business Districts shall conform to the standards contained in the Subdivision Regulations.
12.9 Performance Standards
Land buildings and other structures may be used for one or more of the purposes
specified in the district in which it is located subject to the following performance
standards.
12.9.1 Dust, Dirt, Fly Ash and Smoke
No offensive dust, dirt, fly ash or smoke shall be emitted into the air.
12.9.2 Odors, Gases and Fumes
No offensive odors, or noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall be
emitted into the air
12.9.3 Noise
No noise which is objectionable due to volume, intermittence, beat frequency
or shrillness shall be transmitted outside the property where it originates.
12.9.4 Wastes
No offensive wastes shall be discharged into any stream or storm drain.
12.9.5 Vibrations
No vibration shall be transmitted outside the property where it originates.
12.9.6 Danger
No material which is dangerous due to explosion toxicity, extreme fire hazard or
55
radioactivity shall be used, stored or manufactured except in accordance with
applicable governmental codes and regulations.
Section 12.10 Architectural and Community Appearance Standards
Land, buildings and other structures may be constructed and, used for one or
more of the purposes specified in the Neighborhood Designed, and Center
Designed Business Districts in which it is located, subject to the following
architectural and community appearance standards.
12.10.1 When making an application, the following information shall be provided in
addition to the information required by other sections of these regulations.
1. Building plans, including floor plans, roof plans and such drawings or plans
which accurately reflect the size, elevations and architectural style of
buildings or structures so that the application can be evaluated consistent with
the standards set forth in this section.
2. All items affecting the architectural details and appearance of buildings or
structures. Each elevation shall indicate the following specific items and any
others which may be deemed necessary for adequate review.
a. Exact color of all architectural features
b. Architectural details
c. Façade-mounted lighting fixtures
d. Type of building material
e. All architectural features and colors for each elevation
3. Vehicular use areas and paving features
4. Pedestrian environment
5. Presence of historical structures and buildings
6. Type and level of entry features for the site or building incorporated into the
design concept
12.10.2 Utilities: All visible, above-grade utility structures, including but not limited to
electrical control panels, meter, back flow prevention devices, transformers, etc.,
shall be sufficiently screened from view with landscaping in conformance with
landscape provisions in Section 25.7.6. All proposed electric utility wires shall
be placed underground when possible.
56
12.10.3 Parking Areas, Street Scape and Landscape
1. The applicant shall submit a parking study indicating parking demand,
proposed land uses, and rationale for satisfying the parking demand of the
proposed land uses. For multiple tenant properties with a common or shared
parking area, as permitted in Section 12 of these Regulations, the total
required number of spaces, otherwise required in Section 28 may, at the
Commission’s discretion be reduced. The applicant must demonstrate the
adequacy and viability of a proposed reduction, and such a request shall be
subject to a public hearing.
2. Off-street parking shall occur behind or on the side of the structures, allowing
building to front partially or wholly on the sidewalk. Lighting fixtures
throughout the parking field shall be complimentary to adjacent streetscape
elements where applicable.
3. Drive-thrus of any type, including automated, unstaffed facilities are not
permitted.
4. Bicycle racks: Bicycle racks shall be provided and provision for scooter
parking shall be considered when appropriate.
5. Lighting: Sidewalk and roadway lighting shall be provided and comply with
the following:
a. Light posts and luminaries shall be a maximum combined height of
12’0”. This height may, at the Commission’s discretion, be higher if
there are no off-site lighting effects.
b. Residential sidewalk foot-candle levels shall range between 0.2 and 0.5
foot-candles with consistency demonstrated through photometric design.
c. Sidewalks adjacent to mixed use buildings shall provide a range of 0.5 to
0.9 foot-candles with consistency demonstrated through photometric
design.
d. Roadways shall be illuminated to 0.6 to 0.9 foot-candles with
consistency demonstrated through photometric design.
e. Full cut off fixtures are required. House-side shielding is also required
adjacent to residential properties.
f. No trespass glare above 0.5 foot-candles at the property line is permitted.
6. Crosswalks: All crosswalks shall contain distinctive pavement with reflective borders. Distinctive pavement shall be unit pavers or decorative concrete.
57
7. Courtyards and Open Space: Install and maintain internal landscaped
courtyard areas and common space where space permits. Materials shall
include shade and flowering trees, lawn, perennial and annual planting beds.
8. All fence materials and appearance shall be compatible with the
architectural character of the surrounding area.
9. Fence and wall combinations used for ornamental purposes shall be
measured as one and not to exceed 42” in height.
10. Fences exceeding 42” in height can be used for screening and or security
purposes. Material, location size shall be approved by the Commission and
shall be subject to Section 25.7.6 requirements.
11. Seating: Bench seating may be provided along sidewalks adjacent to
mixed use buildings. Bench type shall complement architecture of
surrounding buildings.
12. Service alleys and structures, including trash and recycling containment
areas and receptacles generally not used by the public shall be screened.
SECTION 12.10.4 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS
1. All spaces, structures and related site improvements that are visible to the public
from public roadways are designed to add to the visual amenities of the districts.
2. The color, size, height, proportion of openings, roof treatments and building
materials be evaluated for compatibility with the local architectural character.
3. Building Orientation
a. Buildings should have a well defined front façade oriented so that the front
façade is parallel with the public way. The front facades and the overall massing shall emphasize the human scale and the pedestrian environment.
b. The relationships between buildings and the street should either be parallel or
perpendicular, not angled or diagonal. Major roof ridges of buildings should be
either parallel or perpendicular to the street or public way.
c. Accessory structures visible from the public right of way should follow the
same standards as main structures, generally respecting the architectural
character and design relationship established by the main structure they are
associated with.
58
d. No building on a corner lot of a 90° intersection shall be sited at an angle.
Where corners are other than 90°, buildings shall be sited to reflect the
geometry of the respective intersection.
4. Building Materials
a. Preferred building materials are brick, stone and wood. Maintenance free
simulated wood composite materials such as cementitious or vinyl may be permitted in lieu of wood, if approved by the Commission.
b. Materials should be used according to their particular logic of assembly and
with appropriate detailing and expression. Cladding materials, such as siding,
should not be used as a monolithic treatment but shall be broken up by
appropriate trim and detailing consistent with the architectural style.
c. Preferred roofing materials are slate, wood shingles, shakes, standing seam
metal and architectural grade asphalt shingles.
d. Trim and cornice details should be of materials and dimensions appropriate to
the overall treatment of the façade. Maintenance free simulated wood
composite materials such as pvc are acceptable if approved by the commission.
5. Building Facades
a. The foremost frontal plane of the building facing the street or public way is the
main façade. Other front or side facing planes within a twenty foot (20’) setback from the foremost façade are also considered facades.
b. Bay windows, portico and historical façade projections are acceptable in
proportion to the size of the façade.
c. Any overhang of upper stories should be detailed to provide appropriate
definition and visual support through the use of trim and brackets detailed in
accordance with the architectural style. Projections should be appropriate to
the scale and character of the building.
d. Side elevations that face a street or public way shall have materials and
architectural details consistent with the front façade.
6. Window and Door Placement
a. Windows and doors should be balanced in their placement on building facades,
although exact symmetry is not necessary.
b. Buildings should have many windows and doors at street level to encourage
pedestrian traffic and activity.
59
c. Exterior walls should have windows, especially if they face the street or any
public space.
d. Primary building entries should be oriented toward and visible from the street.
Secondary entrances from courtyards or side yards are acceptable.
e. Mixed use buildings should have a greater glass area at the ground floor than at
upper levels.
f. Signage shall be in accordance with Zoning Regulations, Section 29.0.
7. Windows
a. Window styles shall be consistent and compatible across the entire exterior of
a building or home.
b. Preferred window styles are double-hung, casement, bay and storefront
(in mixed use buildings.) Palladium, half-round and elliptical glazing is
acceptable.
c. Windows shall have muntin patterns that are consistent with the architectural
styles. A variety of muntin patterns is encouraged.
d. Display windows in mixed use buildings are encouraged at the ground level. The use
of muntins to break the expanse of glass into smaller panes is encouraged, where
appropriate.
e. Singly cased windows are encouraged in traditional-style buildings; multiple ganged
window configurations are acceptable in buildings of a more modern style.
f. Windows shall be vertical in proportion, except on storefront windows.
g. Windows wider than three feet (3’) are strongly discouraged except on storefront
windows.
h. Windows, including those with high-energy glazing, shall be non-reflective.
i. Windows on buildings with siding exteriors should be trimmed with a minimum of
3 ½ “ wide casing. Brick façade buildings may be treated differently as appropriate.
j. Window head features should have pediments, arched tops of flat heads consistent
with the architectural style, proportioned as appropriate.
k. Shutters shall be of sufficient width to close over the entire window and shall appear
to be operable. The use of shutter hardware is strongly encouraged.
60
8. Doors
a. Storm doors must match the color of the door they protect, or to the color of
the adjacent trim. No mill finishes will be allowed. Only full view storm and
screen doors are allowed.
b. Muntins should be used when consistent with the architecture and their grid
patterns should remain uniform throughout the façade.
c. Main entrances should feature porticos, recessed entries, or strong architectural
details (i.e. pilasters and head features) consistent with the architectural style.
d. The use of transoms or sidelights is encouraged.
9. Roofs
a. Major roof ridges of buildings should be either parallel or perpendicular to the
street or public way. On narrow lots, the roof ridge should generally be
perpendicular to the street. Roofs shall reflect predominate roof types in the
immediate neighborhood (buildings on either side and across the street) normal
roof types fall into three categories: flat with appropriate parapet or cornice
gable and hipped.
b. Mansard or gambrels roofs may be used as appropriate but such use shall be
limited.
c. Simple roof types are encouraged on small buildings. Roofs of larger buildings
should be more complex and should combine a main roof with secondary roofs.
d. Parapets, projecting cornices, or decorative roof overhangs are encouraged as
appropriate to the architectural style.
e. Heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment located on roofs shall not
be visible from the street or public way.
f. Roof pitches may vary in pitch from 7:12 to 14:12. Roof pitches below 8:12
on main roofs are discouraged. Roof pitches for mansard or gambrel roofs
shall be as appropriate to the architectural style.
g. Roof features such as dormers, eave breaks and turrets may be added in proportion
to the roof’s overall size.
h. Dormers should be set back from the face of the building at least one foot (1’)
and from the sides at least three feet (3’). Dormer roofs are generally gabled,
with pediments or saltbox roof. The roof pitch of gable dormer roofs should
61
match the roof pitch of the main roof.
10. “Trademark” Buildings
a. Trademark buildings, which identify the owner or occupant by a trademarked
architectural style, are not allowed. Buildings with advertising icon images
detract from the coherent and distinctive architectural design promoted by
these regulations. Additionally, separated one-story buildings setback from the
street and surrounded by parking can be incompatible with these regulations.
A “Formula Neighborhood Business” as defined in Section 31.2.41 may be
allowed in buildings designed consistent with these regulations.
11. Modifications
Any change of plans or modification of the planned development shall require the approval
of the Commission.
62
SECTION 13.0 REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCE DRIVE AREA DESIGNED DISTRICT
13.1 General
The purpose of the Commerce Drive Area Designed District is to ensure that development
of various uses located within this district both encourages the use of the passenger rail
station and non-motorized transportation opportunities which will both promote the
public welfare by lessening congestion on highways and local roads, improve public health through increased activity, and improve the local and global environment through
the reduction of greenhouse gas and other emissions from the transportation sector.
13.2 Permitted Uses
For the purpose of this section, underlying zone shall mean either the Designed Commercial District or Designed Industrial District, which existed prior to the
amendment of the Zoning Map establishing the Commerce Drive Area Designed District.
All permitted uses in the underlying zone shall be permitted in the Commerce Drive Area
Designed District except those explicitly listed below as prohibited uses. A Special Permit under Section 25.0 of the Zoning Regulations shall be required for any new construction, reconstruction or addition for a use permitted in the underlying zone.
Change from one permitted use to another permitted use, not including new construction, reconstruction or exterior alterations, shall require an application to the Commission for a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance under Section 2.22 of the Zoning Regulations subject to
the Standards of 25.7.
13.3 Prohibited Uses
Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for the general principle applicable to prohibited uses. Notwithstanding said provisions, the following
uses are explicitly prohibited in the Commerce Drive Area Designed District:
Drive-through restaurants; and Single occupant commercial establishments exceeding
30,000 gross sq. ft., where goods are sold or services rendered primarily at retail.
13.4 Storage and Display
All display of merchandise for sale shall be located in a building unless exterior use is
permitted pursuant to a Special Permit granted by the Commission where the nature of the
display will not create a traffic hazard, unsightly conditions or obstruct pedestrian access.
All refuse must be stored in enclosed containers located within an enclosure.
63
13.5 Off Street Parking and Loading
For any permitted use of the premises, off street parking and loading shall be provided in
accordance with Section 28.0 of the Zoning Regulations except for the following:
Retail Stores Minimum of one (1) parking space for each two hundred
and fifty (250) square feet of retail space
Professional Offices Minimum of one (1) parking space for each three hundred
and thirty three (333) square feet of gross floor area
The applicant shall submit a parking study indicating parking demand, proposed land uses, and rationale for satisfying the parking demand of the proposed land uses. For multiple tenant properties with a common or shared parking area, the total number of spaces otherwise required above or by Section 28 may, at the Commissions’ discretion, be reduced. The applicant must demonstrate the adequacy and viability of a proposed reduction and such request shall be subject to a public hearing.
13.6 Signs
Signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 29.0 of the Zoning Regulations with respect to the underlying zone.
13.7 Access
Each lot shall have a frontage on or unobstructed easement of access or private right of way to a public street which is at least thirty (30) feet in width.
13.8 Lot Shape and Area
Each lot shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and shall be of such shape that a square with seventy five (75) feet on each side will fit on the lot.
13.9 Height
No building or other structure shall exceed a height of four (4) stories or forty (40) feet,
whichever is less.
13.10 Lot Coverage
On any lot, the aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the are of the lot if the underlying zone is Designed Industrial District, and not exceed seventy five (75) percent of the area of the lot if the underlying zone is Designed Commercial District.
64
13.11 Total Floor Area
On any lot, the total aggregate floor area of all buildings and structures shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the area of the lot if the underlying zone is Designed Industrial District, and not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) percent of the area of the lot if the underlying zone is Designed Commercial District.
13.12 Setbacks
On the following sections of road, the minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet and the
maximum setback shall be thirty-six (36) feet from the property line. On all other streets
within the zone, the minimum setback shall be five (5) feet and the maximum setback shall be eighteen (18) feet.
Kings Highway Cutoff west of New England Avenue
Kings Highway between Kings Highway Cutoff and the south side of the building located
at 75 Kings Highway
The station access road from the bridge over the tracks to Black Rock Turnpike
Black Rock Turnpike from the traffic circle south to the northern property line of parcel 80-138
Black Rock Turnpike from the northern parcel line of parcel 80-23 to the southern edge of the surface parking lot in front of 21
13.13 Design Standards
The design of buildings, public spaces and transportation infrastructure (for all modes) shall conform to the following standards in order to best achieve the goals outlined in the
Plan of Conservation and Development section on Commerce Drive:
Parking
A. No off street parking shall be allowed between a public street and the frontage of a
building, other than in a driveway accessory to a residential development. Off street
parking shall be allowed only in surface lots on the side or rear of a lot, in an
underground lot, or in a parking structure. Parking shall be located as much as possible to the rear of buildings. Parking shall be allowed between a public street and building frontage if it does not obstruct clear pedestrian access to the building frontage, and there are unusual site characteristics making it impossible to meet the minimum parking requirement on the side or rear of a building.
B. Parking areas abutting a public right-of-way, except railroad, shall provide a planting
strip between the right-of-way or pedestrian walkway and the parking areas of not less
than five feet in width. Optional wall may be in planting strip but shall not be taller
than three (3) feet and shall be constructed to be at least forty (40) percent open.
Streetscape
65
C. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width and shall be located with a
five (5) foot buffer between the sidewalk and the curb line. This buffer area shall
serve as a tree trench with grass surface along streets without on street parking and
shall contain tree pits punctuating a hard surface along streets with on-street parking.
D. Trees shall be planted within tree pits or within a tree trench every fifteen (15) to
twenty-five (25) feet depending on the canopy width at maturity to result in minor
overlap.
E. Wherever a sidewalk or other pedestrian route crosses a lane of vehicle travel within a
public right-of-way a crosswalk shall be painted and wherever a sidewalk or other
pedestrian route crosses a lane of vehicle travel not within a public right-of-way, a
raised crosswalk shall be constructed.
F. The land between a building and the street or sidewalk must be landscaped and/or
hard-surfaced for use by pedestrians. If this portion of the site totals greater than 500
square feet, then the area must contain one or more pedestrian amenities such as
benches, drinking fountains, public art and/or other design elements. Single-family
dwellings, duplexes, and attached houses are exempt from this requirement.
G. A direct pedestrian connection must exist linking an entrance of each building to a
sidewalk along a public street.
H. A direct pedestrian connection must exist linking an entrance of each building to the
train station for any development on a parcel adjacent to the train station.
I. If a site has a Greater Bridgeport Transit stop along its street frontage, the applicant
shall work with the transit agency in locating a transit stop and shelter.
J. All visible above grade utility structures, including but not limited to electrical
control panels, meter, backflow prevention devices, transformers, etc., shall be
sufficiently screened from view with landscaping in conformance with landscape
provisions in Section 25.7.6. All proposed electric utility wires shall be placed underground when possible.
Building Design
K. Buildings must orient the primary entrance or entrances, toward the street or sidewalk.
The building may also have other entrances so long as direct pedestrian access is provided from all entrances.
L. Building facades of greater than one hundred (100) feet in length, shall be broken up
with projections or recessions of sufficient depth and in sufficient number, to reduce
the unbroken massing into lengths of approximately fifty (50) feet or less along all
sides of the building.
66
M. At least sixty (60) percent of the portion of ground floor façades between two (2) and
ten (10) feet above the ground shall be transparent.
N. Building facades shall not include reflective glass or other materials on the ground
floor.
O. Building facades shall not include any uninterrupted length of blank wall greater than
twenty (20) feet in length.
Lighting
P. Light posts and luminaries shall be a maximum combined height of 12’0”. This
height may, at the Commissions’ discretion, be higher if there are no offsite lighting
effects.
Q. Residential sidewalk foot-candle levels shall range from between 0.2 to 0.5 foot
candles with consistency demonstrated through photometric design.
R. Sidewalks adjacent to mixed use buildings shall provide a range of 0.5 to 0.9 foot
candles with consistency demonstrated through photometric design.
S. Roadways shall be illuminated to 0.6 to 0.9 foot-candles with consistency
demonstrated through photometric design.
T. Full cut-off fixtures are required. House-side shielding is also required adjacent to
residential properties.
13.14 Transit-Oriented Development Park
13.14.1 General
The purpose of the Transit-Oriented Development Park within the Commerce Drive
Area Designed District is to enable the development of a transit-supportive, mixed use
neighborhood within walking distance of commuter rail transit of a scale and design that
is appropriate to the existing neighborhood context and to the character of the town
consistent with the goals and policies, and locations recommended within the Plan of
Conservation and Development.
13.14.2 Permitted Uses
Residential for one (1) or more families;
Business and professional offices;
Financial institutions;
67
Medical and dental clinics;
Retail service stores for cleaning and pressing laundry, including dry cleaning;
Bakeries, catering establishments;
Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served only
when seated at tables or counters, and at least three quarters of the customer seats are
located within an enclosed building. Such uses may include food take-out service
incidental to the primary permitted use but shall not include establishments where
customers are served in motor vehicles;
Establishments for the rental of automobiles for lease periods of fewer than thirty days;
Barber shops and beauty parlors;
Package stores for the sale and establishments for the service of alcoholic liquors, beer,
ale or wine;
Stores and other structures where goods are sold or service is rendered primarily at
retail; and day nurseries
13.14.3 Prohibited Uses
Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for the general
principle applicable to prohibited uses. Notwithstanding said provisions, the following
uses are explicitly prohibited in the Transit-Oriented Development Park: Single
occupant commercial establishment exceeding 15,000 gross sq. ft., where goods are sold
or services rendered primarily at retail.
13.14.4 Density and Lot Area
Property qualifying as a Transit-Oriented Development Park shall consist of a parcel or
qualifying parcels of land having a minimum of thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet and be located within the Commerce Drive Area Designed District, having or
proposing one (1) or more buildings that contain residential uses and any additional land uses permitted herein. If the property has its primary frontage along Commerce
Drive or Black Rock Turnpike, one additional land use must be either a restaurant or
retail establishment. There is no limit to the amount of land uses than can be combined a Transit-Oriented Development Park. The maximum allowable residential density shall be fifty (50) bedrooms per acre and residential use shall not exceed 70 percent of the total floor area.
13.14.5 Application to Determine that a Parcel Qualifies as a Transit-Oriented Development
Park
A written application for determination that a parcel qualifies as a Trans-Oriented
Development Park shall be submitted to the Commission accompanied by the
following:
A written statement describing the proposed land use mix, the area of the site, the
68
assessor’s map and parcel number, name and address of the applicant and owner;
An Affordability plan providing information on the construction and management of
Below Market Rate housing units as described in 13.14.7;
A conceptual site plan, which means a plan drawing or drawings prepared by a
professional engineer, surveyor or landscape architect licenses to practice in the State
of Connecticut, drawn to scale of not less than sixty (60) feet to the inch showing the
conceptual plan of the development within the Transit Oriented Development including
contemplated buildings, structures, streetscape, driveways and off-street parking;
Said conceptual site plan shall include a zone legend providing data pertaining to the
contemplated buildings and structures including height, lot coverage, total floor area,
and parking;
Elevation drawings prepared by an architect showing the conceptual façade design of
each building frontage;
A photo-simulation showing the building(s) in its context prepared from two vantage
points to be chosen by the Town Planning staff.
Town Plan & Zoning Commission may, in its’ discretion, hold a public hearing on a
request for determination that a parcel qualifies as a Transit-Oriented Development.
13.14.6 Off-Street Parking
For any permitted use of the premises, off street parking and loading shall be provided
in accordance with Section 28.0 of the Zoning Regulations and Section 13.5 of the
Zoning Regulation pertaining to the Commerce Drive Areas Designed District except
that the number of spaces required for residential uses shall be reduced to the lesser of one (1.0) parking space per bedroom or one and one quarter (1.25) parking spaces per
household.
13.14.7 Below Market Rate Housing
Not less than 10% of dwelling units created within a Transit-Oriented Development Park shall be Below Market Rate (BMR) units, affordable to households earning not
more than eighty percent (80%) of median household income for the Bridgeport, CT HUD Metro Fair Market Rent Area (HMFA), BMR units shall be comparable in average size of market rate units and shall be reasonably distributed throughout the project.
Rental restrictions shall remain in full force and effect for so long as the building or development exists and shall be administered in accordance with written guidelines as
69
adopted, and periodically revised by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission. BMR units offered for sale shall remain subject to resale controls for so long as the building or development exists, and shall not exceed a resale price equal to the current BMR sale price for a complete unit, as set forth above. The allowable resale price may be reduced if the physical conditions reflect abnormal wear and tear due to neglect, abuse or insufficient maintenance. BMR sale and resale requirements shall be administered in
accordance with written guidelines as adopted and periodically revised by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, with suitable restrictive covenants in deeds, running with the land and senior to all financing instruments, to carry out, and effectuate these obligations.
Management Plan
A proposal to establish BMR units shall be accompanied by a management plan (“Affordability Plan”), subject to approval of the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, providing all of the necessary information and documentation to ensure the construction, and continued operation of affordable housing, including the following:
i) the person or organization responsible for administering the plan, including the
application procedures and screening criteria to determine the income eligibility
of applicants, and reporting, and enforcement mechanisms;
ii) affirmative fair marketing procedures governing the sale or rental of the BMR
units;
iii) proposed sale or rental prices of BMR units and the basis for their determination;
iv) identification and timetable for the completion and even distribution of the BMR
units among the market rate units in the development; and
v) other information as may be required by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission,
13.14.8 Signs
Signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 29.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
13.14.9 Height
No building or structure shall exceed sixty (60) feet in height.
13.14.10 Setback
No building or structure shall be closer than ten (10) feet or farther than eighteen (18)
70
feet from any public street line or Private Right of Way which abuts it.
No building or structure shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any property line.
13.14.11 Additional Setback
Any building or other structure, or portion thereof, exceeding a height of thirty-five
(35) feet shall be set back five (5) feet, in addition to the applicable minimum setback
requirement, along any frontage facing a public street or pedestrian walkway.
13.14.12 Lot Coverage
The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and structures shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the entire parcel.
13.14.13 Public Water, Public Sanitary Sewers
All property located within a Transit Oriented Development Park must be serviced by
public water, and public sanitary sewer.
71
SECTION 21.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
21.1 General
There shall be one (1) District for industrial uses, designated as Designed Industrial
District. No use shall be permitted in that District, except as these Designed
Industrial District Regulations provide, and further except that if the Zoning District
existing prior to the amendment of the Zoning Map establishing the Designed
Industrial District was a Residence “AAA”, “AA”, “R-3”, “R-2”, “A”, “B”, or “C” District land, buildings and other structures may be used for any use permitted in such prior Zoning District, subject to all the requirements of such prior District.
21.2 Permitted Uses
In addition to the foregoing pre-existing permitted uses, the uses of land, buildings
and other structures shall be solely for the following purposes. A Special Permit
under Section 25.0 of the Zoning Regulations shall be required for any new
construction, re-construction, exterior alterations, or additions for a use permitted in
this section. Change from one permitted use to another permitted use not involving
new construction, re-construction, exterior alterations or additions shall require an
application to the Commission for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance under
Section 2.22 of the Zoning Regulations subject to the standards of Section 25.7:
21.2.1 the manufacture, processing or assembling of goods;
21.2.2 research laboratories;
21.2.3 warehousing, wholesale businesses, common carrier, contract carrier or
other freight and materials trucking businesses and terminals, motor vehicle
rental or leasing businesses and building contractor’s businesses and storage yards;
21.2.4 restaurant and food service;
21.2.5 wholesale laundering or cleaning plants;
21.2.6 veterinary hospitals, printing and publishing establishments;
21.2.7 off-street parking facilities;
21.2.8 buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal or other
governmental agencies, which buildings, uses and facilities shall not include
institutions of a correctional nature or for the insane;
21.2.9 railroad rights-of-way and passenger stations, including customary accessory
services therein, switching, freight yards, freight terminals and storage sidings;
72
21.2.10 indoor recreational facilities;
21.2.11 accessory uses customary with and incidental to the aforesaid permitted uses;
21.2.12 signs as provided in Section 29.0 of the Zoning Regulations;
21.2.13 Farmer’s Market provided that they are open seasonally and during limited
hours only and are operated by an existing food related business located within
one hundred (100) feet of the proposed farmer market location.
21.3 The following uses are permitted subject to securing a Special Exception in accordance
with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations:
21.3.1 Gasoline filling stations, automobile repair facilities, including automobile,
trailer and farm equipment; repairing, painting and upholstery; establishments
for the sale of new or used automobiles or the rental thereof;
buildings, uses and facilities of the Town;
public utility substations and water pumping stations.
21.4 Outside Storage and Display
The outside storage or display of merchandise, supplies, machinery and refuse
and/or the outside manufacture, processing or assembling of goods shall be limited to an aggregate area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the lot. Any area used for outside storage or display and/or outside manufacture, processing or assembling of goods shall be appropriately screened from streets and adjoining property in such a manner as to conceal the foregoing materials from view to a height of five (5) feet with fences, walls or embankments in combination with other landscaping or shall be provided with evergreen shrubs and/or trees planted to grow so as to accomplish such screening within one (1) year. The Commission at the time of approval of a Special Permit as provided in Section 25.0 of the Zoning Regulations may adjust the aforesaid landscape requirements to particular circumstances of lot lines, topography, soil conditions and site design, while preserving the purpose and intent of the Zoning Regulations. This provision shall not apply to areas used for parking of registered motor vehicles in daily use.
21.5 Prohibited Uses
Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for the general
principle applicable to prohibited uses.
73
21.6 Performance Standards
Land, buildings and other structures may be used for one or more of the
purposes specified in this district subject to the following performance standards:
21.6.1 Emissions
No offensive dust, dirt, fly ash, offensive odors or noxious, toxic or
corrosive fumes, gases or liquids shall be emitted.
21.6.2 Noise
No noise or vibration which is objectionable due to volume, intermittence,
beat frequency or shrillness shall be transmitted outside the property where
it originated.
21.6.3 Wastes
No offensive wastes shall be discharged into any stream, storm drainage
system, sanitary sewers or on site sanitary disposal system.
21.6.4 Hazards
No material which is dangerous due to explosion, toxicity, extreme fire hazard
or radioactivity shall be used, stored or manufactured except in accordance
with applicable governmental codes and regulations.
21.7 Lot Area and Shape
Each lot shall have a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and shall be of
such shape that a square with seventy-five (75) feet on each side will fit on the lot.
21.8 Access
Each lot shall have a frontage of thirty (30) feet or more or a public street or shall have
an unobstructed easement of access or private right-of-way which is everywhere thirty
(30) feet or more in width to a public street.
21.9 Setbacks
No building or other structure shall extend within twenty-five (25) feet of any street
line, within twelve (12) feet of any property line or within twenty-five (25) feet of any
other District boundary except that marquees, canopies, eaves, open fire escapes, and
similar projections without projecting walls may project not more than ten (10) feet
into the area required for setback from a street line and not more than three (3) feet
into the area required for setback from a property line or other District boundary.
74
21.10 Height
No building or other structure shall exceed a height of forty (40) feet.
21.11 Coverage and Bulk
The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not
exceed fifty (50) percent of the area of the lot. The total floor area of all buildings and
other structures on any lot shall not exceed the area of the lot.
21.12 Landscaping
Landscaping shall conform to the requirements of Section 25.7.6 of the Zoning
Regulations, in addition to the screening requirements in Section 21.4 of these
Designed Industrial District Regulations.
21.13 Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
Section 28.0 of the Zoning Regulations; except that for multiple tenant properties, as
permitted in Section 21 of these Regulations, in excess of 100,000 square feet of gross
floor area and providing for a minimum of 300 car parking spaces, the total required
number of spaces otherwise required in Section 28 may, at the Commissions’ discretion
be reduced. The applicant must demonstrate the adequacy and viability of a proposed
reduction, and such a request shall be subject to a public hearing.
21.14 Signs
Signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 29.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
21.15 Streets and Roadways
Streets and roadways in Designed Industrial Districts shall conform to the standards
contained in the Subdivision Regulations.
21.16 TRANSPORTATION/COMMERCIAL PARK
21.16.1 General
The purpose of a Transportation/Commercial Park within the Designed Industrial District is to permit the development of business and professional offices, hotels, retail stores and
other permitted uses, as set forth in Section 21.16.3 hereinafter, adjacent to a railroad
passenger station or platforms, which will promote the public welfare by lessening congestion on the highways, promoting reverse commuting and providing employment
75
opportunities; all contributing to the economic vitality of the Town of Fairfield while providing for harmonious and appropriate development of those areas located within the Transportation/Commercial Park. Incentives are provided to encourage the integration of
larger tracts and to reduce the number of access ways to public streets thereby creating an attractive and integrated development plan.
The Transportation/Commercial Park is designed to be applicable to areas suitable for commercial development with sufficient provision for on site parking and necessary utility service and where the surrounding roadways are of such character as to be able to support such utilization of the property so as to insure that provision shall be made for
entering and leaving the property without creating undue hazard to traffic or congestion.
21.16.2 Special Permit Uses
If a parcel or parcels of land has been determined to qualify as a Transportation
Commercial Park pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.16.6 hereinafter, and the
owner of such parcel or parcels determines to pursue development of the parcel or
parcels as a Transportation/Commercial Park subject to the provisions of this Section 21.16, the use of land, buildings and other structures within said Transportation
Commercial Park shall be solely for the purposes set forth in Section 21.16.3.
A Special Permit under Section 25.0 of the Zoning Regulations shall be required for
any new construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration or addition for a use permitted
by Section 21.16.3. Change from one permitted use to another permitted use not
involving new construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration or addition shall require
an application to the Commission for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance under Section 2.22 of the Zoning Regulations subject to the standards of Section 25.7.
21.16.3 Permitted Uses In A Transportation/Commercial Park
21.16.3.1 Buildings, uses and facilities of the Town of Fairfield
21.16.3.2 Railroad rights of way and passenger stations including customary accessory services
therein, but not including switching, freight yards, or storage sidings.
21.16.3.3 Business and professional offices
21.16.3.3 Financial institutions
21.16.3.4 Medical and dental clinics
21.16.3.5 Hotels
21.16.3.6 Indoor recreational facilities
21.16.3.7 Retail service stores for cleaning and pressing laundry, including dry cleaning
21.16.3.8 Bakeries, catering establishments
21.16.3.9 Restaurants and food service (including non-table service restaurants and catering)
21.16.3.10 Restaurants and other food service establishments where customers are served only
when seated at tables or counters and at least three quarters of the customer seats are
located within an enclosed building. Such uses may include food take-out service
incidental to the primary permitted use, but shall not include establishments where
customers are served in motor vehicles.
21.16.3.11 Buildings, uses and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal Government or
76
other governmental agencies, which buildings shall not include institutions of a
correctional nature or for the insane.
21.16.3.12 Off-street parking facilities
21.16.3.13 Barber shops and beauty parlors
21.16.3.14 Package stores for the sale, and establishments for the service, of alcoholic liquors,
beer, ale or wine
21.16.3.15 Stores and other structures where goods are sold or service is rendered primarily at
retail
21.16.3.16 Day nurseries
21.16.3.17 Laboratories for scientific, medical, engineering, literary, antiquarian, commercial
and experimental basis research and testing
21.16.3.18 Research and development laboratories
21.16.3.19 For waterfront sites: Marinas and other general public access to the waterfront
21.16.4 Prohibited Uses
Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for the general
principal applicable to prohibited uses. Notwithstanding said provisions, the
following uses are explicitly prohibited in a Transportation/Commercial Park:
21.16.4.1 Indoor theaters and assembly halls (not including conference centers and/or banquet
halls utilized in conjunction with hotels or business and professional offices).
21.16.4.2 Single occupant retail stores exceeding 30,000 sq. ft. of interior floor space where
goods are sold primarily at retail.
21.16.5 Lot Area and Characteristics
21.16.5.1 Property qualifying as a Transportation/Commercial Park shall consist of a parcel or
qualifying parcels of land having a minimum of ten (10) acres in an area adjacent to
a railroad passenger station or platform facilities and to be utilized for uses as permitted in Section 21.16.3, having or proposing more than one (1) building (whether or not the buildings are connected by atrium or other type of common area), designed
to be operated in a unified manner with common accessory facilities; such as private
interior roadways and open space for use by occupants and invitees within the Park. For purposes of this section, adjacent shall be defined to mean that any portion of
said parcel or parcels is located within 300 linear feet of a railroad passenger station or platform facilities.
21.16.5.2 Once an area has qualified as a Transportation/Commercial Park having a minimum
area of ten (10) acres, nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit nor shall the qualification of the parcel as a Transportation/Commercial Park be affected by the subdivision of said parcel into individual lots of less than ten (10) acres for purposes of conveyance and/or financing of construction on said lots.
21.16.5.3 Notwithstanding, the subdivision of lots within a Transportation Commercial Park as
77
referenced in Section 21.16.5.2, coverage and bulk compliance pursuant to Section 21.16.10.3 shall be determined based upon the area of the entire parcel qualified as a Transportation/Commercial Park as if such subdivision had not occurred.
21.16.6 Application to Determine that a Parcel Qualifies as a Transportation/Commercial Park:
A written application for determination that a parcel qualifies as a Transportation
Commercial Park within the Designed Industrial District shall be submitted tot he
Commission accompanied by the following:
21.16.6.1 A written statement describing the proposed use, the area of the site, the assessor’s
map and parcel number, name and address of the applicant and owner;
21.16.6.2 A conceptual site plan, which means a plan drawing or drawings prepared by a
professional engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect licensed to practice in the
State of Connecticut, drawn to scale of not less than sixty (60) feet to the inch showing
the conceptual plan of development within the Transportation/Commercial Park including contemplated buildings, structures, streets, driveways and off street parking
spaces;
21.16.6.3 Said conceptual site plan shall include a zone legend providing data pertaining to the
contemplated buildings and structures including height, lot coverage, total floor area and parking.
21.16.6.4 Town Plan & Zoning Commission may, in its discretion hold a public hearing on a
request for determination that a parcel qualifies as a Transportation/Commercial Park
within the Designed Industrial District.
21.16.6.5 An application for determination that a parcel and its proposed use qualifies as a
Transportation/Commercial Park shall be approved if the same meets the requirements
of Section 21.16.5 here-in-above.
21.16.7 Off Street Parking and Loading
For any permitted use of the premises, off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 28.0 of the Zoning Regulations except that the number of
spaces shall be determined by adding the number required for each type of use and
multiplying such total by eighty (80) percent.
21.16.8 Signs
Signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 29.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
21.16.9 Landscaping
78
All portions of the Transportation/Commercial Park not used for buildings and other
structures or for paved driveways, sidewalks or off street parking and loading area
shall either be suitably landscaped or left in its natural state. The area required for a
minimum setback from any Residence District or Designed Residence boundary line,
or use permitted in these zones, shall be provided with a buffer consisting of fences, walls or embankments in combination with other landscaping in such a manner as to screen the use from view to a height of five (5) feet at such boundary line or shall be
provided with evergreen shrubs and/or trees. The Commission may adjust the aforesaid landscaping requirements to particular circumstances of lot lines, topography, soil conditions and site design while preserving the purpose and intent
of such requirements.
21.16.10 Access, Height, Lot Coverage, Floor Area and Setbacks
21.16.10.1 Access – Each lot shall have frontage on or unobstructed easement of access or
private right of way to a public street equal to width of at least thirty (30) feet.
For purposes of this section 21.16.10, a Private Right of Way is defined as an interior
private passage way within a Transportation/Commercial Park designed for motor
vehicle ingress and egress and circulation within the Park, provided that such a
Private Right of Way has a minimum paved width of twenty-four (24) feet.
21.16.10.2 Height – within a Transportation/Commercial Park and notwithstanding the
provisions of Section 31.2.16 of the Zoning Regulations, the height of a building or
other structure shall be measured from the average top of curb elevation of either the
nearest public street or Private Right of Way averaged over the portion of the public
street or Private Right of Way that directly adjoins a building’s primary front or
entrance as determined by the owner, to the average level between the highest
interior ceiling and the top of the parapet of the building. For purposes of this
section, the average top of the curb elevation at vertical distances between two fixed
points every two feet, provided such elevation shall be no higher than ten (10) feet
above the average post construction grade around any such building or other
structure as calculated in accordance with Section 31.2.16 or fifteen (15) feet above
the average post construction grade when the development includes below street
level parking structures.
21.16.10.2.1 No building or structure shall exceed seventy (70) feet in height.
21.16.10.3 Lot Coverage
The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and structures shall not exceed seventy
five percent (75%) of the total area of the entire parcel, including open space,
qualifies as a Transportation/Commercial Park.
79
21.16.10.4 Total Floor Area
The total floor area of all buildings and structures shall not exceed one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the total area of the entire parcel, including open space,
qualifying as a Transportation/Commercial Park. Within the Transportation
Commercial Park calculation of total floor area in accordance with this section shall not include square footage used for structured parking.
21.16.10.5 Setbacks
21.16.10.5.1 No building or structure shall be closer than ten feet (10) from any public street
line or Private Right of Way which abuts it; provided however, that within a
Transportation/Commercial Park unenclosed surface parking shall be allowed within such setback.
21.16.10.5.2 Side Property Line Setback and Rear Property Line Setback
Zero provided however, that if a building and/or structure are not attached, the
minimum setback between buildings or other structures shall be ten (10) feet.
21.16.10.5.3 Adjacent Residence District Boundary
Setback shall be ten (10) feet or the same as that of the adjacent Residence District setback requirement, whichever is greater.
21.16.11 Public Water, Public Sanitary Sewers
All property located within a Transportation/Commercial Park must be serviced by public water and public sanitary sewer.
21.16.12 Open Space
21.16.12.1 Within a Transportation/Commercial Park provision shall be made for the
dedication of not less than ten (10) percent of the total area of the Transportation
Commercial Park as open space to be so designated by the establishment of a
conservation easement over said portion of the property so dedicated precluding
active development within the bounds of said easement area. Said open space
designation and conservation easement shall not prohibit the establishment of
greenbelts, hiking trails and other amenities for passive recreation within said area,
and shall not preclude public access to such areas.
21.16.12.2 The area designated as open space pursuant to the provisions of this section may be
included within total area of the Transportation/Commercial Park for purposes of
compliance with lot coverage requirement pursuant to Section 21.16.10.3.1 and
total floor area requirement pursuant to Section 21.16.10.3.2.
80
SECTION 22.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED RESEARCH DISTRICT
22.1 General
No use of land, buildings and other structures shall be permitted in the Designed
Research District, except as these Designed Research District Regulations provide
and further except that if the Zoning District existing prior to the amendment of the
Zoning Map establishing the Designed Research District was a Residence “AAA”,
“AA”, “R-3”, “R-2”, “A”, “B”, “C”, or “Beach” District, land, buildings and other
structures may be used for any use permitted in such Zoning district, subject to all of
the requirements of such prior District.
22.2 Special Permit Uses
In addition to the foregoing pre-existing permitted uses, the uses of land, buildings
and other structures shall be solely for the following purposes, and be subject to the
securing of a Special Permit from the Commission as provided in Section 25 of the
Zoning Regulations and further subject to the standards hereinafter set forth in this
Section. This Special Permit procedure is imposed pursuant to CT Gen. Statutes,
Sect. 8-2.
22.2.1 laboratories for scientific, medical, engineering literary, antiquarian, commercial
and experimental basic research and testing, but not for any applied research
provided that laboratories on land in a Designed Research District prior to
March 31, 1990, may be used for any applied research.
22.2.2 office buildings for business and professional establishments, excluding those
establishments which primarily provide services to customers and clients on the
premises, provided that office buildings on land not in a Designed Research
District prior to March 31, 1990, shall be used for single occupant use exclusively.
22.2.3 off-street parking facilities;
22.2.4 accessory uses customary with and incidental to the aforesaid use; and
22.2.5 signs as provided in Section 29 of the Zoning Regulations.
22.3 Prohibited Uses
Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for the general
principle applicable to prohibited uses.
81
22.4 Performance Standards
Land buildings and other structures may be used for one or more of the purposes
specified in this district in which it is located subject to the following performance
standards:
22.4.1 Emissions: No offensive dust, dirt, fly ash, offensive odors or noxious, toxic
or corrosive fumes, gases or liquids shall be emitted.
22.4.2 Noise: No noise or vibration which is objectionable due to volume, intermittence,
beat frequency or shrillness shall be transmitted outside the property where it
originated.
22.4.3 Waste: No offensive wastes shall be discharged into any stream, storm drainage
system, sanitary disposal systems.
22.4.4 Hazards: No material which is dangerous due to explosion, toxicity, fire hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored or manufactured, except in accordance with
applicable governmental codes and regulations.
22.5 Lot Area
Each lot shall have a minimum area of ten (10) acres.
22.6 Access
Each lot
22.6.1 shall have a frontage of one hundred (100) feet or more on a public street
or shall have an unobstructed easement of access or private right-or-way
which is everywhere sixty (60) feet or more in width to a public street; and
22.6.2 the principal entrance and exit to the lot must be located within one-third (1/3)
of a mile from the paved portion of the nearest entrance to or exit from a
limited access highway.
22.7 Setbacks
No building or other structure shall extend within one hundred (100) feet of
any street line, within fifty (50) feet of any property line or within one hundred
(100) feet of any Residence District, Designed Residence District or Flood
Plain District boundary line.
22.8 Height
No building or other structure shall exceed a height of forty (40) feet.
82
22.9 Coverage and Bulk
The aggregate lot coverage of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not
exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the lot. The total floor area of all buildings
and other structures on any lot shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area of the lot.
22.10 Landscaping
Landscaping shall conform to the requirements of Section 25.7.6 of the Zoning
Regulations.
22.11 Off-Street Parking and Loading
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
Section 28 of the Zoning Regulations.
22.12 Minimum Floor Area
Each building shall have a minimum ground floor area of two thousand (2,000)
square feet.
22.13 Storage
All storage shall be located in a building or enclosed structure.
22.14 Streets and Roadways
Streets and roadways in Designed Research Districts shall conform to the standards
contained in the Subdivision Regulations.
83
SECTION 23.0 REGULATIONS FOR FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
23.1 General
The following Flood Plain District Regulations shall apply to the use of land,
buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other
structures, in any Flood Plain District.
23.2 Objectives
In the establishment of this Flood Plain District it is recognized that there are areas
of the Town which are, or are surrounded by areas which are, subject to frequent,
occasional or periodic flooding. Strict limitations on the use of land, buildings and
other structures for human habitation on the construction of buildings and other
structures and on filling and excavation of land are necessary for protection of the
public health and safety and for protection of property values. This Flood Plain
District establishes certain uses which can be conducted with a minimum of risk to
health, safety and property values and established a procedure whereby additional
uses can be conducted after review of plans and a determination that the use, and any
buildings, other structures and filling or excavation of land in connection therewith
can be carried out without endangering health, safety and property values.
23.3 Permitted Uses
Land, buildings and other structures shall be used for one or more of the following
purposes, provided that no building or other structure constructed in connection with
such uses shall have a floor area in excess of two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
23.3.1 nurseries, truck gardens and farms, not including commercial greenhouses;
provided any buildings or holding pens or corrals in which horses, cows, pigs,
or other large animals or poultry are kept are not less than sixty (60) feet
from any property or street line; and provided that fenced pasture areas shall be
designed to prevent animals from overhanging any property line;
23.3.2 subject to the securing of a Special Exception from the Commission in
accordance with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations, buildings, uses
and facilities of the Town;
23.3.3 subject to the securing of a Special Exception from the Commission in
accordance with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations, buildings, uses
and facilities of the State of Connecticut, Federal government or other
governmental agencies;
84
23.3.4 subject to the securing of a Special Exception from the Commission in
accordance with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations, the following uses
when not conducted as a business or for profit; recreation facilities, nature
preserves and wildlife sanctuaries;
23.3.5 off-street parking facilities in connection with a use that would be permitted
in a Residence R-2 District;
23.3.6 signs as provided in Section 29.0 of the Zoning regulations; and
23.3.7 accessory uses customary with and incidental to the aforesaid permitted uses,
subject to the following additional standards and conditions;
23.3.7.1 the accessory use shall be located on the same lot with the permitted
use to which it is accessory.
23.3.7.2 accessory uses shall not include any activity conducted for gain,
any walk or driveway giving access to such an activity or any use
otherwise specifically excluded by these Flood Plain District
Regulations.
23.4 Specific Prohibited Uses
The permitted uses specified in Section 23.3 of these Flood Plain District Regulations
shall not be construed to include, and no land, building or other structure shall be
used for any of the following purposes:
23.4.1 any building or other structure having a floor area in excess of two hundred
and fifty (250) square feet;
23.4.2 any filling of land or the excavation or removal of earth, loam, topsoil, sand
gravel, clay or stone from the premises, except in conjunction with an
otherwise permitted use; or
23.4.3 the construction of any dike, berm, groin, seawall, jetty, navigation channel
or boat basin or the installation of any piers, docks, wharves, bulkheads,
retaining walls or pilings, except in accordance with Section 23.3.3 of these
Flood Plain District Regulations.
23.5 General Prohibited Uses
Reference is hereby made to Section 2.4 of the Zoning Regulations for the
general principle applicable to prohibited uses.
85
23.6 Special Exception
In accordance with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations, the Commission may
permit the establishment of any use permitted in Residence R-2 Districts and a
prohibited use listed in Section 23.4 of these Flood Plain District Regulations that
would be permitted in Residence R-2 Districts, if the Commission finds that the
proposed use, and the buildings and other structures in connection therewith, will
conform to these Flood Plain District Regulations and to the additional standards
specified in Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
23.7 Physical Characteristics of Lot and Structures
The Flood Plain District Regulations with respect to lot area and shape, access,
setbacks, height, coverage and bulk minimum floor area for dwellings, off-street parking and loading and signs are the same as the regulations provided for the same matters
in the R-2 Residential District and Section 5 of the Zoning Regulations is hereby
incorporated into these Flood Plain District Regulations by reference as to the items listed herein.
86
SECTION 24.0 LAND EXCAVATION AND FILL REGULATIONS
24.1 Special Permit Required
The excavation, movement, alteration or filling of any earth, loam, topsoil, clay or stone
affecting any premises located in any Zoning District of the Town shall require a
Special Permit in accordance with these Land Excavation and Fill Regulations.
24.2 Purpose
The purpose of these Land Excavation and Fill Regulations is to regulate land excavation
and fill operations as regulated activities and to preserve and protect the land as a natural
resource to regulate activity which would alter the configuration of the surface or
subsurface of the land and to regulate its development by means of alternatives which
best maintain and enhance the appearance, character and natural beauty of the land, and to protect property values, and public health and safety.
24.3 Regulated Activities
Regulated activities shall consist of drainage, dredging, excavation, or removal of soil, mud, sand, gravel, clay, stone or aggregate of any kind, or similar material, dumping,
filling, or depositing soil, mud, sand, gravel, clay, stone, debris, rubbish, aggregate of
any kind, or similar material.
24.4 Exemptions
A Special Permit shall not be required for the following:
24.4.1 normal excavation for structural foundations and sanitary systems and related
grading or landscaping in connection with an existing or proposed structure or a
proposed permitted accessory use or for which a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued pertaining to a lot in an approved or recorded subdivision, provided that no excavation, filling or grading shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) cubic yards;
24.4.2 construction and grading related to subdivision plans approved by the Commission;
24.4.3 land tests to determine soil characteristics such as borings percolation tests
and those of similar nature;
24.4.4 Subject to securing a Certificate of Zoning Compliance from the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, excavation or filling of two hundred and fifty (250)
cubic yards or less not part of a continuing excavation or filling activity; and
87
24.4.5 any regulated activity for which a permit shall have been issued by the Inland
Wetlands Agency of the Town.
24.5 Application
Written application for such a Special Permit shall be submitted to the Commission
accompanied by a written statement describing the proposed regulated activity,
together with maps and plans, showing the following:
24.5.1 the area to be affected by the regulated activity;
24.5.2 existing contour lines on the premises and proposed contour lines resulting from
the intended regulated activity, including an area within fifty (50) feet of the
premises, shown on a map drawn to a scale not less than sixty (60) feet to the
inch and with a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet;
24.5.3 existing and proposed drainage, buildings and other structures on or within one
hundred (100) feet of the proposed activity and the adjacent or nearby areas to
the extent affected by such activity;
24.5.4 existing rivers and their tributaries, streams, ponds, lakes, reservoirs and
watercourses, tidal and coastal wetlands, inland wetlands, salt and fresh water
marshes and flood plains, geographical features and vegetation on or within
the area affected by the activity;
24.5.5 proposed vehicle access to the property;
24.5.6 proposed time of completion of the project and the periods of operation;
24.5.7 the total amount of excavation in cubic yards, total amount of material to
be removed or placed on the site in cubic yards, the areas affected by the
regulated activity;
24.5.8 proper provision for erosion and sedimentation control in accordance with
Section 37.0; and
24.5.9 such additional information as the Commission shall deem necessary to make
a reasonable decision on the application.
24.6 Public Hearing
Except as otherwise provided, the Commission, in its discretion, may hold a public
hearing on an application, and if it exercises that discretion, shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations. The application
shall also be governed by Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations.
88
24.7 Conditions of Special Permit
A Special Permit, if granted, shall be for a limited time, not exceeding two (2) years,
and only upon the conditions that there shall be:
24.7.1 no excavation, grading or other alteration except in conformity with the
proposed grading plan as approved;
24.7.2 no slopes in excess of fifteen (15) percent;
24.7.3 no machinery, methods or equipment of any nature, including but not limited
to, a crushing plant, a washing operation, a screening or scalping plant or
operation, blenders and bar screens or “grizzlies” for the alteration or processing
of the excavated material so as to affect its physical or chemical properties,
such as sieve analysis and gradation, or the presence of unwanted material; and
24.7.4 no filling or excavation or removal within fifty (50) feet of any street or property
line, except that, where the property is considerably above grade at such line,
removal may take place at a lesser distance from the line, or where the property
is considerably below grade at such line, filling or excavation may take place at
a lesser line, filling or excavation may take place at a lesser distance from the
line, if the Commission determines that the work proposed by the application
will not result in:
24.7.4.1 weakening of lateral support of any public right-of-way or contiguous
property; or
24.7.4.2 the disposition of debris on any public right-of-way, nearby private
property or existing drainage course; or
24.7.4.3 interference with any existing drainage course, or
24.7.4.4 any sharp declivities, pits or depressions;
24.7.5 after the activity, clearance of debris within the time provided in the special
permit;
24.7.6 setting aside the top layer of arable soil for a depth of six (6) inches, retaining
that soil on the premises and re-spreading it over the premises, planting of
suitable ground cover and vegetation according to a landscape plan and grown
to an erosion resistant condition, upon the completion of the regulated
activity, in accordance with the approved contour lines and completing such
work within the time provided for in the Special Permit;
24.7.7 a schedule to be filed with the Commission showing the following:
89
24.7.7.1 a limitation on the days of the week and the hours of the day during
which any work may be performed;
24.7.7.2 the size and type of machinery;
24.7.7.3 the place and manner of disposal of excavated, removed, relocated or
dredged material; and
24.7.7.4 requirements as to control of dust, noise, fumes and lighting, if
permitted, so as to prevent results injurious or offensive to the general public and the environment.
24.7.8 There shall be proper drainage to avoid stagnant water.
24.8 Security
The applicant shall file a bond, as provided for in Section 2.24 of the Zoning
Regulations, to insure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant
to the conditions of approval or approval with modification, and conditioned upon
completion of the regulated activity in accordance with the conditions established by
the Commission at the time of granting of the Special Permit or any subsequent changes
of such conditions. In its discretion, the Commission, or Staff, may waive the security
or reduce the amount of the bond, in the event a bond is also required by the inland
wetlands agency of the Town for the same work. No such bond shall be released, nor
shall the applicant be deemed to have complied with the conditions provided for herein,
until the applicant has filed with the Commission a written certification from the Department of Public Works of the Town that said conditions have been complied with and that such bond may be released. The Commission shall act on a requested release of bond within sixty five (65) days of submission of the application for such release.
24.9 Revocation and Suspension
Any Special Permit issued pursuant to the provisions of these Land Excavation and Fill
Regulations shall be subject to revocation and suspension as provided for in
Section 2.34 of the Zoning Regulations.
24.10 Change of Condition
The Commission may vary or alter any condition provided for in these Land Excavation
and Fill Regulations, if in its opinion such variance or alteration is in harmony with the
purpose and intent of these Land Excavation and Fill Regulations.
90
SECTION 25.0 SPECIAL PERMITS IN DESIGNED DISTRICTS
25.1 General
The Commission may grant a Special Permit, hereinafter called “S P”, for the establishment of a S P use in any designed District, as authorized by General Statutes,
Section 8-2, in accordance with the following S P Regulations which are in addition to
(1) the other requirements applicable in the District in which the S P is to be issued; and
(2) applicable special standards for Special Exception uses under Section 27.0 of the
Zoning Regulations.
25.2 Application
Written application for such Special Permit shall be submitted to the Commission
accompanied by the following:
25.2.1 A written statement in quadruplicate describing the proposed use, setting forth
the Zoning District, the area of the site, the Assessor’s Map and Parcel number,
name and address of the applicant and owner, and the name and address of each
party owning a legal or beneficial interest in the applicant and owner, except in
the case of a publicly held corporation, which shall be identified by name and
address only;
25.2.2 Site Plan in quadruplicate, which means a plan drawing or drawings prepared by
a professional engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect licensed to practice in
the State of Connecticut, drawn to a scale of not less than sixty (60) feet to the
inch (e.g., two hundred (200) feet to the inch is less than one hundred (100) feet
to the inch), showing all the following information, both existing and proposed,
as applicable to the particular application:
25.2.2.1 property lines having exact distances, angles or bearings delineating the
land to be used under the application;
25.2.2.2 existing contour lines on the premises and proposed contour lines resulting from the proposed use, including an area within fifty (50) feet
of the premises, shown on a map drawn to a scale not less than sixty (60)
feet to the inch and with a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet;
25.2.2.3 buildings, structures, signs and outdoor illumination facilities;
25.2.2.4 streets, driveways, sidewalks and off-street parking and loading spaces;
25.2.2.5 rivers and their tributaries, streams, lakes, ponds, reservoirs, watercourses, tidal wetlands, inland fresh water wetlands;
25.2.2.6 storm drainage and sewage disposal;
91
25.2.2.7 a zone legend describing all data pertaining to applicable design
requirements;
25.2.2.8 a landscape plan, presented on plan drawings and/or in narrative form as
appropriate, providing the following information:
a. location and description of existing vegetation
b. location and description of existing and significant natural features,
including but not limited to boulders, rock outcroppings and aquatic
resources, and plans to incorporate these features into the proposed
site design;
c. location and spacing of proposed new plant materials, including types
of materials identified by botanical and common names (invasive or
potentially invasive plants listed by the Connecticut Invasive Plants
Council pursuant to Section 22a-381b of the Connecticut General
Statues are prohibited)
d. a list and description of plant materials to be used, including trunk
diameter and height at installation and at maturity, diameter of shade
canopy at maturity, and a planting schedule for all plant materials;
e. proposed treatment of ground surfaces;
f. methods of protecting landscaping from any significant adverse
impacts that may be caused by vehicles;
g. location and description of trees of notable size, rarity or aesthetic
value, including species and diameter at breast height. and plans to
protect and preserve such trees during and after construction. A tree
of notable size means any tree with a diameter greater than sixteen
(16) inches measured at breast height or any tree of a species
normally described as small or understory with a diameter greater
than six (6) inches at breast height. Breast height means fifty four
(54) inches above ground level.
25.2.2.9 A bicycle and pedestrian plan, presented on plan drawings and/or in
narrative form as appropriate, providing the following information
concerning bicycle and pedestrian ingress, egress and circulation:
a. Proposed access to the site designed to promote and provide safe and
efficient ingress, egress and circulation for bicycle and pedestrian
92
traffic, including direct and convenient circulation between all main
entrances of buildings or uses on the site and available points of
access to the site;
b. Proposed connections from the site to existing and planned public
bicycle and pedestrian facilities and connections to adjacent
properties;
c. Proposed on-site bicycle parking area and amenities to encourage
bicyclists, including, as appropriate: short-term bicycle parking
facilities intended to encourage bicycling for shoppers; customers and
visitors, and long-term bicycle parking facilities intended to provide
safe and weather protected places for users requiring longer periods
of bicycle storage such as residents, employees and students; and
d. Proposed signage indicating the presence and location of bicycle and
pedestrian pathways and amenities, and designed for reading by
bicyclists, pedestrians and motorists.
e. All public sidewalks shall comply with the requirements of the most
recent Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards, which
include requirements for sidewalk widths, grades, locations, markings,
surface treatments, and curb ramps. Sidewalks shall conform to the
standards contained in the Subdivision Regulations Section 3.10.
25.2.2.10 The Commission, however, in its discretion, may waive the
requirement for a Site Plan where there is no change of the exterior of
an existing building or structure or where there is no change proposed
on the site.
25.2.2.11 The Site Plan shall be submitted to aid the Commission in determining
the conformity of a proposed building, use, or structure, with these
Regulations as authorized by General Statutes, Section 8-3 (g). The
Commission is not required to approve, or act in any way upon, a Site
Plan submitted with a Special Permit application.
25.2.3 Architectural Plans in quadruplicate, which means dimensioned architectural
drawings of buildings, structures and signs, including exterior construction
materials, method, location and appearances of heating and air conditioning
equipment not included in the principal building, exterior elevation drawings,
floor plans and perspective drawings prepared, except for drawings for signs, by a professional architect or professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut.
25.2.4 Such additional information as the Commission may deem necessary to make
a reasonable decision on the application.
93
25.2.5 Stamped Envelopes addressed to each of the owners, as of the date of the
application, of all properties which are subject to the application and all
properties within two hundred (200) feet of any portion of such properties.
Such names shall be those indicated on the most recent tax assessment list
of the Town and shall include the actual owners of record where known.
25.3 Revisions and Extensions
Any revision of an approved S P application and any change, including use, and any
reconstruction, enlargement, extension, moving or structural alteration of an approved
S P use or any buildings or structures in connection therewith shall require submission of
a S P application as for the original application, except in the following instances:
25.3.1 change from one to another of the following uses, within each the following categories, in any Designed Business District:
25.3.1.1 stores and other buildings and structures where goods are sold or service is
rendered primarily at retail; or
25.3.1.2 business and professional offices, banks and medical and dental clinics; or
25.3.2 reconstruction of restoration after damage by fire or other casualty.
25.4 Procedure
The Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for a Special permit submitted under these Regulations pursuant to General Statutes,
Section 8-3c.
25.5 Public Hearing Conduct
Any public hearing shall be in accordance with Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations.
25.6 Reapplication
The Commission shall not be required to act upon any S P application for the same use,
or substantially the same use, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months.
25.7 Requirements for Approval
The Town Plan and Zoning Commission, after public hearing, shall approve an application for a Special Permit for the establishment of a special permit use if it finds
that the proposed use and proposed buildings and structures conform to the standards
applicable in the district in which the special permit use is to be located, conform to any
94
applicable special standards for special exception uses in Section 27.0 and conform to the
following additional requirements;
25.7.1 the proposed use shall be a permitted use in the District in which it is to be located;
25.7.2 the Site Plan shall include the location and arrangement of buildings, and
other structures, signs and outdoor illumination and the existing and proposed
contours, streets, driveways, off-street parking and loading spaces, sidewalks, storm drainage, sewage disposal facilities to meet the requirements of
Section 25.7.7 of these S P Regulations;
25.7.3 Architectural Plans of buildings, other structures, and signs shall include the
exterior building material, colors, elevations, roof line, height and bulk;
25.7.4 the specifications for all construction of improvements within any existing or
proposed local or private streets shall meet or exceed the standards of the
Subdivision Regulations of the Town. The specifications for all driveways,
off-street parking and loading spaces, storm drainage, sewage disposal facilities
and landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the Commission;
25.7.5 the Commission may grant a S P for establishment of a S P use on a lot which does not conform to the minimum area and shape requirements for the District in
which the lot is located, provided that the lot is a legally existing non-conforming
lot and the Commission finds that all other standards of these S P Regulations are
met and the lot is of sufficient size and shape to permit the use for buildings, other structures and facilities in such a manner that will not be detrimental to the
neighborhood or adjacent property;
25.7.6 all portions of the lot not used for buildings and other structures or for paved
driveways, sidewalks or off-street parking and loading areas shall be suitably
landscaped. The area required for a minimum setback from any Residence District, Designed Residence District or Flood Plain District boundary line or use
permitted in these zones, shall be provided with a buffer consisting of fences,
walls or embankments in combination with other landscaping in such a manner as to screen the use from view to a height of five (5) feet at such boundary line or
shall be provided with evergreen shrubs and/or trees. The Commission may adjust the aforesaid landscaping requirements to particular circumstances of lot
lines, topography, soil conditions and site design while preserving the purpose
and intent of such requirements; and
25.7.7 the development shown on the site and Architectural Plans shall be of such a
character as to harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transition in
character between areas of unlike character, to protect property values in the
neighborhood, to preserve and enhance the appearance and beauty of the community, and to avoid undue traffic congestion.
95
25.7.8 The S P use, site plan and architectural design shall be in conformance with the
purpose and intent of any plan of development adopted by the Town Plan and
Zoning Commission for the area in which the S P use is to be located.
25.7.9 Any project that results in a net increase of ten (10) or more dwelling units,
whether by new construction or by the alteration, expansion, reconstruction, or
change of existing residential or nonresidential space shall include provision to
set aside not less than ten percent (10%) of said units as below market rate
(BMR) units, affordable to households earning not more than eighty percent
(80%) of the area median income for the Bridgeport, CT HUD Metro Rent Area
(HMFA). BMR units provided under this Section shall be subject to the
Additional standards and requirements provided in Section 10.17.
25.8 Zone Changes and Special Permit
An application to change a District shall require a public hearing as provided in
Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations. An application for a S P under these S P
Regulations, other than an application submitted by the Commission, shall be submitted
simultaneously with an application for a change of District to a Designed District as to
the land covered by the S P application. A hearing for a change of District to a Designed
District shall be held simultaneously with a public hearing on such S P application be held simultaneously with a public hearing on such S P application.
25.8.1 A written application for a District change and an application for a Special
Permit shall be accompanied by the following:
25.8.1.1 a written statement in quadruplicate setting forth the present and proposed Zoning District, description of the property, the area of the
site, the assessor’s map and parcel number, name and address of the
applicant, the owner of the property and the name and address of each
party owning a legal or beneficial interest in the applicant except in the
case of a publicly held corporation, which shall be identified by name
and address only;
25.8.1.2 Ten (10) copies of a map showing he subject property and all streets,
properties and owners, within five hundred (500) feet of the subject
property in the standard zoning key color in use on the Town Zoning Maps. The proposed zoning shall be appropriately marked in color. The
map may be based on the Town Assessor’s Map and drawn to a scale of
not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch; and
25.8.1.3 such additional information as the Commission may deem reasonably
necessary to make a decision on the application.
96
25.8.1.4 Stamped Envelopes addressed to each of the owners, as of the date of the application, of all properties which are subject to the application and all properties within five hundred (500) feet of any portion of such
properties. Such names shall be those indicated on the most recent tax
assessment list of the Town and shall include the actual owners of record
where known.
25.8.2 Within ninety (90) days after the expiration of a S P granted under Section 25.8
of these S P Regulations, where the development contemplated by the S P has not
been completed in accordance with the S P, the Commission shall conduct a public hearing to consider rezoning the land placed in the Designed District to its
prior Zoning District.
25.8.2.1 Regardless of the foregoing requirements for a S P, no Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall be issued until after the completion of the
curbs, sidewalks, roads, passageways, and landscaping requirements, or
until the applicant files with the Commission a bond as provided for in
Section 2.24 of the Zoning Regulations, conditioned upon the
completion of the work within the time prescribed by the Commission,
and in accordance with the plans as approved.
25.8.2 The duration of a S P shall be as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes.
25.9 Bond Release
If a bond is filed, and thereafter the work is substantially completed as evidenced by an
interim inspection report of the Town Engineer, then upon the written request of the
applicant, the Commission in its discretion may release not in excess of fifty (50) percent
of the original amount or value of such bond. The release of the remainder shall be conditioned upon the following:
25.9.1 a further written request;
25.9.2 a public hearing with notice that such release has been requested, which notice shall be published in accordance with the requirements of Section 2.23 of the
Zoning Regulations, and shall identify the site, the name of the applicant and the
amount of the remainder of the bond sought to be released;
25.9.3 a post construction survey by a land surveyor licensed to practice in the State
of Connecticut establishing the actual location of the required improvements,
their grades, and such other matters as shall be required by the Town Engineer;
and
25.9.4 a final written inspection report of the Town Engineer.
97
SECTION 26.0 OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION PLANS
26.1 Special Exception
Simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plan under the
Subdivision Regulations of the Town, the Commission may grant a
Special Exception for an open space subdivision plan, hereinafter called
“Open Space Plan”, involving reduction of lot area and shape in Residence
Districts AAA and AA.
26.2 Purpose
The Commission may grant a Special Exception to permit establishment of an Open Space Plan if it finds that the Special Exception will accomplish one or more of the
following open space purposes:
26.2.1 to preserve land as un-subdivided and undeveloped open space which preserves
or enhances the appearance, character and natural beauty of an area;
26.2.2 to preserve land for park and recreation purposes;
26.2.3 to preserve land for purposes of conserving natural resources;
26.2.4 to preserve and protect particular areas and terrain having qualities of natural
beauty or historic interest; or
26.2.5 to protect streams, rivers ponds and wetlands to avoid flooding, erosion and
water pollution.
26.3 Application
An application for a Special Exception pertaining to a proposed Open Space Plan shall
be submitted to the Commission and shall be accompanied by the following:
26.3.1 A subdivision map shall be submitted in conformity with the Residence AAA or
AA District Zoning Regulations.
26.3.1.1 Such subdivision map shall show proposed street and lot lines, adjoining
owners, existing and proposed contours of the premises and an area within fifty (50) feet thereof based on the Town of Fairfield Aerial Survey and the Inland Wetland Soil Boundary. The map shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch.
26.3.1.2 The number of lots shown on such subdivision map shall take into account topography, physical characteristics and wetlands.
26.3.2 Additionally a map shall be submitted showing the proposed subdivision of the
98
land as an Open Space Plan based on the standards and conditions specified
herein.
26.3.2.1 The Open Space Plan shall show proposed street and lot lines, adjoining
owners, existing and proposed watercourses, easements, existing and
proposed storm drains and sanitary sewers, representative lot dimensions
and approximate lot areas, proposed open spaces, and existing and proposed contours based on the Town of Fairfield Aerial Survey and the Inland Wetland Soil Boundary. The map shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. In areas where sanitary sewers are not available, proposed individual house or community septic systems shall be outlined. Preliminary approval shall be obtained from the Health Department attesting to the suitability of the subdivision for said systems.
26.3.2.2 Profile drawings shall be submitted for all proposed roads, showing existing and proposed ground surfaces at the centerline of the proposed road and proposed storm and sanitary sewers. The profile shall be based on the Town of Fairfield Aerial Survey.
26.3.2.3 Such additional information shall be submitted as the Commission may deem reasonably necessary to make a decision on the application.
26.3.3 A written statement describing the open space purpose or purposes to be
accomplished and the proposed method of preservation and disposition of the
open space land.
26.4 The Standards
The application and the Open Space Plan shall conform to the following standards:
26.4.1 The area of the subdivision shall not be less than thirty (30) acres in Residence
District AAA or ten (10) acres in Residence AA, except that in Residence
District AA the acreage may be less than ten (10) acres if the proposed open
space land is:
26.4.1.1 at least twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the subdivision; and
26.4.1.2 adjacent to existing open space outside the area covered by the application
26.4.2 The area of open space or spaces shall be not less than forty (40) percent of the
area of the entire subdivision except as provided in Section 26.4.1 of these Open
Space Subdivision Plan Regulations.
26.4.3 The Open Space Plan shall be located entirely in a Residence District AAA
or AA, except that up to one third (1/3) of the area of the proposed subdivision
99
may consist of land in another Residential District (other than Residence
District AAA) if in the same ownership. In this event, the land in such other District shall be considered as if it were zoned as the adjacent subdivision land.
26.4.4 The number of lots shown on the open space plan shall not exceed the number that could be created in conformity with the requirements of Section 26.3.1 of
these Open Space Subdivision Plan Regulations.
26.4.5 Each lot shall have a minimum area of twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet
when located in a Residence District AA Zone, and a minimum lot area of forty- eight (48,000) square feet in a Residence District AAA Zone.
26.4.6 Each lot shall be of such shape that a square with one hundred and twenty (120)
feet on each side will fit in the case of Residence District AA and one hundred and fifty (150) feet on each side will fit in the case of Residence District AAA.
26.4.7 Building setbacks shall be in accordance with Residence District AAA and AA
Zone setbacks specified in Section 5 of the Zoning Regulations.
26.4.8 Each building lot shall be served by public water supply.
26.4.9 The Open Space Plan shall result in preservation of open space land with suitable
access, shape, dimension, character, location and topography to accomplish one
or more of the open space purposes specified in Section 26.2 of these Open Space
Subdivision Plan Regulations.
26.4.10 Any lot on an approved Open Space Plan shall be used for one or more of the
proposes specified in Section 5 of the Zoning Regulations.
26.5 Open Space Preservation
The method used to preserve and dispose of open space land shall accomplish one or more of the open space purposes in Section 26.2 of these Open Space Subdivision Plan
Regulations and shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. The Commission
may require the developer to record a declaration of restrictions limited the use of the
open space land for one or more of the purposes in Section 26.2 of these Open Space
Subdivision Plan Regulations and giving the owner of each lot in the subdivision the right to enforce such restrictions. The method used to preserve and dispose of open space land
may include, but is not limited to:
26.5.1 transfer to the Town, subject to its acceptance;
26.5.2 transfer to an association of property owners (which association may or may not be limited to the owners of lots within the subdivision); or
26.5.3 transfer of the land to a not-for-profit corporation.
100
In each case, the transfer shall be conditioned on the grantee’s observance of one or more
of the open space purposes in Section 26.2 of these Open Space Subdivision Plan
Regulations.
26.6 Commission Action
26.6.1 The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance
with Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations. The Commission shall approve
the application, if it finds that:
26.6.1.1 One or more of the open space purposes in Section 26.2 of these Open Space Subdivision Plan Regulations will be accomplished;
26.6.1.2 The standards of Section 26.4 of these Open Space Subdivision Plan Regulations have been met;
26.6.1.3 The Special Exception for the Open Space Plan will be in harmony with the purposes and intent of the Zoning Regulations; and
26.6.1.4 The Open Space Plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety and property values in the neighborhood.
26.6.1.5 After such approval, the applicant shall submit a map in conformity with the approved Open Space Plan which meets the requirements for the filing of a subdivision map.
26.6.2 Any Special Exception for an Open Space Plan, granted under these Open Space Subdivision Plan Regulations, shall become null and void one (1) year from the date it was granted, unless the subdivision map for which the Special Exception was granted has been filed in the Office of the Town Clerk.
26.7 Inapplicability of Section 27.0
The application for a Special Exception for an Open Space Plan adhering to the requirements of these Open Space Subdivision Plan Regulations shall not be required to
comply with Section 27.0 of the Zoning Regulations.
101
SECTION 27.0 SPECIAL EXCEPTION REGULATIONS
27.1 General
The Commission may grant a Special Exception for the establishment of a use designated as a Special Exception use in these Zoning Regulations in accordance with these
Special Exception Regulations, and provided that, in the case of the Designed Business
Districts and the Designed Industrial District, the requirements of Sect. 25.0 of the
Zoning Regulations, wherever applicable, have also been met. All requirements of this
section are in addition to all other requirements applicable to the district in which the
Special Exception use is located.
27.2 Application
An application for a Special Exception and any revision of an approved Special
Exception application and any reconstruction, enlargement, extension, moving or
structural alteration of an approved Special Exception use or any building or structure
in connection therewith shall be submitted in writing to the Commission, accompanied
by the following:
27.2.1 Written statement in quadruplicate describing the proposed use;
27.2.2 Site Plan and Architectural Plans as set forth in Sect. 25.2.2 of the Zoning
Regulations. The Commission, however, in its discretion, may waive the
requirement for a Site Plan where there is no change of the exterior building
or structure, or where there is no change proposed on the site;
27.2.3 For hospitals, homes for the aged, rest homes, chronic, convalescent and
nursing homes, a report from:
27.2.3.1 the Director of Health of the Town attesting to the adequacy of the
proposed site plan, buildings and facilities for the intended use;
27.2.3.2 the Fire Marshal of the Town attesting to the safety of the proposed
location; site plan, buildings and facilities, water supply and pressure
at the location
27.2.4 For day nurseries a report from the Director of Health of the Town attesting that the proposed location, site plan, buildings and facilities comply in all respects to applicable Town and State health laws and regulations and will be adequate, safe and suitable for the intended use.
27.2.5 Such additional information as the Commission may deem reasonably necessary to make a decision on the application.
27.3 Public Hearing
102
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application as set forth in
Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations. The application shall also be governed
by Section 2.23 of the Zoning Regulations.
27.4 Conditions for Approval
The proposed use, buildings and structures shall conform to the following standards:
27.4.1 the location, type, character and size of use and buildings and structures shall
be in harmony with and conform to appropriate and orderly development of
the Town and the neighborhood and not hinder or discourage appropriate
development and use of adjacent property or impair its value;
27.4.2 the nature and location of the use and buildings or structures shall be such
that there will be adequate access for fire protection;
27.4.3 the streets serving the proposed use shall be adequate to carry prospective
traffic, provision shall be made for entering and leaving the property without
creating undue hazard to traffic or congestion and adequate off-street parking
and loading shall be provided on the same lot in accordance with Sect. 28.0
of the Zoning Regulations;
27.4.4 landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 25.7.6 of the Zoning Regulations;
27.4.5 the proposed use shall be in conformity with the Master Plan of the Town;
27.4.6 with respect to hospitals, homes for the aged, rest homes, chronic convalescent and nursing homes, the applicable laws and regulations of the Health Code of
the State of Connecticut pertaining to the operation and maintenance of
hospitals and other institutions shall be met and, no building permit shall be
issued until such time as the Applicant shall file with the Plan and Zoning Office
a copy of the Certificate of Need issued/granted by the Connecticut Office of
Health Care Access, to the extent that such a Certificate is required by State Law.
27.4.7 with respect to day nurseries, the use shall be situated and developed so as to
create no nuisance, nor have a detrimental effect on the privacy, tranquillity
or value of surrounding properties. The Special Exception shall be limited to
group care programs for children and for a period of not more than five (5)
years; and
27.4.8 with respect to gasoline filling stations, automobile repair facilities, including
automobile, painting and upholstery, establishments for motor vehicle
103
washing, establishments for the sale or rental of new and used automobiles,
also the following;
27.4.8.1 provision for entering and leaving the premises to be in such a manner that no
traffic hazards are created;
27.4.8.2 outside storage and display of vehicles shall conform to the setback requirements of (1) Designed Business Districts in the case of gasoline filling stations, automobile repair facilities, garages, including automobile painting and upholstery, and (2) Center Designed Business District in the case of
establishments for motor vehicle washing, and for the sale or rental of new and
used automobiles;
27.4.8.3 no repair work, except of an emergency nature, is to be performed out-of-doors;
27.4.8.4 fuel filling devices are to be located at least ten (10) feet from any street
or property line; and
27.4.8.5 no more than five (5) motor vehicles awaiting repair work or having
been repaired are to be stored or parked on the lot out-of-doors, unless
such motor vehicles are located in an area suitably screened from streets
and adjoining property in such a manner as to conceal the area from view to a height of five (5) feet with fences, walls or embankments in
combination with other landscaping or shall be provided with evergreen
shrubs and/or trees planted to grow so as to accomplish such screening
within one (1) year. The Commission at the time of approval of a
Special Exception may adjust the aforesaid landscape requirements to
particular circumstances of lot lines, topography, soil conditions and site
design, while preserving the purpose and intent of the Zoning
Regulations.
27.4.9 with respect to assisted living facilities, also the following:
27.4.9.1 floor area – minimum floor area for a dwelling unit shall be not less
than 350 square feet.
27.4.9.2 kind of dwelling unit – units may be studio, one bedroom or two
bedrooms. Each unit shall contain a full bathroom and may contain a
small kitchenette.
27.4.9.3 occupancy – not more than two persons, at least one of whom shall be
55 years or older, shall occupy any one unit.
27.4.9.4 location – no assisted living facility shall be allowed on parcels which
are within the Flood Plain District or designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency as either a special flood hazard area of
104
a floodway. Each lot shall have a frontage of fifty (50) feet or more and
the main entrance on a public street which is classified as a major or
collector road as shown on the Fairfield Master Plan map entitled
“Fairfield Master Plan, Fairfield, Conn. 1980” or any amendment
thereto.
27.4.9.5 utilities – each facility must be served by and connected to public
sanitary sewer and public water supply.
27.4.9.6 density – the maximum allowable dwelling unit density shall be 16 units
per acre.
27.4.9.7 lot area – each lot shall have a minimum lot size of four (4) acres.
27.4.9.8 the site area accessible to residents shall have a slope no greater that 5%,
and shall in all other respects be accessible to the residents as
determined by the Americans with Disabilities Act and its requirements.
There shall be a van drop off area and parking space for the van located
at the main entry for the convenience of residents.
Access to loading spaces shall be designed so as not to interfere with
normal traffic, and such spaces shall be screened.
27.4.9.9 height – no building or other structure shall exceed a height of three (3)
stories or forty (40) feet, whichever is less.
27.4.9.10 usable open space – outdoor space designed for use by the residents
shall be at least 50 sq. ft. per unit, with a minimum of 2,000 sq. ft.
landscaped, and provide benches, paved walkways, site lighting and
beneficial views, and be shielded from heavy traffic. No less than 25%
of the total area of such space shall be contiguous. Natural geological
features and specimen trees should be preserved in these areas. The
land so set aside shall be graded and landscaped, shall be of a passive
recreation nature suited to the needs of the residents, and shall include
open interior court yards. Such recreation areas shall be designed to
provide security and privacy and to prevent the emission of
objectionable noise and light on to abutting properties. No parking
shall be allowed in the set backs adjoining residential zones.
27.5 Time for Completion the duration of a Special Exception shall be as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes.
105
SECTION 28.0 REGULATIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
28.1 Scope
No off-street parking and loading spaces shall be established, constructed, enlarged, extended, relocated or altered, except in accordance with these Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, hereinafter called “Parking Regulations.”
28.2 General
Parking spaces and loading spaces shall be provided off the street for any use of land, buildings and other structures in accordance with these Parking Regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be permanently maintained and made available for
occupancy in connection with and for the full duration of the use of land, buildings and other structures for which such spaces are herein required. If any existing use of land,
buildings and other structures is changed to a use requiring additional off-street parking
and loading spaces to comply with these Parking Regulations, the additional spaces shall
be provided for the new use accordance with these Parking Regulations. Any existing use which does not conform to these Parking Regulations shall not be changed to a use
which would need additional off-street parking and loading spaces to comply with these
Parking Regulations, unless such additional spaces are provided. If in any Designed
District the applicant has not specified the exact nature of the proposed use, the
Commission may require the maximum number of spaces required by these Parking
Regulations.
It is the purpose of these regulations to foster parking designs that accomplish the
following goals:
Improve the quality of the streetscape, increase the tree canopy, increase permeability to
mitigate storm runoff and improve pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
28.3 Subsurface Parking
Underground parking is permitted, subject to compliance with the requirements of these Parking Regulations. In computing the required number of parking spaces for buildings and structures having underground parking, areas devoted to parking, entrance and exit shall not be included.
28.4 Parking Space
One parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, with such shape, vertical clearance, access and slope as to accommodate one automobile and shall be striped in accordance with the diagram in Appendix A. Notwithstanding the above, a parking space to be utilized in conjunction with a railroad passenger station shall not be less than 8.5 feet by 18 feet. In all cases the minimum area of a parking space shall be free of obstruction of any type unless otherwise provided in these regulations.
106
28.5 Loading Spaces
One loading space shall be not less than twelve (12) feet by thirty (30) with a vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet with such shape, access and slope as to accommodate one truck having an overall length of thirty (30) feet.
28.6 Parking Space Standards
Off-street parking spaces, all of which must be on the same lot or contiguous lots under the same ownership as the building or structures shall be provided as follows:
The Buildings and Structures Number of Spaces
28.6.1 Properties with dwelling
units for 1 to 4 families Two (2) for each family
Properties with dwelling Two and one half (2.5) for each
units for 5 to 10 families family
Properties with dwelling
units for 11 or more families Three (3) for each family
When dwelling units are located in a Commercial District as permitted in
Section 12 of these Regulations, the Residential Parking requirement may, at
the Commission’s discretion, be reduced by up to fifty (50) percent.
When dwelling units are located in a Designed Residential District, the required number
of parking spaces shall be exclusive of any unit driveway spaces if such driveway spaces
obstruct access to a unit garage space. A minimum of ½ space per unit of surface parking
shall be designated as visitor parking.
In developments qualifying as a Fairfield Housing Authority, Pine Tree development as
defined in Section 31.2.43, the Residential Parking requirement shall be 1.15 parking
spaces per unit.
When dwelling units are located in any district falling within the Transit Oriented Design
Overlay, the Residential Parking requirement shall be reduced to the lesser of one (1.0)
parking space per bedroom or one and one half (1.5) parking spaces per household.
28.6.2 Leased rooms in a dwelling One (1) for each lodger, roomer or
boarder
28.6.3 Developments designed One (1) for each family
exclusively for occupancy by
three or more elderly families
107
28.6.4 Churches, places of worship, One (1) for each five (5) seats
theaters, assembly halls or
stadium
28.6.5 Medical and dental offices and One (1) for each two hundred (200) sq. ft. of gross
clinics, retail stores and banks floor area in a building or portion thereof as
determined by the exterior dimensions of the bldg.,
except for parking areas or basement and cellar
areas used for maintenance equipment or storage;
Except for medical, dental offices and clinics in
buildings in excess of 100,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
area and providing for a minimum of 400 parking
spaces, in which event one (1) space for each two
hundred fifty (250) sq. ft. of gross floor area.
28.6.6 Other business and professional One (1) for each two hundred and fifty sq. ft. (250)
offices and post offices of gross floor area in a building or portion thereof as
determined by the exterior dimensions of the
building, except for parking areas or basement and
cellar areas used for maintenance equipment or
storage. Notwithstanding the above, within a
Transportation/Commercial Park established
pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.16, such
use shall require one (1) for each three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area as defined
herein. Such parking in a Park may either be
located within an individual lot or on a different lot
likewise located within the park.
28.6.7 Retail stores within the Center One (1) parking space up to one thousand five
Designed Business District hundred (1,500) square feet of retail space; over
that, one (1) space for each additional two hundred
and fifty (250) square feet of retail space or portion
thereof.
28.6.8 Gasoline filling stations, Ten (10)
automobile repair facilities,
and establishments for motor
vehicle washing
28.6.8 (a) Gasoline filling Five (5) spaces for gasoline filling and
stations with multiple uses sufficient parking spaces shall be provided
other than automotive repair for all multiple uses other than gasoline
facilities or motor vehicle filling in accordance with Sect. 28.8.
108
washing.
28.6.9 Undertaker’s establishments Fifteen (15) per funeral unit
28.6.10 Chronic, convalescent and One (1) for each four (4) beds plus one (1)
nursing homes for each employee during the largest daily
work shift period
28.6.11 Hotels and motels One (1) for each sleeping room and, when
these buildings have restaurant or other
facilities, the number of spaces shall be
determined by adding the number required
for each type of use and multiplying such
total by seventy-five (75) percent
28.6.12 Restaurants, taverns, diners, One (1) space for each 40 square feet of cafes, bars, nightclubs and patron floor area or portion thereof except that no
dance halls additional parking is required for the first 150
square feet of seasonal outdoor dining area
approved by the Commission through a Zoning
Compliance application.
Take-out Restaurants One (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet or portion thereof of gross
floor area.
28.6.13 Warehouses, wholesale One (1) for each one and one-quarter
businesses, contractors’ (1.25) employees during the largest
businesses, research daily work shift period
laboratories, establishments
for the manufacturing,
processing or assembling of
goods, and offices used in
connection with the foregoing uses:
28.6.14 Bowling alleys Four (4) for each alley
28.6.15 Other uses Sufficient parking spaces shall be
provided in connection with any use
not specified in Sections 28.6.1
through 28.6.14 to maintain the
purpose and intent of these Parking
109
Regulations.
28.6.16 Assisted living facilities – six-tenths (0.6) of a parking space for each unit.
28.6a Bicycle Parking Standards
Bicycle parking shall be provided as required by this section. Bicycle parking shall be in addition to automobile parking spaces. Bicycle parking facilities shall comply with
designs approved by the Commission and at a minimum must provide a bicycle rack
that permits the locking of a bicycle frame and one wheel while supporting the bicycle in
a stable position that will not damage the bicycle or its components or interfere with
pedestrian access to the sidewalk and ingress, and egress to buildings or facilities.
Properties with dwelling units for One (1) for each family
3 or more families
Developments designed exclusively One (1) for every (4) families
for occupancy by three or more
elderly families
All commercial establishments One (1) for every ten (10) required
except animal sales and services, parking spaces
auto related uses, and warehousing:
wholesale and distribution
Educational, recreational and public Sufficient bicycle parking as by the
facilities Commission
110
28.7 Loading Spaces Standards
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as follows:
28.7.1 Building and Structures Number and Sizes of Spaces
Motel, retail store, post One (1) loading space for those uses
office, restaurant, tavern, having a gross floor area in excess of
bar, night club, research four thousand (4,000) square feet, but
laboratory and less than forty thousand (40,000)
establishment for the square feet of gross floor area and for
for the manufacture, those uses having a gross floor area in
processing or assembling in excess of forty thousand (40,000)
of goods square feet , one (1) for each forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof as
determined by the exterior dimensions
of the building, excluding basements
28.7.2 Warehouse and Wholesale Number and Size of Spaces (for uses
Business having the following square feet of
gross floor area)
One (1) for up to twenty four thousand
nine hundred ninety-nine (24,999)
Two (2) between twenty five thousand
(25,000), and thirty nine thousand
nine hundred ninety nine (39,999)
Three (3) between forty thousand (40,000),
and fifty nine thousand, nine hundred
ninety-nine (59,999)
Four (4) between sixty thousand (60,000), and
ninety nine thousand, nine hundred, ninety nine
(99,999)
Five (5) between one hundred thousand
(100,000), and two hundred forty nine
thousand, nine hundred, ninety nine
(249,999) and
One additional space for each additional
two hundred thousand (200,000), square
feet or major portion thereof.
111
28.8 Multiple Uses
Whenever two (2) or more classifications provided for in these Parking Regulations shall apply to a use of land, buildings or other structures, the requirements for the larger
number of parking spaces shall apply. Where separate parts of a building or structure or
of a floor of a building are used for purposes requiring different numbers of parking
spaces, the number of spaces shall be determined by adding the number of spaces
required for the area devoted to each type of use.
28.9 Shared Access
It is the intent of the Commission to minimize the number of curb cuts and access points
in all commercial districts as well as to facilitate improved access between adjoining
commercial properties. Where topographic and other conditions reasonably allow,
provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian connections between adjoining
properties where such connections will enable the public to travel between two or more
existing or potential land uses, open to the public generally, without need to travel upon a street.
28.9.1 No property shall be penalized for the elimination of existing parking spaces in
order to accomplish shared access connections, if such elimination reduces the
number of spaces below that are required by Section 28.6. New development
providing access to adjoining property or properties may credit the number of
parking spaces which would otherwise have been provided without such access
toward the requirements of Section 28.6.
28.9.2 The provisions of this Section shall apply to any application for change in change
of use or Special Permit. The site plan submitted by the applicant for any such
application will designate areas in which shared vehicular and/or pedestrian
access will be accommodated. Upon approval, the site plan showing areas of
shared access or proposed shared access must be filed on the Land Records.
28.9.3 The Commission may modify or waive the requirements of this Section, where
the character or arrangement of abutting properties make shared access
impractical.
28.9a Joint Usage
The owners of two (2) or more abutting properties may establish a joint parking
area to provide the total number of required parking spaces which may be located on
any of the properties involved.
Subject to a Special Permit under Section 25.0, the owner or owners of two (2)
or more properties may provide joint parking to provide the total number of
required parking spaces which may be located on any of the properties involved,
subject to the following standards:
112
1. All properties are located within the Center Designed Business District or Designed
Industrial District.
2. The parcel on which the parking is to be provided shall be no more than 500 feet from
the parcel requiring the parking, such distance being measured along the line between
the closest two points between subject parcels.
3. A formal written agreement between the property owner(s) and the Town of Fairfield
to be filed on the Land Records of such properties shall be filed with the application
and shall be in effect for the duration of the proposed use(s) of property. A change in
use of any property involved requires reapplication to the Commission.
4. Proper pedestrian access and lighting shall be available between the parking and
subject properties.
5. The uses proposed must be of such a nature and off-site parking conveniently located
so as to be likely that the off-site parking will be fully utilized in conjunction with the
intended uses.
6. The Commission, in its discretion, may limit the percentage of parking required under
Section 28.6 which may be provided off-site.
28.10 Construction: Require design compliance with DEP Storm Water Quality Manual and
encourage Low Impact Development (LID) techniques.
All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be suitably improved, graded, striped and marked, stabilized and maintained so as to cause no nuisance or danger from dust or from storm water flow onto any public street or adjacent property. Drainage designs must meet all requirements of the CT DEP 2004 Storm Water Quality Manual or any amendment thereto, with respect to storm water treatment and attenuation. The Commission encourages the use of Low Impact Development Best Management Practices (LID BMPS) including but not limited to vegetated swales, buffers and filter strips, bio-retention, rain garden areas or permeable surfaces. The Commission encourages flexibility in design techniques and recognizes that utilization of LID BMPS occupies site area that may otherwise be devoted to parking. The Commission shall maintain the discretion to credit the number of parking spaces that could have otherwise been provided in the absence of utilization of LID BMPS to the extent that implementation of such practices occupies more than five percent (5%) of the developed site area. Except for necessary driveway entrances and except for parking spaces provided in connection with a dwelling or leased rooms in a dwelling, all off-street parking and loading spaces shall maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any street line. The minimum setback area for parking and loading shall be suitably landscaped and permanently maintained for no other purpose. The Commission may adjust the aforesaid requirement to particular circumstances of lot lines, topography, soil conditions and site design while preserving
113
the purpose and intent of these parking regulations.
28.10.1 Enclosure: Except for single family houses in flood zones where the regulations
require the first habitable floor well above the ground elevation and the area between
that floor and ground elevation enclosed with breakaway walls; off-street parking or
loading areas which extend ten (10) feet or more under all or a portion of a building or
other structure shall be enclosed. The facade of this enclosure shall be the same as the
building or structure above it. Where the top of the roof or soffit of such parking areas
is five (5) feet or more above ground level, it will be considered to be a story.
28.11 Design Standards
Except for parking spaces provided in connection with a dwelling for one (1) or two (2)
families, and leased rooms in a dwelling, each parking space shall be provided with
adequate area for approach, turning and exiting of an automobile having an overall
length of eighteen (18) feet without need to use any part of a public street or right of way.
Points of entrance and exit for driveways onto the street shall be located so as to minimize hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the street.
28.11.1 Maneuvering
No off-street loading space and no truck loading bay, ramp or dock shall be designed or
arranged in a manner that trucks must use any part of a public street or right of way for
maneuvering.
28.11.2 Standards
The following will be deemed to be minimum standards in the design of parking areas.
The Commission may vary these standards as it deems necessary to accomplish the
objectives of these Parking Regulations:
28.11.2.1 Two way aisle with 90 degree parking shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet in
width.
28.11.2.2 One way aisle with 90 degree parking shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet in
width.
28.11.2.3 One way aisle with no parking shall be no less than twelve (12) feet in width.
28.11.2.4 Curb return radii at street shall be fifteen (15) feet (or subject to specifications determined by the Town Engineer to meet field conditions).
28.11.2.5 One way aisle with sixty (60) degree angle parking shall be no less than eighteen (18) feet in width.
28.11.2.6 One way aisle with forty-five (45) degree angle parking shall be no less than twelve (12) feet in width.
114
28.11.2.7 One way aisle with thirty (30) degree angle parking shall be no less than eleven (11) feet in width.
28.11.2.8 Handicapped parking spaces shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet in width.
28.11.2.9 Wheel stops or curbs shall be required where there is a fence or building wall on the
property line along the row of cars, or where such row of cars abuts a walkway, or if
the parking is abutting a street or a public walk. Areas for spaces as set forth above
shall be determined without reference to the location of such wheel stops or curbs.
28.11.2.10 Refer to Appendix A for diagrams illustrating the above captioned standards.
28.11.3 Shade Trees
Shade trees, defined as single-trunked deciduous trees, which by virtue of their
natural shape, provide at maturity a minimum shade canopy of 30 feet in diameter,
shall be provided in parking lots with twenty (20) or more parking spaces. This
requirement may apply to parking lots with fewer than twenty (20) parking spaces
at the Commission’s discretion. At least one tree for every ten (10) spaces shall be
provided equally distributed throughout the parking area. Such trees when planted
shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 ½ ) inch caliper measured six (6) inches
above the root flare; shall have a minimum height of ten (10) feet; and shall provide
at least six (6) feet of vertical distance between the lowest branch and grade level.
Such trees shall be selected, planted and maintained according to standards set forth
by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI) and shall be subject to
approval and oversight by the Town of Fairfield Department of Public Works and
Town Tree Warden. Invasive or potentially invasive plants listed by the Connecticut
Invasive Plants Council pursuant to Section 22a-381d of the Connecticut General
Statutes are prohibited.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 28.4, parking spaces may be reduced in
length by four and one-half (4 1/2) feet to accommodate tree planting islands
provided that no more than two parking spaces are so reduced for each tree provided.
The trees required in this section shall be deep rooted, so as not to disturb the
surrounding pavement and shall be permanently maintained and replaced when
diseased, damaged or destroyed. The requirements of this section shall be in addition
to the landscaping requirements of Section 25.7.6.
28.11.4 Lighting
All lighting utilized for illumination of buildings and grounds shall aim downward
115
and meet the specifications of the International Dark Sky Association and shall be
fully cut-off fixtures. No parking lot pole lighting shall exceed a height of twenty-
five (25) feet.
28.11.5 Pedestrian Amenities
Pedestrian walks shall be required to facilitate safe passage from the public sidewalk
to a commercial building and throughout the parking area. Such pedestrian walks
shall be visually delineated utilizing differentiated paving materials or pavement markings.
28.12 Exemption Area
The Commission, after due notice and public hearing as provided for in Section 2.23 of
the Zoning Regulations, may delineate areas of the Town which shall be exempt from the
parking provisions of these Parking Regulations. Such delineation may be made only
after the Commission determines that the Town, or a combination of the Town and
property owners, will provide sufficient and permanent off-street parking spaces to
comply with the requirements of these Parking Regulations.
116
SECTION 29.0 REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS
29.1 General
Except as provided under Section 29.7 of these Sign Regulations, no sign shall be
established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, moved or structurally
altered, (1) other than in accordance with these Sign Regulations and (2) unless a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been obtained under Section 2 of the
Zoning Regulations.
29.2 Alterations or Replacement
If any sign does not conform to these Sign Regulations, and is discontinued, altered,
reconstructed, enlarged, extended or moved, its replacement or the alterations shall
conform to these Sign Regulations. No existing sign shall be altered, reconstructed,
enlarged, extended or moved except in accordance with these Sign Regulations. The
repainting or repair of existing signs, however, is permitted.
29.3 Removal
Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product
sold, on the premises, shall be removed by the owner of the premises upon which
such sign may be found, within ten (10) days after written notification from the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the
time specified in such order, the Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized
to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
owner of the premises.
29.4 Classification
No signs shall be permitted in any District except Identification Signs as described
in Section 29.5.1.4 of these Sign Regulations.
29.5 Definitions
“Sign” shall mean and include every sign, illustration, lettering, device, insignia or
display of any kind, however made, displayed, painted, supported or attached, used
for the purpose of advertisement, identification, publicity or notice of any kind, when
located out-of-doors in view of the general public. “Sign” shall also include any
flag, banner or other device of any kind, designed to move by force of wind or air
pressure and larger than one (1) foot in any dimension, whether with or without letters,
figures, or other symbols thereon, intended to advertise or attract attention to any
business or commercial establishment in any District, but not including flags of any
government unit or branch, or of any charitable or religious organization.
29.5.1 The following shall have the meanings given below:
117
29.5.1.1 Ground Sign - a sign which has no clear area between the ground and the
bottom of the sign area or a sign together with its supports which does not
exceed six feet in height.
29.5.1.2 Pole Sign - a sign supported by uprights in or upon the ground which total
height exceeds six feet.
29.5.1.3 Wall Sign - a sign attached to, painted on or erected against the exterior wall
of a building, and projecting not more than fifteen (15) inches from the building
wall, except in the case of an awning sign, and running approximately parallel
with the face of the wall;
29.5.1.4 Identification Sign - a sign advertising the name or kind of business
conducted, or the sale of goods, merchandise or services sold or provided at the
premises where the sign is located, or the prospective sale or lease of said
premises of the business conducted therein;
29.5.1.5 Light - any floodlight, searchlight, beacon or other source of illumination of
any kind;
29.5.1.6 Flashing and Moving - a sign or source of light which flashes, rotates, moves or in any way simulates motion;
29.5.1.7 Continuous Strip Lighting - any source of illumination of the gas filled tube or
continuous bulb lighting or of similar utility and design.
29.6 Sign Area
For the purposes of this Section, the sign area shall be the area of the smallest
rectangle or circle which encompasses all letters, designs, symbols and logos,
including the advertising surface. The sign area shall include any background
material, if such material is designed to be an integral part of the sign because of
its texture, color or building material.
29.7 Exemptions
These Sign Regulations shall not apply to the following signs, except with respect to
the requirements set forth under Sections 29.8 and 29.12 of these Sign Regulations.
Size Requirements
Type of (not over the square
Permitted Sign footage stated below ) Purpose of Sign
Any Sign Three (3) Intended as a directional or warning
sign with no advertising thereon.
118
One (1) Sign Three (3) Identifying a charitable or religious
institution occupying the premises
where the sign is located.
Any sign or Not applicable Erected by the town, state or
source of federal government or any
illumination or department thereof.
Single unlighted Three (3) For any purpose except to
sign in a Residence advertise any commercial
District, Flood Plain enterprise not permitted on
Zone or Beach District on the property.
Single unlighted ground Thirty Two (32) To identify the premises
sign in Designed Business, during the course of Designed Industrial or construction on site.
Designed Residential
District or in a subdivision
in excess of twenty lots.
29.8 Standards for All Signs
All signs shall conform to the following;
29.8.1 Setbacks All ground and pole signs in other than a Residence District,
Des. Residence District, Beach District or Flood Plain District shall conform to the setback requirements for other buildings and structures except that by a two- thirds vote of all the members of the Commission, ground and pole signs may extend within a lesser distance of a street line. No ground or pole sign, in other than a Residence District, shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the boundary line of any such District.
29.8.2 Connecticut Turnpike and Merritt Parkway Where a lot abuts the right-of-way
or access road of the Connecticut Turnpike or Merritt Parkway, no sign on such
lot shall be erected which faces or is primarily intended to be visible from the Connecticut Turnpike or Merritt Parkway, as the case may be.
29.8.3 Hazard or Nuisance No sign shall be:
29.8.3.1 so placed as to be a hazard to traffic or the public generally,
or a nuisance or annoyance to the residents or occupants of any
other building or premises; or
29.8.3.2 erected or maintained as to obstruct any fire escape, window,
119
door or opening used for entrance or exit or for fire fighting
purposes, or which interferes with any opening required for
proper ventilation; or
29.8.3.3 erected in such a manner that it obstructs clear vision of any
public way by either motorists or pedestrians.
29.8.4 Maintenance of Signs All signs, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a safe condition. The owner of any sign, and the owner of the premises on which it stands, shall be severally responsible for keeping such sign, and the area around it, in a safe, sanitary, neat and clean condition.
29.8.5 Direction of Lights Exterior illumination of buildings, signs or grounds shall be
only for the purpose of illuminating a sign, walk, delivery service, or parking
area and shall not be directed so as to create a hazard or cause a public or private nuisance. Lights shall be located or shielded so that their beams are not directed
onto adjoining properties or onto the public highway, but shall be limited to the
illumination of the subject property only.
The source of all lighting of signs and buildings (bulbs, tubes, reflectors, etc.),
shall not be visible from any street or from any lot other than that in which the
sign or building is located.
29.8.6 Conflict with Traffic Signals No source of illumination shall be erected in such a location or in such a manner so as to interfere with motorists’ vision of a traffic signal light, street or directional signs or any other sign or device intended primarily for the public safety and welfare. No sign shall be erected in such a manner that it obstructs clear vision for a distance of twenty (20) feet from any intersection.
29.8.7 Projecting Signs and Unattached Signs No sign projecting more than fifteen (15) inches from a building wall shall be permitted except that awning signs shall be permitted provided they do not overhang any property, street or right-of-way line and meet all size and design requirements of this section. The entire awning shall be used to calculate sign area. Signs not fixed either to a building or the ground in a permanent manner (such as sandwich signs), shall be prohibited.
29.8.8 Flashing, Moving, Animated or Intermittent Illuminated Signs No flashing, moving, animated or intermittent illuminated sign shall be permitted, including flags or banners, or other devices designed to move by force of wind or air pressure and larger than one (1) foot in any dimension.
120
29.8.9 Continuous Strip Lighting No building, sign, or any portion thereof, except under canopy lighting property shielded, shall be outlined in gas-filled tube type lighting, LED lighting or other similar lighting.
29.8.10 Floodlights No exterior flood lights or source of any kind shall be higher than
twenty five (25) feet above the ground.
29.8.11 Exterior Illumination Exterior illumination of commercial structures (except in
in the Center Designed Business District) is prohibited, unless open for business, and when open for business such illumination is not to exceed five (5) foot candles when measured at the nearest residence.
29.8.12 Roof Signs No signs shall be permitted on the roof of any building.
29.8.13 Rights-of-Way No sign shall be permitted to overhang or be located within the
right-of-way of any street.
29.8.14 Window Signs Notwithstanding the definition of “sign” as found in Section 29.5
and 31.2.34 of these Regulations, indoor illuminated signs intended to be visible
from the exterior of the building shall be prohibited. Flashing, rotating or
intermittent illumination of any kind shall also be prohibited.
29.9 Signs permitted in Residence, Designed Residence, Beach and Flood Plain Districts,
subject to securing a Certificate of Zoning Compliance from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Type and Not Exceeding the
Number of Sign Following Measurement Purpose
Single sign with no Identifying the use the
interior illumination Twenty (20) square feet premises for which a
special exception has
been granted.
Two (2) ground signs Twenty (20) square feet Identifying the name of
with no interior and no higher than five the condominium or
illumination (5) feet above ground level apartment complex
located on the premises.
29.10 Signs Permitted in Designed Business, Designed Research & Designed Industrial Districts
No permit shall be issued for an individual sign unless and until an Overall Signage Plan
for the premises on which the sign will be erected has been approved by the Plan and
Zoning Commission. The Overall Signage Plan shall include all necessary information to
accurately describe the number, size and location of all present and future signs on the
121
premises. The plan shall include a site plan indicating the location of all buildings and
ground or pole signs and elevation drawings to indicate the location of all wall signs. The
plan must be accompanied by a written narrative, signed by the property owner indicating
the dimensions, materials, color and method of illumination (if any) for each sign
indicated on the plan.
All signage proposed shall be of similar nature so as to represent a unified design so as to
harmonize with the neighborhood and to preserve and enhance the appearance of the
community while conforming to the standards of these sign regulations.
29.10.1 Size and Location of Wall Signs
Designed Business and Designed
Designed Research Districts Industrial District
No letter, figure or device shall No letter, figure or device shall
(a) exceed a height of three (3) (a) exceed a height of three (3)
feet for a single line of copy or feet for a single line of copy or
two (2) feet for multiple lines of copy; two (2) feet for multiple lines of copy;
b) project more than fifteen (15) b) project more than fifteen (15)
inches from the building face; inches from the building face;
(c) extend above the roof (c) extend above the roof
or parapet wall, and (d) extend or parapet wall, and (d) extend
beyond the outer edges of the wall beyond the outer edges of the wall
to which it is attached. to which it is attached.
A single tenant building may have A single tenant building may have
up to two (2) signs provided they up to two (2) signs provided they are not
are not on the same wall. No sign on the same wall. No sign may be on
may be on a side or rear wall unless a side or rear wall unless such wall
such wall faces a street, driveway or faces a street, driveway or parking area
parking area, or is at least fifty (50) or is at least fifty (50) feet from
feet from any other commercial any other commercial structure.
structure. A sign may occupy up to A sign may occupy up to twenty (20)
twenty (20) percent of the area of the percent of the area of the wall to
wall to which it is attached or seventy which it is attached or one hundred
two (72) square feet, whichever is less. (100) square feet, whichever is less.
For multiple tenant buildings, For multiple tenant buildings,
tenant signs may only be attached tenant signs may only be attached
to a portion of the building that to a portion of the building that
the tenant occupies and may not the tenant occupies and may not
exceed seventy-two (72) square exceed one hundred (100) square
feet or twenty (20) percent of feet or twenty (20) percent of
the tenant wall area, whichever the tenant wall area, whichever
is less. A single tenant may is less. A single tenant may
122
have up to two signs provided have up to two signs provided
they are not on the same wall. they are not on the same wall.
No sign may be on a side or rear No sign may be on a side or rear
wall unless such wall faces a wall unless such wall faces a street,
street, driveway or parking area, driveway or parking area, or is at
or is at least fifty (50) feet from least fifty (50) feet from any other
any other commercial structure. commercial structure.
In multiple story buildings, In multiple story buildings,
no sign shall be located above no sign shall be located above
the ground floor level. the ground floor level.
29.11 Signs Which Face A Residence, Designed Residence, Beach or Flood Plain District
No sign on a side or rear wall shall be more than three and one-half (3.5) feet long and
one (1) foot wide if located within three hundred (300) feet of any such District and,
thirty-six (36) square feet if located within five hundred (500) feet of any such District.
29.12 Size and Location of Ground or Pole Signs
Designed Business and Designed Industrial
Research Districts District
Only one (1) ground or pole sign shall be permitted on any property (a double faced sign
or two (2) signs placed back to back count as one sign. No other type of multiple faced
signage shall be permitted.)
No letter, figure or device shall exceed a height of three (3) feet for a single line of copy
or two (2) feet for multiple lines of copy.
No sign shall exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet (measured to the top of the sign) above
the curb or ground level, whichever is higher, of the fronting street.
No sign shall be permitted beyond the side or rear wall of a main building where the rear
property line upon which it is placed abuts a Residence, Designed Residence,
Beach or Flood Plain District.
No ground or pole sign shall exceed the following number of square feet:
fifty (50) one hundred (100)
29.13 Design Criteria
Signs constructed of natural materials (wood) or non-natural materials that simulate natural materials are preferred.
123
Internally illuminated signs shall be prohibited in the Center Designed Business District. In other Districts, internal illumination shall be strictly limited to the illumination of text or graphic symbols only, i.e. channel letter style or box signs with opaque background materials. Internally illuminated awnings are prohibited.
All ground or pole signs shall display the street number of the premises. Ground and pole signs shall conform to the following standards for minimum height of all letters, numbers, or symbols for the purpose of creating legible graphics which can be seen and responded to within safe distances to maneuver a car:
Lane Posted Minimum
Configuration Speed Limit Character Height
2 Lanes 25 m.p.h. 6 inches
30 m.p.h. 7 inches
35 m.p.h. 8 inches
40 m.p.h. 9 inches
4 Lanes 25 m.p.h. 8 inches
30 m.p.h. 9 inches
35 m.p.h. 10 inches
40 m.p.h. 11 inches
When, in the opinion of the Commission, a sign is intended primarily for view by pedestrians as opposed to vehicular traffic, the minimum character height may be
reduced so as to maintain a pedestrian scale.
All pole signs shall have two (2) supporting uprights which are visually proportional to the sign they support.
124
29.14 Purpose
The purpose of these sign regulations is to permit signs that do not confuse or obstruct the
vision necessary for traffic safety or otherwise endanger public health and safety and to
improve the physical appearance of commercial areas and to preserve and enhance the
aesthetics of the community.
125
SECTION 30 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
30.1 General
It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, firm or corporation to sell, offer for
sale, or keep with intent to sell any intoxicating liquors or alcoholic beverages in any
Residence District or in the Beach District, except as herein specifically provided in these
Alcoholic Beverage Regulations, and except further in a building or a membership club
organized and existing for bona fide social or recreational purposes; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall limit or prohibit anyone licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages by the Liquor Control Commission of the State of Connecticut on the date
hereof from continuing said business and under the present license or renewals thereof.
30.2 Location and Classification
No building or premises shall be used either in whole or in part for the purpose of selling
alcoholic liquors, beer, ale or wine, under any drug store permit, package store permit or
tavern permit, cafe permit, if any entrance to such building or premises is within a radius of
one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from any entrance to another building or premises
where any alcoholic liquors, beer, ale or wine are sold under any permit when of the same
class or kind of permit or where sale of alcoholic liquors, beer, ale or wine, under any
permit has been abandoned or discontinued for less than ninety (90) days. The foregoing
prohibition shall not apply to the establishment of restaurants where customers are served
only when seated at tables or counters and at least three-quarters of the customer seats are
located within an enclosed building or to full service restaurant permits, restaurant service
bar permits, restaurant permits for beer and wine only or restaurant permits for beer only,
nor to a restaurant or hotel/motel permit for a restaurant located on the same premises as a
hotel or motel.
30.2.1 For purposes of these Alcoholic Beverages Regulations a drugstore permit and a package store permit shall be considered a single class of permit; a restaurant permit for beer only, restaurant permit for beer and wine service bar permit or full service restaurant permit shall be considered a single class of permit; and a tavern permit, or cafe permit shall be considered a single class of permit.
30.2.2 No building or premises shall be used either in part for the purpose of selling
alcoholic liquors, beer, ale or wine under any drug store permit or tavern permit.
30.3 Discontinuance
No building or premises used either in whole or in part for the purpose of selling alcoholic
liquors, beer, ale or wine, in which the sale of such alcoholic liquors, beer, ale or wine is
abandoned or discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months shall thereafter be used for
the purpose of selling any alcoholic liquors, beer, ale or wine, except in compliance with
Section 30.1 and 30.2 of these Alcoholic Beverage Regulations.
126
SECTION 31.0 - DEFINITIONS
31.1 General The words used in these regulations shall have the meaning commonly attributed
to them. Doubts as to their precise meaning shall be determined by the Town Plan and
Zoning Commission in accordance with the purpose and intent of these regulations.
31.2 Special Definitions - Certain words used in these regulations are defined and explained as
follows:
31.2.1 Accessory Apartment: Shall be defined as a separate, self-contained living unit
within, and subordinate to, an existing single family residence.
31.2.2 Accessory Use: A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
a building or property and located on the same lot with said building or use.
31.2.3 Affordable Housing: Housing as defined in Section 8-39a of the Connecticut
General Statutes, or any amendment thereto.
31.2.4 Charitable Institution: Organizations or corporations of public or eleemosynary
character which provide benefits or services.
31.2.5 Commercial Greenhouse: Structures in which trees, shrubs, flowers and vegetable
plants are propagated or grown indoors, for a period of at least six months, or where
flowers and vegetables of an annual variety are germinated before being offered for
sale and transplanting. Such definition shall not include those retail establishments
that buy the majority of their horticulture stock for re-sale not propagating it
themselves.
31.2.6 Commercial Vehicle: Vehicles which have commercial, livery or wrecker license
plates or any vehicle which has signage thereon or has mechanical equipment affixed
or stored. This definition shall also include any vehicle which capacity exceeds
three quarters (3/4) ton.
31.2.7 Corner Lot: A corner lot is defined as a lot having an interior angle of less than 135
degrees at the intersection of two streets whether public or private. A lot abutting
upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the central angle of the curve
is more than 45 degrees.
31.2.8 Customary Home Occupation: An accessory use customarily conducted entirely
within a principal dwelling carried on solely by the residents therein, which use is
incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the building. Such uses may
include: art studio, teaching, including musical instruction, limited to a single pupil
at a time; sales, advertising or management activities strictly limited to telephone
contacts; dressmaking, millinery and similar domestic homemaking activities that
are a customary adjunct to housekeeping.
127
31.2.9 Day Nursery: A facility which offers or provides a program of supplementary care
to related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular basis for part of
the twenty-four hours in one or more days in the week.
31.2.10 Detached Dwelling for One, Two, Three, or Four Families: A single residential
building entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot containing not more
than one, two, three, or four dwelling units respectively.
31.2.11 Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an
independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one family with
separate facilities for cooking and sleeping.
31.2.12 Elderly Family Developments: Developments of dwelling units (a) to be occupied
exclusively by elderly families consisting on one (1) or more persons, one (1) of
whom is fifty five (55) years of age or over, and (b) which conform to the
requirements of State and/or Federal programs providing for housing for the
elderly, except with regard to maximum floor area, and shall include a certification
from State and/or Federal agencies that such housing conforms to the requirements
of elderly housing programs.
31.2.13 Family: Except as otherwise provided in Section 11.0 a family shall be:
(a) Persons living together as a single housekeeping unit who are all related by
blood, marriage or adoption. Two (2) roomers, boarders or lodgers shall also
be permitted, provided there is one (1) off-street parking space for each roomer,
boarder, lodger, in addition to the parking otherwise required for such uses,
bona fide domestic servants in the paid employ of a resident family may be
included in the single housekeeping unit, provided the number of servants shall
be limited to three (3) ; or
(b) Persons living together as a single housekeeping unit who are unrelated by
blood, marriage or adoption except that such a group shall not exceed five (5)
individuals.
31.2.14 Farm: Any parcel of land containing at least five (5) acres which is used for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy products. It
includes any necessary farm structures within prescribed limits and the storage of
equipment used. It excludes the raising of pigs, more than three (3) fur bearing
animals and laboratory animals, riding academies, livery or boarding stables, dog
or animal kennels.
128
31.2.15 Floor Area Requirements: The measurement of floor area for any building shall be
taken to the outside surfaces of exterior walls on all stories.
In determining compliance with maximum floor area requirements (bulk) for
dwellings, all floor area shall be counted, including any portion of an attic, which
has a height of seven (7) feet or greater to the underside of the ridge or rafters,
whether finished as living space or not. Total floor area shall also include garages,
enclosed porches and all detached accessory structures. Basements, decks and
open porches shall be excluded.
In determining compliance with minimum floor area requirements for dwellings,
only finished livable floor area having a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet, be
counted, excluding garages, terraces, bay windows, basements, cellars, utility
rooms for heating apparatus, attics, open porches and enclosed porches not heated
by a central heating system for the dwelling.
31.2.16 Height: The height of a building or other structure shall be measured from the
average ground elevation to the mid-point between the main eave line and the
highest ridge. For flat or mansard roofs, the measurement shall be taken to the
roof deck. For the purposes of this section, the average ground elevation shall be
established as follows:
(a) A closed polygon, with sides parallel to, and everywhere ten (10) feet outside
the perimeter footprint of the building or structure shall be established and
shown on the site plan. This shall be deemed to be the girth of building or
structure and its length shall be shown on the site plan.
(b) The full length of the girth shall be traversed by examination and it shall be
divided into sections. A section exists when the vertical distance between two
fixed points is two feet. The contribution of each section to the average
ground elevation is established as follows and the sum of these contributions
is the average ground elevation.
Given: (Example)
Length of Girth 1568
Length of Section 118
Elevation of each end
of Section 23 feet and 25 feet
129
Contribution of section to average ground elevation.
Length of Section Sum of elevations
X at end of section
Length of Girth 2
118 X 23 & 25
1568 2
.07526 X 24
Contribution of this section is 1.8062 feet. The sum of the contributions of
all sections is the average ground elevation. The average ground elevation shall
be established as above for the pre-construction and post construction conditions.
The lower of the two results shall be used to determine the height of the building
or structure.
Exceptions: The provisions of these regulations pertaining to height shall not
apply to flag poles, church steeples, ornamental towers, silos, chimneys and water
towers. In all districts except AAA, AA, R-3, R-2, A, B and C, elevator machine
rooms, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and similar equipment may extend
over the roof, provided that not more than 10% of the gross area of the roof is
used for this purpose. Except that elevator machine rooms shall not extend more
than ten (10) feet, and all other equipment not more than five (5) feet above the
roof, and further provided that all such items are set back a minimum of two (2)
feet from all edges of the building for each foot or portion thereof that the
equipment extends above the roof, provided that in a Transportation Commercial
Park such height limitations for elevator machine rooms and other equipment may
extend to seventeen (17) feet above the roof, if said rooms and equipment are
located within an enclosed structure.
31.2.17 Indoor Recreational Facility: Facilities which provide one or more leisure activities in an enclosed building including but not limited to: bowling alleys; billiard pool halls; fitness centers, racquetball, tennis and other sports facilities. No such facility shall contain more than two (2) amusement devices as defined in Section 38.1, except as provided in Section 38.2.
31.2.18 Junk Yard: The term “junk yard” shall be construed to include any “junk yard”,
“motor vehicle junk business” and “motor vehicle junk yard” as defined in the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. The terms shall also include any place of outside storage or deposit, whether in connection with a business or not, one or more motor vehicles or motorcycles which are not in condition for legal use on the public highways and shall also include any of outside storage or deposit of used parts of motor vehicles, or motorcycles and metals, iron, glass, paper, cordage, and other waste materials which on any lot have an aggregate bulk equal to one automobile (17 cubic yards or more) or any lot in which a lesser amount of such materials are stored in such a manner so they are not properly enclosed or covered so as to be visible to adjoining landowners or general public. In Residence
130
Districts, Designed Residence Districts, Flood Plain District and the Beach District
the term shall also include the outside storage of unregistered motor vehicles or
motorcycles for periods longer than 30 days and the outside storage or deposit of
parts or bodies of motor vehicles or motorcycles.
31.2.19 Leasing of Rooms and Taking of Boarders: Boarders in a dwelling shall be limited
to not more than two (2) persons (except as otherwise provided herein) and shall
not be construed to include the provision of cooking facilities for such rooms but
may include table board or sharing of the cooking facilities of a dwelling and
further subject to the following conditions:
(a) An owner of not less than a fifty (50) percent interest in the residence
must reside in the dwelling during the duration of the lease.
(b) One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each roomer or boarder.
(c) The lease period shall not be less than thirty (30) days.
31.2.20 Lot: A parcel of land which is owned separately from any adjoining parcel or
parcels as evidenced by deed or deeds or maps recorded on the land records of the
Town and which separation is also evident by use or which is shown as a building
lot on a subdivision map approved by the Commission, filed in the Town Clerk’s
Office and which conforms in all respects to the requirements of the Zoning
Regulations and any amendment thereto.
31.2.21 Lot Area and Shape: In determining compliance with the minimum lot area and
shape requirements of the Zoning Regulations, land subject to underground
easements may be included, but no street or highway, easement for vehicles or
easement for above ground public utilities (other than utility easements serving a
private residence) may be included. The area of any portion of a lot which has a
width of less than 50 percent of the minimum lot square width in the District in
which it is located shall not be included in the lot area calculation. This provision
is not intended to exclude the area between two intersecting property lines that
meet at an angle equal to or greater than sixty (60) degrees. All contributing
portions of a lot for purposes of minimum lot area shall be contiguous, meaning
that no contributing area of a lot shall be separated by non-contributing areas of the
lot. The area of the minimum square required on each lot shall be exclusive of
wetlands, watercourses, conservation easements, or any other restriction other than
setbacks which would prevent actual house construction within the square.
Areas consisting of rivers, ponds, lakes or marsh shall not be used for compliance
with more than 25 percent of the minimum lot area requirement and shall not be
included in the calculation for lot coverage and bulk. Land in a Zoning District
having a higher lot area requirement shall not be used to satisfy a lot area
requirement in a Zoning District having a lesser lot area requirement; land in a
Residence, Designed Residence, Beach or Flood Plain Districts shall not be used
131
to satisfy a lot area requirement in any other District.
31.2.22 Lot Coverage: Except as otherwise provided in Section 11.0, lot coverage shall mean the combined percentage of the land covered by the roof area or outside dimensions of all structures on the lot excluding eaves. Coverage shall include dwellings, garages, storage/accessory buildings, commercial buildings, porches, decks, pools covered by a roof and other structures that are located on or above the ground. Driveways, uncovered walks, patios, terraces and other at grade surfaces less than one foot above the ground shall not be included.
31.2.23 Membership Clubs: A voluntary organization, not conducted for gain, with
facilities catering exclusively to members, and their guests, for recreational
cultural, educational or social purposes.
31.2.24 Nursery: A place where trees, shrubs, vines and/or flower and vegetable plants are
propagated or grown outdoors for a period of at least six (6) months. Such
definition shall not encompass those retail establishments that buy the majority of
their stock wholesale, (not propagating it themselves).
31.2.25 Premises: The term premises shall include the street and adjoining public
right-of-way, and shall be subject to all uses both prohibited and permitted within
each Zoning District.
31.2.26 Property Line - Rear: Any lot line which is parallel with or within forty-five (45)
degrees of being parallel with a street line, except for a lot line which is itself a
street line, and except that in the case of a corner lot, only one lot line shall be
considered a rear property line.
31.2.27 Property Line - Side: Any lot line which is not a rear property line or street line.
31.2.28 Rear Lot: A lot which does not have frontage on an improved public street or
which, if it does have such frontage, is not of such shape that some portion of the
required square on the lot is located within the area required for setback from such
street.
31.2.29 Research - Applied: Research which is put into practice involving processes
typically associated with manufacture and assembly.
31.2.30 Research - Basic: Research used to gain an underlying or fundamental knowledge.
31.2.31 Setbacks - Fences, Walls and Terraces: Except as otherwise provided in
Section 11.0, the provisions on setbacks in the Zoning Regulations shall not be
construed to apply to fences or walls six (6) feet or less in height or to necessary
retaining walls or to paved unroofed terraces.
31.2.32 Setbacks – Railroad: No setback is required from a railroad right-of-way on the
132
side of a building or structure where a railroad siding is located.
31.2.33 Setback - Rear: Setbacks from rear property lines shall be measured from the
property line toward the structure. If the direction of such measurement is away
from the streetline (s) then the setback shall be reduced to that required for a side
yard.
31.2.34 Signs: “Sign” shall mean and include every sign, illustration, lettering, device,
insignia or display of any kind, however made, displayed, painted, supported or
attached, used for the purpose of advertisement, identification, publicity or notice
of any kind, when located out-of-doors in view of the general public. “Sign” shall
also include any flag, banner or other device of any kinds, designed to move by
force of wind or air pressure and larger than one (1) foot in any dimension, whether
with or without letters, figures or other symbols thereon, intended to advertise or
attract attention to any business or commercial establishment in any District, but
not including flags of any governmental unit or branch, or of any charitable or
religious organization.
31.2.35 Story: That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface
of the floor, ceiling or roof next above. Attics with a height of seven (7’) feet or
more between the top of the floor joists and bottom of the roof rafter for 50 percent
or more of the attic floor area shall be considered a full story. Attics with such a
height for less than 50 percent of the attic floor area shall be considered a half
story. If no portion of an attic has such a height, then it shall not be considered a
story.
When the ceiling of a basement or cellar is five (5) feet or more above average
grade, the basement or cellar shall be considered a story. Any basement or cellar
exclusively used for parking or storage of automobiles shall not be considered a
story.
For structures within a 100-year flood zone, an unfinished, unheated crawl space
built in accordance with the standards of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations with a clear height not exceeding six (6) feet shall not be considered a
story.
31.2.36 Street Line: The right-of-way easement or taking line of any public or private
street, or of any easement of access or private right-of-way twenty five (25) feet or
more in width.
31.2.37 Swimming Pools: Swimming pools having a depth of more than four (4) feet or
having a ground coverage of more than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet
shall, together with all accessory equipment, and all above ground pools, be
considered buildings and structures and shall have the same setbacks as required
for accessory buildings; but, if not covered by a roof, shall not be counted in
determining maximum permissible lot coverage or floor area.
133
31.2.38 Truck Garden: The growing of vegetables for sale provided that all items sold are
produced on site.
31.2.39 Used: The term “used” shall include “arranged, designed or intended to be used.”
31.2.40 Assisted Living Facility: The term “Assisted Living Facility” shall mean a
managed residential community consisting of private residential units and common
facilities such as common rooms, entertainment facilities, auditorium/chapel,
communal dining facilities, kitchen and supportive food preparation areas, laundry
facilities, administrative offices, area for periodic medical examination, limited
treatment and therapy, or similar uses, and providing assistance with activities of
daily life such as meal service, laundry service housekeeping, social and
recreational activities and transportation, in a group setting to persons who require
help or aid with activities of daily living. Services at the Facility shall be provided
by an Assisted Living Service Agency, licensed by the State of Connecticut.
31.2.41 Formula Neighborhood Business: A “Formula Neighborhood Business” means any
Permitted Use in a Neighborhood Designed District pursuant to Section 12.5, other
than uses permitted pursuant to Section 12.5.10 and 12.5.13, that includes,
incorporates or utilizes any two or more of the following standardized items that
cause it to be substantially identical to more than five other stores, restaurants,
businesses, offices or institutions regardless of ownership or location: A
standardized array of products or merchandise, a standardized menu, uniform
apparel, standardized architectural design, layout or façade, standardized décor or
color scheme and/or standardized signs, trademarks, service marks or logos.
a. “Standardized” does not mean identical but means “substantially the same.”
b. A standardized array of products or merchandise shall be defined as 50% or
more of in-stock products or merchandise from a single distributor bearing
uniform markings.
c. Uniform apparel shall be defined as standardized items of clothing worn by
employees including but not limited to standardized aprons, pants, shirts,
smocks or dresses, hats and pins (other than name tags) as well as standardized
colors of clothing.
d. Façade shall be defined as the face or front of a building, including awnings,
looking onto a street or an open space.
e. Décor shall be defined as the style of interior furnishings, which may include
but is not limited to style of furniture, wall coverings or permanent fixtures.
f. Color scheme shall be defined as selection of colors used throughout, such as on
134
the furnishings, permanent fixtures and wall coverings or as used on the façade.
g. Sign shall be defined and include every illustration, lettering, device insignia or
display of any kind, however made, displayed, painted, supported or attached,
used for the purpose of advertisement, identification, publicity or notice of any
kind.
h. Trademark shall be defined as a word, phrase, symbol or design, or a
combination or words, phrases, symbols or designs that identifies and
distinguishes the source of the goods from one party from those of others.
i. Service mark shall be defined as work, phrase, symbol or design, or a
combination or words, phrases, symbols or designs that identifies and
distinguishes the source of a service from one party from those of others.
31.2.43 Fairfield Housing Authority, Pine Tree Development
A development of dwelling units located on Pine Tree Lane, (a) consisting of only
one and two bedroom units, (b) conforming to the requirements of an “Affordable
Housing Development” as defined by Section 8-30g of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
135
SECTION 32.0 - FLOOD PROTECTION
32.0 General Proposed uses, buildings, structures, in flood prone areas as delineated on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map shall conform to the following standards:
32.1 In all special flood hazard areas, designated A, AE and VE Zones, the following
provisions shall apply:
a. Proposed development shall be reviewed to assure that all necessary federal, state
and local permits have been received, including those from governmental agencies where approval is required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. Proposed development shall be reviewed to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.
b. All proposed developments shall include within such proposals base flood
elevation data.
c. Permits shall be required for all new construction, substantial improvements,
including the placement of prefabricated buildings, and other development and
shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure, be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage, and be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
d. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
e. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of the flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
system into flood waters and on-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
f. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
g. Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside
of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a
concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or
lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a
screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.
136
h. If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the
entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the
construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached
additions, garages, docks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main
structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will
require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone.
i. If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the
most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive
than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes
any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to
the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will
require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.)
32.2 In all special flood hazard areas designated as A Zones, the following shall
additionally apply:
a. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway date available from a Federal, State or other
source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development in Zone A have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
or above the base flood level and all new construction and substantial
improvements of non-residential structures have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated or flood proofed to or above the base flood level.
b. For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk premium
rates, the applicant shall provide the elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures
and whether or not such structures contain a basement; obtain, if the structure has
been flood proofed, the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the
structure was flood proofed, and a record of all such information shall be
maintained with the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Upon completion of the
applicable portion of construction, the applicant shall provide the Zoning
Enforcement Officer verification of the as-built lowest floor elevation and utility
elevation or in the case of flood proofed buildings, the elevation to which the flood
proofing is effective.
c. In riverine situations, the applicant shall notify adjacent communities and the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such notifications to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and Federal Emergency Management Agency.
d. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
e. Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions are
137
prohibited in all flood hazard areas, designated Zones A, AE and VE.
32.3 In all special flood hazard areas designated as Zones A and AE, the following
additionally shall apply:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood level.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures,
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
level, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that
below one foot above the base flood level the structure is water tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic, and hydrodynamic loads, and effects
of buoyancy.
c. Where flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure in accordance with
paragraph 32.3b of this section, a Connecticut registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the flood proofing methods are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors
associated with the base flood, and a record of such certificate indicating the
specific elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are
flood proofed shall be maintained with the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
d. For all new construction and substantial improvement, fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may
be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
e. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A, AE, VE shall either (1) be on
the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (2) be fully licensed and ready for
highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions) or (3) meet all the
general standards of Section 32.1 and the elevation and anchoring requirements of
Section 32.3 for A or AE Zones or 32.5 for VE Zone.
f. Equal Conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally
138
influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the
community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial
improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited
unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer
demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not
result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within
the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide
compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an
increase in flood stage or flood velocity.
g. Compensatory Storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those
areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by
filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in
footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of
the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been
gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same
hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be
hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood
water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which
would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have
an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body.
Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
32.4 In the floodway as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, any encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development
that would result in any 0.00 feet increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge shall be prohibited. The provision
of proof that there shall be no (0.00 feet) increase in flood discharge due to the
proposed construction or encroachment shall be the responsibility of the applicant
and shall be based on hydrologic and hydraulic studies, performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice, and certification, with supporting technical data,
by a Connecticut Registered Professional Engineer.
a. The Town may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without
FEMA-published floodways. When such data are available from any other source
(in response to the Town’s request or otherwise), the Town shall designate
regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey
the waters of the base flood without increasing the elevation more than one (1) foot
at any point along the watercourse.
b. In “A” zones where base flood elevations have been determined but before a
floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood
elevation more than one (1) foot any point along the watercourse when all
anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed
139
development.
32.5 In the coastal high hazard zones, designated as VE, the following provisions shall
additionally apply:
a. The applicant shall obtain the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom
of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor, excluding pilings or columns
of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures
contain a basement. A record of all such information shall be maintained with the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
b. All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide with
the exception of accessory uses that include boat houses, landings, docks and piers.
c. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on adequately
anchored pilings or columns, and securely anchored to such piles, and columns so
that the lowest structural member of the lowest floor, excluding piles or columns, is
elevated to or above the base flood level. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the structure is securely anchored to adequately anchored
pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash,
and the space beneath the lowest floor shall be free of obstruction or be constructed
with breakaway walls intended to collapse under stress without jeopardizing
structural support; said space shall not be used for human habitation.
For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading
resistance of not less than 10 or more than 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or State codes) may be permitted only if a
registered professional engineer or architect has certified that the designs proposed
meet the following conditions:
Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that would occur
during the base flood; and the elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acts simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural). Water loading values used
shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be
those required by applicable State or local standards. Such enclosed space shall be
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.
d. No use of fill for structural support of buildings shall be permitted.
e. Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is
prohibited.
32.6 The applicant shall file with the commission a performance bond, in form and with
surety acceptable to the commission, in an amount sufficient to insure proper
140
performance of those elements of the proposed work which have a bearing on
protection from flooding.
32.7 Variances
a. Variances shall not be issued within any designated regulatory floodway if any
increase will result in flood levels during the base flood discharge.
b. The applicant for a variance shall be notified in writing over the signature of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates to the maximum
in accordance with which such is below the base flood level and increases risks to
life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions as required in paragraph c of this section.
c. The Town shall maintain record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual report submitted to the
Administrator.
32.8 Definitions
a. Administrator - means the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to whom the
Secretary has delegated the administration of the Program.
b. Area of Special Flood Hazard - is the land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
c. Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and
measured in accordance with the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 - is
expressed and measured on a vertical scale that corresponds to 14.5 feet below
Town of Fairfield datum.
d. Base Flood Elevation (BFE) – means the elevation of the crest of the base flood or
100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by
the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and
riverine areas.
e. Basement – any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground) on
all sides.
f. Breakaway walls – means type of walls, whether solid or lattice and whether
constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable
building material which are not part of the structural support of the building, and
which are so designed as to break away, under abnormally high tides or wave
action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building.
141
g. Building – means see the definition for “Structure”.
h. Coastal High Hazard Area – means the area of special flood hazard subject to high
velocity waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash, or tsunamis.
The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone VE.
i. Development - means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the
construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or
structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of
materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage
disposal systems or water supply facilities.
j. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) – is the federal agency that
administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
k. Flood or Flooding - means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal
waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
l. Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on
which the Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
m. Flood Insurance Study (FIS) - means the official report provided in which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and water surface elevation of the base
flood.
n. Flood Plain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective
and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and flood plain management
regulations.
o. Flood proofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and
their contents.
p. Floor - means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring
in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used
solely for parking vehicles.
142
q. Floor (lowest) - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not
considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as
to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this section.
r. Functionally Dependent Facility - means a facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water. The term includes
only docking facilities or port facilities necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers; shipbuilding, and ship repair. The term does not include
seafood processing facilities or the long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service
facilities.
s. Historic Structure – means any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the
National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved
state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the
Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
t. Hydrodynamic Loads - means loads that are caused on building or structures by the
flow of flood water moving at moderate or high velocity around the buildings or
structures or parts thereof, above ground level which allow the free flow of flood
water. Hydrodynamic loads are basically of the lateral type and relate to direct
impact loads by the moving mass of water, and to drag forces as the water flow
around the obstruction.
u. Hydrostatic Loads - means loads that are caused by water, either above or below
the ground surface, free if confined, which is either stagnant or moves at slow
velocities or up to 5’ per second. Hydrostatic pressures at any point are equal in all
directions and always are perpendicular to the surface on which they are applied
and are divided into the following types: Vertical Loads, Lateral Loads and Uplift.
v. Manufactured Home – means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and other similar vehicles
143
or transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred and eighty (180)
consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
w. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision – means a parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
x. Market Value – means the market value of the structure shall be determined by the
property’s tax assessment, minus land value; prior to the start of the initial repair or
improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the
damage occurring.
y. Mean Sea Level – means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide and
is to be considered elevation zero (“O”), North American Vertical Datum of 1988
is expressed and measured on a vertical scale that corresponds to 14.5 feet below
Town of Fairfield datum.
z. New Construction – Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on
or after the effective date of the initial firm, August 15, 1978, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
a.a. Pilings – means columnar support members which may be of any approved
type capable of resisting all applied loads and shall, as far as practicable, be
compact and free from unnecessary appendages which would trip or restrict
free passage of debris during a flood.
b.b. Regulatory Floodway – means the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
c.c. Recreational Vehicle – means a vehicle which is: (1) built on a single chassis
(2) 40 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections
(3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck
and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Recreational vehicles and similar transportable structures placed on a site for
180 consecutive days or longer shall be considered structures for the purpose
of this ordinance.
d.d. Riverine – means relating to, formed by or resembling a river, including
tributaries, stream, brook, creek.
e.e. Sand Dunes – means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
f.f. Start of Construction – (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act)(P.L. 97-348)
144
includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns,
or any work beyond the state of excavation or placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
g.g. Structure – means a walled and roofed building which is principally above
ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other
man-made facilities or infrastructures.
h.h. Substantial Damage – means damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
i.i. Substantial Improvement - means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement
of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure either (l) before the “start of construction” of the
improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and
is being restored, before the damage occurred. This term includes structures
that have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. For the purpose of this definition “substantial improvement” is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term shall include the
cumulative cost of any repairs, reconstruction or improvement for which less
than one year has transpired between issuance of a certificate of occupancy
and the issuance of a subsequent permit. The term does not, however, include
either (l) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
previously identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a
State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
145
j.j. Variance – means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management regulation that allows construction in a manner
otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in
unnecessary hardship.
k.k. Violation – Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway
encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
l.l. Water Surface Elevation – means the height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other datum, where specified) of floods
of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine
areas.
32.9 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this regulation and another
ordinance, regulation easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
32.10 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this regulation is considered the
minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering consideration and research. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
regulation does not imply or guarantee that land outside the Special Flood Hazard
Area or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding and flood damages.
This regulation shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Fairfield or by
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this regulation or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. The Town
of Fairfield, its officers and employees shall assume no liability for another person’s
reliance on any maps, data or information provided by the Town of Fairfield.
146
SECTION 37.0 – EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
37.1 General The disturbance of any area for development which is cumulatively more
than one half an acre, in any of the zoning districts of the Town, shall require an
erosion and sedimentation control plan certified by the Commission in accordance
with the provisions of this regulation.
37.2 Purpose The purpose of this regulation is to reduce the danger from storm water
runoff on any disturbed parcel and minimize non-point sediment pollution from land
being developed.
37.3 Exclusions A single family dwelling that is not a part of a subdivision of land shall
be exempt from the soil erosion and sediment control regulations.
37.4 Action by Commission The Plan and Zoning Commission shall either certify that the
soil erosion and sediment control plan as filed, complies with the requirements and
objectives of this regulation or deny certification when the development proposal does
not comply with these regulations.
37.5 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan To obtain certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil and Erosion and Sediment Control (1985) as amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
Application Before certification shall be granted, four copies of the plan shall be
submitted to the Town Plan and Zoning Commission with a certification fee and the
necessary information.
37.5.1 Maps and plans showing the following:
a. Location of the proposed development and adjacent properties.
b. Existing contour lines of the area to be developed and proposed contour lines
shown on a map drawn to a scale not less than one hundred feet to the inch and
with a contour interval not to exceed two feet.
c. Existing and proposed structures on the parcel.
d. Existing and any proposed fill material.
e. Existing rivers and their streams, ponds, lakes, reservoirs and watercourses.
147
f. Existing tidal and coastal wetlands, inland wetlands, salt and fresh water marshes
and flood plains.
g. Existing geographical features and vegetation.
h. Existing buildings and other structures within one hundred feet of the parcel.
i. Surrounding properties and streets.
j. Proposed alterations, including clearing, excavating, filling or grading.
k. Proposed location for utilities and roads, to include temporary roads used for
development purposes only.
l. Location and design for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures
and storm water management facilities.
37.5.2 A written statement describing the proposed development and including the
following:
a. Description of the proposed project.
b. Sequence of grading and construction activities.
c. Sequence for installing and applying soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures.
d. Sequence for final stabilization of the parcel.
e. Proposed time of completion of project and periods of operation.
f. Design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures, and
storm water management facilities.
g. Construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures,
and storm water management facilities.
h. Installation procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures,
and storm water management facilities.
i. Maintenance and operation procedures for proposed soil erosion, and sediment
control measures, and storm water management facilities.
148
37.5.3 The Commission may request such additional information it shall deem necessary to
decide this application.
37.5.4 The Commission may grant exemptions when requested by the applicant if in its
opinion exemption is deemed appropriate.
37.6 Certification The Plan and Zoning Commission may certify a soil and erosion plan,
if it finds that such plan will not result in soil erosion, sedimentation, drainage or
other flooding problems, pollution problems, depressed land values or create any
hazard to human environmental health, safety or welfare, or other conditions which
would impair the use of the property in accordance with the Zoning Regulations.
37.7 Alteration of Certification The Commission may alter a certification as provided for
in this section, if, in its opinion, such alteration is in harmony with the original intent
of the certification granted.
37.8 Bond The applicant may be required to file a performance bond with the Town Plan
and Zoning Commission.
37.8.1 Bonds Performance bonds shall be in a form and with surety acceptable to the
Commission, in such amount as the Commission shall deem sufficient to insure
the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the certification.
37.8.2 Release No such bond shall be released nor shall the applicant be deemed to have
complied with the certification provided for herein until the applicant has filed with
the Commission a written report from the Department of Public Works of the Town
of Fairfield that said requirements have been performed and that such bond be
released.
37.9 Revocation and Suspension A certification issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section may be revoked by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission, after notice in
writing for (1) violation of the requirements of certification, (2) violation of any provision of this section, or any other law or other regulation relating to the work
permitted, or, (3) the existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance or endangering the life or property of another.
37.9.1 Notice The notice shall describe the violation charged and may be either delivered
personally or deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage
prepaid, directed to the address appearing on the application.
37.9.2 Suspension Certification may be suspended by the Director of Public Works or
the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a period not to exceed 30 days. Notice of
suspension is to be presented to the Plan and Zoning Commission within 30 days.
The Commission shall direct such remedies as deemed appropriate. Certification for
any plan of development may be revoked by the Commission for due cause.
37.10 Enforcement Officer The Zoning Enforcement Officer or any persons designated and
149
authorized by the Town Plan and Zoning Commission shall inspect and enforce the
provisions of this section.
37.11 Civil Action In addition to any other provisions contained herein, the Town of
Fairfield, acting through the Selectman, Town Plan and Zoning Commission or the
Director of Public Works, may take such action as may be deemed advisable to
enforce any of the provisions of this section.
150
SECTION 38.0 – AMUSEMENT DEVICES
38.1 Definition For purposes of this section, amusement device shall mean any mechanical,
electric or electronic device used or designed to be operated for entertainment or as a
game of skill by the insertion of a piece of money, coin, token or other article into said
device or by paying money to have it activated. This definition does not include:
jukebox, rides, bowling alleys or any such device maintained within a residence for the
use of the occupants thereof and their guests.
38.2 Permitted Use It shall be unlawful in any District for any business, store, or other
commercial or industrial establishment to have on its premises for use by customers or
invitees more than two amusement devices except an Indoor Recreational Facility, as
defined in Section 31.2.7, which exceeds 10,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area may have in
excess of two amusement devices subject to an application to the Commission for a
certificate of zoning compliance under Section 2.22 of the zoning regulations and subject
to the design standards set forth in Section 38.3.
38.3 Design Standards
i. Amusement devices shall be an accessory use to an Indoor Recreational Facility;
ii. Amusement devices shall not occupy more than 5% of the gross floor area;
iii. No more than ten (10) amusement devices are permitted in an Indoor Recreational
Facility;
iv. The amusement devices shall only be operated during the hours that the principal use
is open for business;
v. No entrance to such building or premises on which the amusement devices are
located shall be within 200 feet from any entrance to a school or public library, and
vi. No one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in the Indoor
Recreational Facility unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
PURPOSE: To allow up to ten amusement devices in Indoor Recreational Facilities in excess of
10,000 square feet.
151
APPENDIX A
REQUIRED PARKING SPACE STRIPING
152
DESIGN STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING
Degree Parking
153
Herringbone Pattern
Truck Loading Berths and Apron Space
154
End of Aisle Configurations
Parallel Parking
NOTE: For Handicapped Spaces Refer to State Building Code
155
APPENDIX B
EFFECTIVE DATES
SECTION AMENDED TO:
1.0
2.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS 10-28-89
2.7 ACCESS AND REAR LOTS 7-24-94
2.7 (additional frontage requirements) 2-24-09, 9-10-13
2.12 FLOOD MANAGEMENT 5-11-10, 6-11-13
2.8.2.5 FLOOD ELEVATION RELIEF 6-11-13
2.17 PUBLIC TREES 7-8-14
2.23 PUBLIC HEARING AND DECISION 7-24-94
2.23 PUBLIC HEARING AND DECISION 2-8-11
2.23.6 TIME LIMITS 1-23-92
2.33.1 PENALTIES (violation notice) 11-17-06
2.33.2 PENALTIES (violation notice) 11-17-06
2.44 AFFORDABLE HOUSING 11-17-06
5.0 REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 6-06-91
5.1.2 LEASING OF ROOM + HOME OCCUPATIONS 7-24-94
5.1.3 NURSERIES, TRUCK GARDENS AND FARMS 7-24-94
5.1.4c) ASSISTED LIVING 1-12-99
5.1.4f) CHILD DAYCARE CENTER 4-13-99
5.1.5 ACCESSORY USES 7-24-94
5.1.5a ACCESSORY USES (RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT) 3-04-97
5.2.1 ACCESS (additional frontage requirements) 2-24-09, 9-10-13
5.2.2 HEIGHT (A, B, C Zones) 2 ½ stories 11-17-07
5.2.5 TOTAL FLOOR AREA (AAA) 3-14-02
5.2.5.1 COVERAGE AND BULK 11-13-93
5.2.5.2 COVERAGE AND BULK (AAA) 3-14-02
5.2.5.3 COVERAGE AND BULK (TOWN R3) 12-14-10
6.0 ACCESSORY APARTMENTS 6-14-86
6.3.2 Reduce to 450 sq ft 1-20-10
6.3.3 ) 10-12-91
6.3.6 ) PROVISIONS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING 10-12-91
6.4.3 ) 10-12-91
10.0 DESIGNED RESIDENCE DISTRICT 4-16-88
10.3 PINE TREE DEV. 10-7-14
10.4 SPECIAL PERMIT USES (HOME OCCUPATIONS) 7-24-94
10.4(2)a ACCESSORY USES (DESIGNED RESIDENCE
DISTRICT) 3-04-97
156
SECTION Amended to:
10.6.7 DENSITY 3-29-03
10.6.7 “(transit oriented dev) 5-3-11
10.6.9) 2-01-92
10.6.9 Affordable Housing Committee amends. 9-8-15
10.6.10 AFFORDABLE DENSITY (reference to 8-30g) 11-18-06, 9-8-15
10.6.11 ELDERLY DENSITY 3-29-03 , 1-27-06
10.6.12 8-30-08
10.6.13 PINE TREE DENSITY 10-7-14
10.7.1 ACCESS FOR ELDERLY HOUSING 5-13-00, 10-7-14
10.7.2 Transit oriented development 5-3-11
10.7.3 Frontage for DID underlying 5/23/17
10.9.3 Pine Tree amends. 10-7-14
10.10 SETBACK (10.6.12 set-aside development) 8-30-08
10.10(5) ELDERLY SETBACK 3-29-03, 1-27-06
10.10 SETBACKS Pine Tree 10-7-14
10.10.1 SETBACK BETWEEN BUILDINGS (set-aside) 8-30-08
10.12) PROVISIONS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING 2-01-92
10.12 COVERAGE AND BULK (DID elderly) 3-29-03, 1-27-06
10.12 COVERAGE AND BULK (10.6.12 set-aside) 8-30-08
10.13 FLOOR AREA Pine Tree 10-7-14
10.17) PROVISIONS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING 2-01-92
10.17.3 BEDROOMS (10.6.12. set-aside) 8-30-08, 9-8-15, 10-7-14
10.17.5 AFFORDABILTY PLAN (reference to 8-30g) 11-18-06, 9-8-15
11.0 BEACH DISTRICT 9-01-89
11.1.2 CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS 7-24-94
11.1.4.1 ACCESSORY USES (BEACH DISTRICT) 3-04-97
11.7 EXTRA HEIGHT FOR FLOOD ELEVATION 6-11-13
12.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED BUSINESS 6-10-87
DISTRICTS
12.2 SPECIAL PERMIT USES 6-27-92
12.3 VETERINARY HOSPITALS 6-25-96
12.10 ARCHITECTURAL AND COMMUNITY APPEARANCE 9-18-08
12.2 FORMULA NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS 7-14-07
12.3.9 ) REVISIONS TO DRY CLEANERS AND 7-24-94 12.3.10) 7-24-94
12.4.9 ) SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES 7-24-94
12.4.10 ) 7-24-94
12.4.18 Transit Oriented Dev. 5-3-11
12.4.28.7 Dog Day Care 8-25-15
12.5.1 ART STUDIO 4-27-10
12.5.1 ART GALLERIES 6-26-12
157
SECTION Amended to:
12.5.1 DRIVING SCHOOLS 5/26/15
12.5.2 OFFICE USE 4,000 SQ FT LIMIT 1-8-13
12.5.4 ) 7-24-94
12.5….. VARIOUS USES 4,000 SQ FT LIMIT 7-14-07
12.3.17) 10-12-91
12.4.19) PROVISION FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING 10-12-91
12.5.6 ) 10-12-91
12.3.16) 7-01-89
12.4.18) DWELLING UNIT SIZE FOR ELDERLY 7-01-89
12.5.5 ) 7-01-89
12.4.28.6)
12.5.17.6) ASSISTED LIVING 1-12-99
12.5.1 ART STUDIO 4-27-10
12.5.9 PACKAGE STORES 1,500 SQ FT LIMIT 4-25-17
12.5.16 VETERINARY HOSPITALS 5-26-90
12.5.17.5 DANCE STUDIOS 1-23-92
12.7.4 HEIGHT (Des. Comm. flood zone) 5-16-09
12.7.5.2 TOTAL FLOOR AREA LIMIT 14,000 1-8-13
12.9 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 7-07-88
13.0 REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCE DRIVE DES. DIST. 5-3-11
21.0 REGULATIONS FOR DESIGNED INDUSTRIAL 10-28-89
DISTRICT
21.2 PERMITTED USES 6-27-94
21.2.13 FARM MARKETS 11-18-14
21.10 COVERAGE AND BULK 7-24-94
21.13 OFF STREET PARKING (exception) 2-10-09
21.16 TRANSPORTATION/COMMERCIAL PARK 10-19-02
21.16.7 PARKING AND LOADING (80% exception) 7-29-05
21.16.10.2 Height (15 feet above average grade) 7-29-05
22.0 DESIGNED RESEARCH DISTRICT 3-31-90
22.2.1 PERMITTED USES 8-18-90
22.2.2 PERMITTED USES 8-18-90
22.9 COVERAGE AND BULK 7-24-94
23.0 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT 8-31-91
23.3.1 NURSERIES,TRUCK GARDENS, AND FARMS 7-24-94
24.0 LAND EXCAVATION AND FILL REGULATIONS 10-28-89
24.4.4 EXEMPTION 7-24-94
25.0 SPECIAL PERMITS IN DESIGNED DISTRICTS 10-28-89
158
SECTION Amended to:
25.2.2.8 LANDSCAPE PLAN 7-8-14
25.2.2.9 BIKE / PED PLAN 6-10-14
25.2.5 STAMPED ENVELOPES 2-24-09
25.7.9 INCLUSIONARY PROV. FOR AFF. HOUSING 9-8-15
25.8.1.4 STAMPED ENVELOPES 2-24-09
26.0 OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION PLANS 8-31-91
27.0 SPECIAL EXCEPTION REGULATIONS 10-28-89
27.1 GENERAL 7-24-94
27.4.6 CERTIFICATE OF NEED 5-31-08
27.4.9 ASSISTED LIVING 1-12-99
28.0 REGULATIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING 6-10-87
28.2 PURPOSE STATEMENT 1-8-13
28.4 PARKING SPACE 10-19-02
28.4 DOUBLE STRIPING REQUIREMENT (Appendix a) 1-8-13
28.6a BICYCLE PARKING 5-3-11
28.6.1 RESIDENTIAL PARKING 6-02-88
28.6.1 RES. PARKING (Trans. Oriented) 5-3-11
28.6.1 RES PARKING (driveway spaces) 1-8-13
28.6.1 RES PARKING (Pine Tree) 10-7-14
28.6.5 MEDICAL OFFICE (>100,000 sq. ft.) 11-17-01
28.6.6 OTHER BUSINESSES & PROFESSIONAL OFFICES 10-19-02
& POST OFFICES
28.6.8 GASOLINE FILLING STATIONS 1-23-92
28.6.12 RESTAURANTS 7-02-94
28.6.12 NO PARKING FOR 150 FT OF OUTDOOR DINING 1-8-13
28.9 SHARED ACCESS 10-27-01
28.9a JOINT USAGE 2-11-97, 10-27-01*
28.10 CONSTRUCTION 7-02-94
28.10 CONSTRUCTION (Storm Water Quality) 1-8-13
28.10.1 ENCLOSURE 4-21-90
28.11.3 SHADE TREES 7-02-94, 7-8-14
28.11.4 LIGHTING 1-8-13
28.11.5 PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES 1-8-13
159
SECTION Amended to:
29.0 REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS 1-12-91
29.5.1 DEFINITIONS 11-10-98
29.7 EXEMPTIONS 7-24-94
29.12 HEIGHT 11-10-98
29.8.4 WINDOW SIGN (illumination prohibited) 1-8-13
29.8.9 CONTINUOUS STRIP LIGHTING 7-24-94
29.13 DESIGN CRITERIA 11-10-98
30.0 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE 2-16-93
31.0 DEFINITIONS 9-26-92
31.2.3 AFFORDABLE HOUSING (reference to 8-30g) 11-18-06
31.2.6 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE 7-24-94
31.2.13 ELDERLY FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS 11-12-96
31.2.15 FLOOR AREA REQUIREMENTS (reduction to 7’) 11-17-07
31.2.16 HEIGHT (reference points for measure) 4-15-05
31.2.16 HEIGHT (exception fro trans./comm.. park) 7-29-05
31.2.17 INDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 6-25-96
31.2.21 LOT AREA AND SHAPE 1-17-98, 1-12-99, 6-8-99, 10-27-01, 2-24-09
31.2.28 REAR LOT (add “an improved” before public street) 2-24-09
31.2.35 STORY 11-17-07, 6-11-13
31.2.40 ASSISTED LIVING 1-12-99
31.2.41 FORMULA NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS 7-14-07
31.2.43 PINE TREE DEV. 10-7-14
32.0 FLOOD PROTECTION 5-11-10
37.0 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 9-26-85
38.0 AMUSEMENT DEVICES 6-25-96
*Section changed from 28.9 to 28.9a (no content change)

