
Hamden, CT Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-22 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 698, passed 2-26-18



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TOWN OFFICIALS
OF
HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT




HAMDEN MEMORIAL TOWN HALL
HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT  06518
TELEPHONE:  (203)  287-2500




 


2017-2019



MAYOR
 
Curt Balzano Leng


TOWN CLERK
 
Vera Morrison


TOWN ATTORNEY
 
Susan Gruen



 



 




LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL



COUNCIL PRESIDENT
 
Michael McGarry


COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE
 
Lauren Garrett


COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE
 
Marjorie Bonadies


COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE
 
John DeRosa


COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE
 
Michael McGarry


COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE
 
Elizabeth S. Wetmore


COUNCILMEMBER-AT-LARGE
 
Berita Rowe-Lewis


FIRST DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
Jody Clouse


SECOND DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
Harry Gagliardi, Jr.


THIRD DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
Athena Gary


FOURTH DISTRIC COUNCILMEMBER
 
Eric Annes


FIFTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
Justin Farmer


SIXTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
Cody O’Brien


SEVENTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
Michael L. Colaiacovo,  Jr.


EIGHTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
James Pascarella


NINTH DISTRICT COUNCILMEMBER
 
Brad Macdowall


CLERK OF THE COUNCIL
 
Kimberly Renta


 
 
 




 



CHARTER
OF THE
TOWN OF HAMDEN
Connecticut



[IMAGE]



 



 



Hon. Scott D. Jackson
Mayor



 



Hon. Vera Morrison
Town Clerk



 



Adopted by the electors of the Town of Hamden
and effective thereupon, November 8, 2011



PREAMBLE



CHAPTER I:  CONSTRUCTION OF THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF HAMDEN



   Section 1-1:   Title



   Section 1-2:   Definitions and Titles Generally



   Section 1-3:   Time of Appointments and Meetings Generally



   Section 1-4:   Definitions



CHAPTER II:  INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS



   Section 2-1:   Territory



   Section 2-2:   Incorporation



   Section 2-3:   General Grant of Powers



   Section 2-4:   Continuance of Rights and Obligations



CHAPTER III:  ELECTIONS, ELECTORS, ELECTED OFFICIALS AND TERMS OF OFFICE



   Section 3-1:   Application of the General Statutes



   Section 3-2:   Electors



   Section 3-3:   Date of Election and Terms of Office for Elected
Offices



   Section 3-4:   Eligibility



   Section 3-5:   Vacancies in Elected Offices



   Section 3-6:   Temporary Disability or Absence of the Mayor



   Section 3-7:   Reapportionment of Voting Districts



   Section 3-8:   Public Officials to Deliver Records to Successors



   Section 3-9:   Conflict of Interest and Ethics



   Section 3-10:   Removal of Elected and Appointed Officials



CHAPTER IV:  LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL



   Section 4-1:   Legislative Power



   Section 4-2:   Officers of the Council



   Section 4-3:   Procedures of the Legislative Council - Public
Participation in Council Proceedings



   Section 4-4:   Clerk of the Council



   Section 4-5:   General Powers



   Section 4-6:   Counsel to Council



   Section 4-7:   Ordinances, Statutory Resolutions, Resolutions,
Orders or Motions: the Role of the Legislative Council and the Mayor



   Section 4-8:   Public Notice of Final Action



   Section 4-9:   Petition for Overrule



   Section 4-10:   Selection of Independent Auditors



   Section 4-11:   Approval of Mayoral Appointments



   Section 4-12:   Interlocal Agreements and Regional Cooperation



CHAPTER V:  THE MAYOR



   Section 5-1:   Election and Qualifications



   Section 5-2:   Duties



   Section 5-3:   Appointments, Terms of Office and General Powers



   Section 5-4:   Appointments to Boards and Commissions



   Section 5-5:   Emergency Powers



CHAPTER VI:  OTHER ELECTED OFFICIALS



   Section 6-1:   Town Clerk



   Section 6-2:   Registrars of Voters



CHAPTER VII:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



   Section 7-1:   General Requirements for Appointed Boards and
Commissions



   Section 7-2:   Boards and Commissions Established by the Charter



         A.   Civil Service Commission



         B.   Board of Ethics



         C.   Police Commission



         D.   Fire Commission



         E.   Zoning Board of Appeals



         F.   Planning and Zoning Commission



         G.   Building Board of Appeals



         H.   Personnel Appeals Board



         I.   Library Board



         J.   Inland Wetlands Commission



   Section 7-3:   Appointed Boards and Commissions Required by the
Charter



   Section 7-4:   Appointed Boards and Commissions Established by
Ordinance or as Otherwise May Be Prescribed by the General Statutes



   Section 7-5:   Boards Appointed by the Legislative Council



         A.   Board of Assessment Appeals



   Section 7-6:   Continuance of Boards and Commissions



   Section 7-7:   Merger or Consolidation of Boards and Commissions



CHAPTER VIII:  THE TOWN GOVERNMENT: DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS



   Section 8-1:   The Authority to Establish the Departments of Town
Government



   Section 8-2:   Appointment of Department Heads and Other Mayoral
Departmental Appointees; General Requirements



   Section 8-3:   The Legal Department - Town Attorney



   Section 8-4:   Government Administration



         A.   The Department of Finance



         B.   The Tax Collector



         C.   The Assessor



         D.   The Purchasing Agent



         E.   Personnel and Human Resources



   Section 8-5:   Public Safety, Health and Community Services



         A.   The Police Department



         B.   The Fire Department



         C.   The Health District



         D.   Community Services



   Section 8-6:   Government Operations and Infrastructure



         A.   Department of Public Works and Parks



         B.   Engineering Department



   Section 8-7:   Town Planning, Zoning Enforcement, Environment and
Economic Development



         A.   Town Planning and Zoning Enforcement
Responsibilities



         B.   Building Department



         C.   The Town Planning and Zoning Department



         D.   Other Departments



CHAPTER IX:  EDUCATION



   Section 9-1:   Board of Education



   Section 9-2:   Budget



CHAPTER X:  BUDGET



   Section 10-1:   Formulation and Submission of Town Budgetary Requests



   Section 10-2:   The Mayor, and the Director of Finance and the Budget



   Section 10-3:   Legislative Action on the Proposed Town Budget



   Section 10-4:   Approval, Veto, Acceptance and Veto Override of the
Adopted Town Budget



   Section 10-5:   Petition for Budget Overrule



   Section 10-6:   Fiscal Year



   Section 10-7:   Expenditures and Accounting



   Section 10-8:   Public Funds and Finance



   Section 10-9:   Referendum on Borrowing of Funds



CHAPTER XI:  TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



   Section 11-1:   Legal Proceedings



   Section 11-2:   Periodic Review of the Charter



   Section 11-3:   Existing Laws and Ordinances



   Section 11-4:   Amendment of Charter



   Section 11-5:   Saving Clause



   Section 11-6:   Effective Date



   Section 11-7:   "Transition Provision A" Pertaining to § 3-3.B(2)
of this Charter - The General Election Scheduled for 2012



   Section 11-8:   "Transition Provision B" Pertaining to § 3-3.C(3)
of this Charter - The Term of Office for the Registrars of Voter Elected in
the General Election Scheduled for 2012



   Section 11-9:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
Regular Members of the Board of Ethics Derived from § 19-5.A of the Prior
Revision of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-10:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
Alternate Members of the Board of Ethics Derived from § 19-5.A of the Prior
Revision of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-11:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
Regular Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission Derived from § 13-1 of
the Prior Revision of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-12:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
Alternate Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission Derived from § 13-2
of the Prior Revision of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-13:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
Members of the Personnel Appeals Board Derived from § 17-5 of the Prior
Revision of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-14:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
Members of the Library Board Derived from § 14-1 of the Prior Revision of
the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-15:   "Transition Provision E" Pertaining to § 7-2.J of
this Charter - The Inland Wetlands Commission



   Section 11-16:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
Members of the Board of Tax Review Derived from § 4-1 of the Prior Revision
of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-17:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
the Six Members of the Board of Education Derived from § 12-1 of the Prior
Revision of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



   Section 11-18:   Historical Note Regarding the Term of Office for
the Three Members of the Board of Education Derived from § 12-1 of the Prior
Revision of the Charter (Rev. November 8, 1983)



CHAPTER XII:  SUNSET PROVISIONS



   Section 12-1:   Generally



   Section 12-2:   Ethics Commission



   Section 12-3:   Parks and Recreation Commission



CHAPTER XIII:  HISTORICAL PROVISIONS



   Section 13-1:   Status of Present Employees



PREAMBLE



   Hamden's strength, inclusiveness, and innovation are the foundation of
our community.  To ensure our continued growth and that future generations
reap the rewards of our unique spirit, we embrace the provisions of this
Charter which is a blueprint for ethical, professional, and honest
government.  The words of this Charter create structures designed to meet
the needs of the people, conserve our natural and public resources, make
efficient use of technology and enhance our economy.  To these ends, and in
recognition of the sacrifices by those who came before us and by those who
will follow us on this journey of self-governance, we, the Electors of the
Town of Hamden, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 99 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended, do approve this Charter for the Town of Hamden.



   Adopted by the Electors of the Town of Hamden - November 8, 20111



                                       



1   General Historic Note:  This version of the Charter replaces the
Charter that was amended on November 8, 1983.  The 1983 Charter was the most
recent revision of the original Charter which was effective, January 1,
1966.  The amended and revised Charter was recommended to the Legislative
Council by the Charter Revision Commission on July 21, 2011.  The Commission
was comprised of the following members:  Rev. K. Dexter Cheney, Chair;
Michele Mastropetre, Vice Chair; Cherie Gabrielle Phoenix, Secretary;
Jennifer Cutrali; Richard DePodesta; Laura Freebairn-Smith; James A. O'Brien;
Richard Reilly; and, Walter Rochow.  Attorney Steven G. Mednick and Kimberly
Renta, served as Special Counsel and Clerk, respectively. 



The Legislative Council approved the proposed Charter on  August 1, 2011. 
The Legislative Council was comprised of the following members:  James J.
Pascarella, President;  Michael R. Colaiacovo, Jr., President pro tempore;
Kathleen M. Schomaker, Majority leader; Raeann Curtis, Minority leader; At
Large Representatives  Al Gorman, Jack Kennelly, Carol I. Noble and
Elizabeth S. Wetmore; and, District Representatives Michael W. Iezzi, Gabriel
I. Lupo, Oswald Brown, David R. Hennigan, R. Thomas Rousseau, John J. DeRosa
and Lynn D. Campo. 



The electors of the Town of Hamden approved the amended and revised Charter
on November 8, 2011.



CHAPTER I:  CONSTRUCTION OF THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF HAMDEN



SECTION 1-1:  TITLE.



   The title of this Act shall be the "Charter of the Town of Hamden".



SECTION 1-2:  DEFINITIONS AND TITLES GENERALLY.



   The definitions contained in the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut shall govern the interpretation of this Charter; unless otherwise
defined herein.  Articles and Sections are for the purpose of ready
reference and shall not be held to limit, extend or effect the interpretation
and meaning of the text.



SECTION 1-3:  TIME OF APPOINTMENTS AND MEETINGS GENERALLY.



   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, any appointment to office
or election by the Legislative Council to fill a Vacancy required herein to
be made on or before a certain Day shall be, if made after that Day, as valid
and effective as if made on the Day specified.  If the day on which any
meeting specified to be held shall be a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday,
the meeting shall be held on the first business day following.  Any meeting
required by this Charter to be held on a certain Day shall be deemed, for all
purposes, to be a regular meeting.  The Mayor shall designate the place of
all meetings provided for in this Charter, unless the place of meeting is
specified herein or fixed by Ordinance.  However, in the absence of any such
designation by the Mayor, the person responsible for convening the meeting
shall designate the place thereof.



SECTION 1-4:  DEFINITIONS.



   Whenever used in this Charter:



   A.   "Board" or "Commission".  For the purpose of this Charter and
except as otherwise provided by Law, the terms "Board" and "Commission" shall
include all Boards, agencies, Commissions, authorities or like entities of
the Town, whether elected or appointed.



   B.   "Capital Expenditures" means expenditures for (1) any physical
betterment or improvement or any preliminary studies or surveys relative
thereto; (2) the acquisition of real property or other property of a
permanent nature; (3) the purchase or acquisition of equipment for any public
betterment or improvement; (4) major alterations and repairs to existing
buildings, structures or equipment; or (5) any lease which commits the Town
to more than one year of aggregate payments in an amount set by the
Legislative Council, from time to time.



   C.   "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Town of Hamden.



   D.   "Classified Service" means the employees of the Town, covered
by the Merit System of the Town (including civil service rules and
regulations) appointed to all positions now or hereafter created except those
positions excluded by this Charter (or collective bargaining agreement),
Elected Officials or other Officials whose appointments and terms are
prescribed by the General Statutes, and such other positions as the Civil
Service Commission may determine, after investigation, to be within an area
intended for exclusion from the classified service.



   E.   "Completion of Service" means the end of employment in the
position in any manner whatsoever, including but not limited to retirement,
resignation, removal, termination, whether for cause or at will, under the
provisions of this Charter, collective bargaining or contract.



   F.   "Council" or "Legislative Council" means the Legislative
Council of the Town, the legislative body of the municipality, as required by
the General Statutes.



   G.   "Day(s)" means calendar days; unless, otherwise specifically
set forth in this Charter.  Moreover, where a Day set forth in this Charter
falls on a weekend, holiday or day when the Town is closed for business, the
deadline shall be extended through the close of the next Town business day;
unless otherwise required by law.



   H.   "Department" means any major functional or administrative
division of the Town, including any offices, agencies, bureaus or other
descriptions serving such purpose as may be set forth in the budget of the
Town.  When used within the section establishing or describing the duties of
the particular department or its related Board or Commission, the term
"Department" shall apply exclusively to the functional division referred to
in that section.



   I.   "Department Head" means an employee who heads any Department in
the Town; has substantial supervisory control of a permanent nature over
other municipal employees; and, is directly accountable to the Mayor.



   J.   "Elected Official" or "Elected Official of the Town" means an
individual who holds an elected municipal office (as defined in C.G.S.  §
9-372 but shall not include a justice of the peace or notary public) in the
Town.  The Elected Officials of the Town are set forth in § 3-3.A(1) of
this Charter.



   K.   "Elector" shall have the meaning contained in the General
Statutes.



   L.   "Final Action" means the last acts taken by the Mayor or the
Legislative Council on an Ordinance or other measure that requires mayoral
and legislative action under the provisions of §§ 4-7.B or 4-7.C of this
Charter; and, §§ 10-4.A(1)(a) or (b) or 10-4.A(2) of this Charter.  Final
Action with regard to Resolutions, with the exception of Statutory
Resolutions, shall be upon approval by a Majority Vote of the Legislative
Council.



   M.   "General Statutes" shall mean the General Statutes of the State
of Connecticut, as amended from time to time.



   N.   "Law" includes, but is not limited to, decisions of courts and
administrative bodies, federal or state legislative enactments, rules and
regulations and local ordinances and regulations.



   O.   "Majority Vote of the Legislative Council" means more than half
of the votes have been cast by the members at a meeting of the Council at
which a quorum is present.



   P.   "Mayor" shall mean the chief executive officer of the
municipality, as required by the General Statutes.



   Q.   "Meeting (or Hearing) Notice" means a notice posted as required
by the General Statutes, including posting of regular meetings with the
Office of the Secretary of the State and the Town Clerk, as well the
requirement pertaining to special and emergency meetings as well as public
hearings.  In addition to the above-referenced postings, the Town may post
notices on its web-site or through other electronic media and, if practicable
or otherwise required by Law, may be published in a daily newspaper of
general circulation distributed in the Town.  A Meeting Notice (including
public hearings) shall state the time and place thereof and shall be
published at a minimum in compliance with the General Statutes or by a more
stringent requirement as may be set forth in this Charter.  Meeting or
Hearing Notice may also be governed by regulatory practices and procedures
set forth in the General Statutes.



   R.   "Merit System" shall mean the Civil Service and Merit System of
the Town, as required by this Charter and set forth in the Ordinances of the
Town.



   S.   "Official" or "Public Official" means an individual who holds
an elected or appointed municipal office in the Town; including but not
limited to Elected Officials of the Town; employees appointed subject to §
8-2.A of this Charter; and, members of Boards and Commissions.  "Appointed
Public Officials" shall include all Public Officials to the exclusion of
Elected Public Officials.  When the term "officer" is used, it shall be
synonymous with the term "Official".



   T.   "Order" or "Motion" means a legislative action conferring
authority to do a specified act, including, but not limited to, the approval
of Mayoral appointments, proposed contracts or other matters upon which are
conferred temporary power or authority which when its purpose has been
accomplished it ceases to require further authority.  Orders and Motions
shall be enacted in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.



   U.   "Ordinances" or "Ordinances of the Town" shall mean the powers
of the Town to (1) establish rules or regulations of general municipal
application, the violation of which may result in the imposition of a fine or
other penalty; (2) create a permanent local law of general applicability; or
(3) accomplish other objectives permitted by the General Statutes as may be
enacted in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.



   V.   "Public Notice" means a notice for matters other than public
meetings or hearings, including the public inspection or availability of any
documents or data, as may be required by this Charter.  It specifically
includes matters where "publication" was required under the prior Charter or
the General Statutes.  Said Public Notice shall be specifically set forth in
this Charter or may be governed by the requirements of the General
Statutes.  Public Notice may be posted (1) in the Office of the Town Clerk
and other public space or location in the Town Hall designated by the Town
Clerk in order to assure sufficient disclosure to and access by the public;
(2) in the central Town Library (and each branch of the Town Library); (3) on
the Town web-site or through other electronic media; and, (4) if otherwise
required by Law, by publication in a daily newspaper of general circulation
distributed in the Town.



   W.   "Resolution" means an action by the Legislative Council that
(1) expresses the sentiment or intent of the Council; (2) governs the
business of the Council; (3) expresses recognition by the Council; or, (4)
complies with the specific requirements of the General Statutes with regard
to certain legislative enactments.  A declaratory statement of the Council
on a given matter.



   X.    "Special Acts" or "Special Laws" shall mean the acts of the
General Assembly pertinent to the Town.



   Y.   "State" or "Connecticut" shall mean the State of Connecticut.



   Z.   "State Constitution" shall mean the Constitution of the State
of Connecticut.



   AA.   "Statutory Resolution" means a necessary legislative action
required by General Statutes in order to utilize the provisions of State
enabling legislation.  Statutory Resolutions shall be enacted in the same
manner as an Ordinance under the provisions of this Charter".



   BB.   "Town" shall mean the Town of Hamden.



   CC.   "Vacancy" or, in the alternative the use of the word "Vacant"
means whenever any Official of the Town, including Registrars of Voters, is
unable to complete the current term of office due to death, resignation,
removal, incapacity or other reason as may be defined by Ordinance.



   DD.   Where reference is made to "Action to be taken by a Department
Head," the specified action may be taken by that Department Head or a
designee.



   EE.   Where reference is made to "Mayor or designee," the identity
of the designee shall at all times be determined, in the sole discretion, of
the Mayor.



CHAPTER II:  INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS



SECTION 2-1:  TERRITORY.



   The territorial limits of the body politic and corporate under the name
of "The Town of Hamden" shall include all the land and territory situated
within the said Town.



SECTION 2-2:  INCORPORATION.



   All the Electors of this State, dwelling within the said limits, shall
continue to be a body politic and corporate by the name of the Town of Hamden
and by that name they and their successors shall have perpetual succession
and may hold and exercise all powers and privileges heretofore exercised by
the Town of Hamden and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter,
the additional powers and privileges herein conferred and all powers and
privileges conferred upon towns under the State Constitution and the General
Statutes.



SECTION 2-3:  GENERAL GRANT OF POWERS.



   A.   In addition to all powers granted to municipalities under the
State Constitution and the General Statutes, or which may hereinafter be
conferred, the Town shall have all powers:



      (1)   specifically granted by this Charter and all powers
fairly implied in or incidental to the powers expressly granted by the State
to the management of the property, government and affairs of the Town,
including the power to enter into contracts with the United States Government
or any agency thereof, the State or any agency or any political subdivision
thereof for services and the use of facilities, the exercise of which is set
forth by Law;



      (2)   conferred by the Special Acts, which the Town deems to
be of continued applicability; and,



      (3)   now granted or that may hereafter be granted to
municipalities under the State Constitution or the General Statutes.



   B.   The enumeration of particular powers in this and of any other
chapter of this Charter shall not be construed as limiting this general grant
of power but shall be considered as an addition thereto.  Said Town shall
exercise all the rights, powers, privileges, functions and jurisdiction
essential to a proper exercise of its corporate functions, including all that
may be necessarily incident to, or may be fairly implied from, the powers
specifically conferred upon this corporation.



SECTION 2-4:  CONTINUANCE OF RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS.



   A.   All property, both real and personal, all rights of action and
rights of every description and all securities and liens vested or inchoate,
in said Town as of the effective date of this Charter are continued in said
Town and said Town shall continue to be liable for all debts of every kind
for which said Town shall be liable on said date, whether accrued or not.



   B.   Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the rights of said
Town to collect any assessment, charge, debt or lien.



   C.   If any contract has been entered into by said Town prior to the
effective date of this Charter or any bond or undertaking has been given by
or in favor of said Town which contains a provision that the same may be
enforced by any Commission, Board, Department or Official therein named,
which is abolished by the provisions of this Charter, such contracts, bonds
or undertakings shall be in no manner impaired but shall continue in full
force and effect and the powers conferred and the duties imposed with
reference to the same upon any such Commission, Board, Department or Official
shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, thereafter be exercised
and discharged by the Mayor of said Town.



   D.   The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed
upon any Commission, Board, Department or Official under the General Statutes
or special acts concerning the Town or any Ordinance or regulation in force
at the time this Charter shall take effect, shall, unless otherwise provided
in this Charter, thereafter be exercised and discharged by the Commission,
Board, Department or Official upon which are imposed such powers and duties
under the provisions of this Charter.



   E.   All Commissions, Boards, Departments or offices abolished by
this Charter, whether elected or appointed, shall continue in the performance
of their duties until provisions shall have been made for the discontinuance
of such Commissions, Boards, Departments or offices and until the Mayor shall
have notified the members of such Commissions, Boards, Departments or offices
as are abolished by this Charter that their successors have been appointed.



   F.   All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any
Commission, Board, Department or Official or part thereof, all the powers and
duties of which are assigned to any other Commission, Board, Department or
Official by this Charter, shall be transferred and delivered intact to the
Commission, Board, Department or Official to which such powers and duties are
so assigned.



   G.   If part of the powers and duties of any Commission, Board,
Department or office or part thereof are by this Charter assigned to another
Commission, Board, Department or office, all records, property and equipment
relating exclusively thereto shall be transferred and delivered intact to the
Commission, Board, Department or office to which such powers and duties are
so assigned.



CHAPTER III:  ELECTIONS, ELECTORS, ELECTED OFFICIALS AND TERMS OF OFFICE



SECTION 3-1:  APPLICATION OF THE GENERAL STATUTES.



   The General Statutes, as amended from time to time, relating to
elections, including, without limitation, residency requirements and
nomination of candidates, shall be applicable to all elections held in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter. The Legislative Council shall
provide by Ordinance for the manner of warning (or notice) of municipal
elections and such additional regulations in respect of elections, not
inconsistent with the General Statutes or this Charter, as may be necessary
to accomplish the intent of this chapter.  The nomination and elections of
all Federal, State and Town elected officials shall be conducted as
prescribed by the General Statutes.



SECTION 3-2:  ELECTORS.



   A.   Each Elector of this State who shall reside within the limits
of the Town upon the date of any election, and who shall be qualified to vote
therein, shall be an Elector of the Town.  All such Electors whose names are
legally registered on the list of voters shall be entitled to vote at such
elections.



   B.   The Registrars of Voters shall prepare lists of Electors
qualified to vote therefore, in the manner prescribed by the State
Constitution, the General Statutes and any Special Acts applicable to the
Town.



SECTION 3-3:  DATE OF ELECTION AND TERMS OF OFFICE FOR ELECTED OFFICES.



   A.   Commencement of the Term of Office.



      (1)   Elected Officials.  The Elected Town Officials are: (a)
Mayor; (b) Town Clerk; (c) Fifteen (15) Members of the Legislative Council
(six (6) At-Large and one member from each of the nine (9) voting districts);
and (d) Nine (9) members of the Board of Education. The Registrars of Voters
are also considered to be Elected Officials.



      (2)   Municipal Offices (including Board of Education).  The
terms of all Elected Officials declared elected hereunder shall commence at
twelve noon on the last Sunday of November following their election and until
their respective successors have been chosen and qualified.



      (3)   State Office - Registrars of Voters.  The terms of the
Registrars of Voters shall commence on the date set forth in the General
Statutes.



   B.   Date of Election of Elected Officials.



      (1)   Municipal Offices.  Except as hereinafter provided, on
the first Tuesday after the first Monday,



         (a)   in November 2013 and in the odd numbered years
thereafter, as the term of office shall fall (as set forth in § 3-3.C (1) of
this Charter), the Electors of the Town shall elect, in accordance with the
provisions of the General Statutes and the applicable provisions of this
Charter, the following officers:  (i) Mayor; (ii) Town Clerk; (iii) Members
of the Legislative Council (six (6) At-Large and nine (9) District
Representatives); and, (iv) Six (6) members of the Board of Education; and,



         (b)   in November 2015 and in the odd numbered years
thereafter, as the term of office shall fall (as set forth in §3-3.C of this
Charter), the Electors of the Town shall elect, in accordance with the
provisions of the General Statutes and the applicable provisions of this
Charter, three (3) members of the Board of Education.



      (2)   State Office - Registrars of Voters.  On the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2014 and in the even numbered
years thereafter as the term of office shall fall (as set forth in § 3-3.C
(3) of this Charter), the Electors of the Town shall elect, in accordance
with the provisions of the General Statutes and the applicable provisions of
this Charter, Registrars of Voters (Transition Provision A: See, § 11-7 of
this Charter pertaining to the transitional election scheduled for 2012).



   C.   Term of Office.



      (1)   Four Year Term:  Members of the Board of Education. 
Commencing at twelve noon on the last Sunday of November following the
election of six members in 2013 (for those set forth in § 3-3.B(1)(a)(iv) of
this Charter) and three members in 2015 (for those set forth in §
3-3.B(1)(b) of this Charter) and quadrennially thereafter, Members of the
Board of Education, shall hold their respective offices for a term of four
(4) years.



      (2)   Two Year Term: The Mayor, Town Clerk and Members of the
Legislative Council. Commencing at twelve noon on the last Sunday of November
following their election in 2013 and biennially thereafter, the Mayor, Town
Clerk and Members of the Legislative Council shall hold their respective
offices for a term of two (2) years.



      (3)   Four Year Term:  Registrars of Voters.  Commencing at
twelve noon on the last Sunday of November following their election in 2014
and quadrennially thereafter, the Registrars of Voters shall hold their
respective offices for a term of four (4) years (Transition Provision B: See,
§ 11-8 of this Charter pertaining to the transitional election scheduled for
2012).



   D.   The names of all candidates duly placed on the ballot shall be
arranged as set forth in the General Statutes.  All elected offices shall be
filled as a result of the election process.



   E.   Election of At-Large Members of the Legislative Council.  The
Electors shall vote for no more than four (4) of the at-large candidates for
the Council.  Each major or minor party, as defined by the General Statutes
and petitioning slates of candidates (if permitted by the General Statutes),
may nominate up to four (4) candidates for the members at large, and those
six (6) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected.



   F.   Election of Members of the Board of Education.



      (1)   Six Members of the Board of Education Elected Pursuant
to § 3-3.B(1)(a) of this Charter.  With regard to the six (6) members of
the Board of Education elected in accordance with § 3-3.B(1)(a) of this
Charter, no more than four (4) members shall be from the same political party.



      (2)   Three Members of the Board of Education Elected Pursuant
to §3-3.B(1)(b) of this Charter.  With regard to the three (3) members of
the Board of Education elected in accordance with § 3-3.B(1)(b) of this
Charter, no more than two (2) members shall be from the same political party.



SECTION 3-4:  ELIGIBILITY.



   No person shall be eligible for nomination or election to any Town
office who is not an Elector of the Town, and, in the case of a district
council representative, a resident of that particular district.  Any person
ceasing to be a resident, where such residence is required for eligibility,
shall thereupon cease to hold elective office in the Town or district.



SECTION 3-5:  VACANCIES IN ELECTED OFFICES.



   A.   Mayor.  A Vacancy in the office of the Mayor shall be
addressed as follows:



      (1)   Greater than Six Months remaining in the Term of
Office.  The President of the Legislative Council shall serve as Acting
Mayor until a successor is elected at a special election. Said special
election shall be called forthwith to fill the Vacancy and shall be held in
the time-frame as may be set forth in the General Statutes.  In the event
the General Statutes are silent, the special election shall be held no later
than forty-five (45) Days from the effective date of the Vacancy, as declared
by the Town Clerk.  The person so elected shall assume the office of Mayor
on the date of election and serve for the unexpired term.  Such successor
shall have the rights, powers and duties of Mayor and shall receive the same
compensation otherwise due the Mayor.



         (a)   In the event the President shall serve as Acting
Mayor, the office of President of the Legislative Council and a member of the
Legislative Council shall not be deemed Vacant.  However, the Acting Mayor
shall have no vote and may only participate in Legislative Council
proceedings in accordance with the functions and duties of the Mayor.



         (b)   During the absence of the President for the
purposes of this provision, the President Pro Tempore shall preside and
conduct the business of the President.



      (2)   Final Six Months of the Term of Office.  The President
of the Legislative Council shall at once become Mayor for the unexpired term
and shall assume office on the date of Vacancy and serve for the unexpired
term.  Such successor shall have the rights, powers and duties of Mayor and
shall receive the same compensation otherwise due the Mayor. In the event the
President shall serve for the remainder of the term of Mayor, the office of
the President of the Legislative Council and a seat on the Legislative
Council shall become Vacant whenever the person holding them shall become
Mayor and the President Pro Tempore shall succeed to the Office of President.



   B.   Legislative Council and Town Clerk. Any Vacancy in any elected
Town office, except the Board of Education and the Office of the Mayor, from
whatever cause arising, except as hereinafter provided, shall be filled by a
Majority Vote of the Legislative Council for the unexpired portion of the
term.



      (1)   All such Vacancies shall be filled by a person of the
same political party or affiliation as that of the person who just vacated
the office.  In the event there is no other member of the political party
appertaining to the vacating member, the appointment shall not be made from
the party containing the majority of members.



   C.   Board of Education. Until the next Town election, any Vacancy
in the Board of Education shall be filled by election by the remaining
members of the Board of Education.



      (1)   All such Vacancies filled by election of the Board of
Education shall be filled by a person of the same political party or
affiliation as that of the person who just vacated the office.  In the event
there is no other member of the political party appertaining to the vacating
member, the appointment shall not be made from the party containing the
majority of members.



   D.   Registrars of Voters.  Any Vacancy in the Office of the
Registrars of Voters shall be filled as required by the General Statutes.



SECTION 3-6:  TEMPORARY DISABILITY OR ABSENCE OF THE MAYOR.



   A.   In the event the Mayor notifies the President of the Council of
an inability to attend to the duties of office due to absence from the Town,
temporary disability or sickness or other cause, the President of the Council
shall serve as Acting Mayor at a rate of compensation to be determined by the
Council.  There shall be no Vacancy in the Office of the President of the
Legislative Council when the President serves as set forth in this
sub-section.



   B.   In the event the Mayor fails to notify the President of the
Council under the provisions of § 3-6.A of this Charter, and it is
determined that the Mayor is unable to attend to the duties of office due to
an unexplained and sustained absence from the Town, temporary disability or
sickness or absence or other cause,  the Legislative Council may determine
the temporary disability or absence of the Mayor by a vote of two-thirds
(2/3rds) of the Council present and voting; although there shall be, at
least, nine (9) members voting in the affirmative.



SECTION 3-7:  REAPPORTIONMENT OF VOTING DISTRICTS.



   A.   Nine Voting Districts and Standards Pertaining to
Reapportionment.  The Town shall be divided into nine (9) voting districts,
each of which shall be represented by a district representative on the
Legislative Council and shall be substantially equal in population consistent
with federal constitutional standards.  Moreover, said voting districts
shall be in as compact and contiguous a form as practicable and shall follow
geographical divisions wherever practical in determining voting district
boundaries.



   B.   Final Action on Adoption of a Reapportionment Plan.  On or
before the date set forth in the General Statutes, the Legislative Council
shall adopt a reapportionment plan for such legislative body.  At the time
of the adoption of this Charter, the reapportionment plan shall be adopted
not later than the first (1st) Day of June in the year after the first
regular General Assembly election following a reapportionment of the General
Assembly.



   C.   Assembly of Census and State Reapportionment Information and
Data.  Following the 2010 census and every ten (10) years thereafter, the
Town shall commence the process of reapportioning the voting districts. 
Upon issuance of the reports of the applicable Federal Decennial Census, the
Registrars of Voters shall assemble information and data relating to the
census and the State redistricting process.  Said information and data shall
be transmitted at the appropriate time to the participants in the
reapportionment process.



   D.   First Reapportionment Commission.  No later than the 1st Day
of March of the year following reapportionment of the General Assembly and
every ten years thereafter, a Reapportionment Commission shall be appointed
by the Legislative Council.



      (1)   The seven (7) member Commission shall be comprised of
(a) the two (2) Registrars of Voters; and, (b) five (5) Electors recommended
by the President of the Legislative Council and approved by the Council, no
more than two (2) of whom shall be from the same political party.



      (2)   The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on a
proposed Ordinance, Report and Reapportionment Plan (the "ORRP"), at least,
one week prior to approval and submission to the Council.  Hearing Notice
shall be provided, at least, five (5) Days prior to the public hearing; said
Notice shall include the contents of the ORRP as well as a copy of a map
illustrating the boundary lines of each of the proposed voting districts. 
On the basis of information elicited at the public hearing, the Commission
may thereafter alter the Report and Plan.



      (3)   Approval of the ORRP shall require the affirmative votes
of, at least, five (5) members of the Commission.



      (4)   The Commission shall file the ORRP with the Clerk of the
Council within six (6) months after appointment and may utilize demographic
data (based upon census data) assembled by the Town utilizing the
technological resources of the Town and such other resources, facilities and
funding the Council may deem desirable to carry out the purposes of this
section.  Receipt of the ORRP shall be deemed to be the date upon which it
is filed with the Clerk of the Council.



      (5)   The ORRP shall recommend and set forth the boundaries of
each of the proposed voting districts and, upon recommendation of the
Registrars of Voters, include an enumeration of suitable polling places
within each district.



      (6)   In the event the Commission fails to submit the ORRP as
set forth in § 3-7.D(4) of this Charter, then a Second Reapportionment
Commission shall be established as set forth in § 3-7.F of this Charter.



   E.   Action by the Legislative Council on the Proposal of the First
Reapportionment Commission, if any.  Within sixty (60) Days following
receipt of the ORRP and after a public hearing thereon, the Legislative
Council shall accept, reject, or modify the ORRP.  Within thirty (30) Days
following said legislative action:



      (1)   If the ORRP is accepted or modified, the Ordinance in
conjunction with the ORRP approved by the Legislative Council shall be deemed
adopted in compliance with the requirements of the General Statutes and have
the full force of law and become effective for the next municipal general
election.



      (2)   If the ORRP is rejected, then a Second Reapportionment
Commission shall be established as set forth in § 3-7.F of this Charter.



Approval of the ORRP and the Ordinance contained therein shall require an
affirmative vote of, at least, two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Council, present
and voting.



   F.   Second Reapportionment Commission.  Within fourteen (14) Days
following the failure of the Reapportionment Commission to submit the ORRP,
as set forth in § 3-7.D(6) of this Charter; or, the rejection of the ORRP by
the Legislative Council, as set forth in § 3-7.E(2) of this Charter, the
Mayor shall appoint a Second Reapportionment Commission.



      (1)   The Commission shall be comprised of nine (9) Electors,
as follows: (a) three (3) recommended by the Council Majority Leader; (b)
three (3) recommended by the Council Minority Leader; and (c) three (3) upon
the Mayor's designation.



      (2)   The Commission shall consider the reapportionment of
districts in accordance with the standards set forth herein and shall submit
a Reapportionment Plan and Ordinance ("RPO") to the Clerk of the Council
within ninety (90) Days of the appointment by the Mayor.



      (3)   The RPO shall not be submitted to the Clerk of the
Council unless it is approved by, at least, seven (7) members of the
Commission.  In such event, the Legislative Council shall act in accordance
with § 3-7.G(2) of this Charter.



   G.   Action by the Legislative Council on the Proposal of the Second
Reapportionment Commission. Within sixty (60) Days following receipt of the
RPO and after a public hearing thereon, the Legislative Council may:



      (1)   Approve the RPO by an affirmative vote of at least
two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Council present and voting, and, following said
approval, the districts set forth in the accompanying Ordinance shall be
deemed adopted in compliance with the requirements of the General Statutes,
and have the full force of law and become effective for the next municipal
general election; or,



      (2)   Reject the RPO; in which event the Council shall
formulate and approve a Redistricting Plan and Ordinance, in accordance with
the standards set forth herein and within the statutory time-frame
established by the General Statutes and as set forth in § 3-7.B of this
Charter.  If approved, the Ordinance shall be deemed adopted in compliance
with the requirements of the General Statutes and shall have the full force
of law and become effective for the next municipal general election.



   H.   Failure of the Legislative Council to Adopt an Ordinance
Pursuant to § 3-7.G(2) of this Charter.  In the event the Legislative
Council fails to approve an Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of §
3-7.G(2) of this Charter, the Ordinance included in the RPO submitted by the
Second Reapportionment Commission (see, § 3-7.F(2) of this Charter) shall be
deemed to be approved by the Legislative Council and shall be deemed adopted
in compliance with the requirements of the General Statutes and shall have
the full force of law and become effective for the next municipal general
election.  The effective date shall be deemed to be the final date permitted
for enactment of municipal reapportionment by the General Statutes.



   I.   Notwithstanding the adoption of a plan of redistricting,
members of the Legislative Council shall continue to represent the districts
from which they were elected for the balance of the term for which they were
elected.



SECTION 3-8:  PUBLIC OFFICIALS TO DELIVER RECORDS TO SUCCESSORS.



   A.   The General Rule.  On or before the date a successor takes
office, the Mayor, Town Clerk, Registrars of Voters and each Department Head
or other Mayoral appointees, upon the expiration of the applicable term of
office or termination of employment, shall deliver to the successor all
books, data,



documents, books of account (or equivalent) records, vouchers, papers of
every description and memoranda (in all existing formats including electronic
media of any and all types) ("Records") under the control of the named
Official relating to the business of the Town during the entire term of
office or employment by the Town.  This general rule shall also apply to the
administrative offices of the Legislative Council; however, the individual
members of the Council shall be subject to the rules of the Legislative
Council, as set forth below.



   B.   Ordinance.  The delivery of such Records shall be carried out
in accordance with an Ordinance establishing the parameters of this provision
and the rules necessary to comply with any related provisions of the General
Statutes.



   C.   The Legislative Council.  The rules of the Legislative Council
shall set forth the parameters of the requirements to retain and deliver to
their successors Records assembled by individual members of the Council. 
Said rules shall take into cognizance the provisions of § 3-8.A of this
Charter as well as the record retention and public information requirements
of the General Statutes and other applicable Law.



   D.   Liability.  The Officials set forth in this section shall be
personally liable to the Town for complete and safe delivery of all such
Records to the successor Official.  Any Official who shall violate any
provision of this section shall be fined in an amount which shall be
established by Ordinance.



SECTION 3-9:  CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND ETHICS.



   A.   Statement of Purpose.  Public office is a public trust.  The
trust of the public is essential for government to function effectively. 
Public policy developed by Officials affect every citizen of the
municipality, and it must be based on honest and fair deliberations and
decision.  This process must be free from threats, favoritism, nepotism,
undue influence, and all forms of impropriety so that the confidence of the
public is not eroded.  By setting forth this Statement of Purpose, the Town
of Hamden seeks to articulate a policy that will continually strive to
maintain and increase the confidence of our citizens in the integrity and
fairness of their government.  Public Officials and employees must discharge
their duties impartially so as to assure fair competitive access to
government procurement by responsible contractors.  In turn, those
contractors should conduct themselves in such a manner as to foster public
confidence in the integrity of the competitive process.  In all cases, the
reality and appearance of impropriety should be addressed by the Conflict of
Interest Policy and Ethics Ordinance.



   B.   Conflict of Interest Policy and Ethics Ordinance.  The Town
shall enact, by Ordinance, a code of ethics for all Officials and employees
of the Town, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, and individuals
and entities seeking to and conducting business with the Town. The purpose of
such code is to establish suitable ethical standards by prohibiting acts or
actions incompatible with the discharge of their public duties and the best
interests of the Town, and by directing disclosure of private financial
interest or personal interest in matters affecting the Town by such elected
and appointed Officials or employees as well as such individuals and entities
seeking to and conducting business with the Town.  The Ordinance shall
designate an Official to provide all Public Officials and employees of the
Town with copies of the provisions of § 3-9 of this Charter and the
implementing Ordinances and policies enacted hereunder, upon the commencement
of their public service and/or employment.



      (1)    The Council shall enact a code of ethics by Ordinance
(and amendments thereto) following public review and comment by the Board of
Ethics, in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Charter.



      (2)   Recusal.  The Official or employee filing a disclosure
under this Charter or Ordinance with the Town Clerk shall refrain from
voting, participating or acting on matters which are the subject of such
disclosures.



      (3)   Violation.  In addition to any remedies or penalties
set forth in the Ordinance effectuating this provision of the Charter, any
finding of a violation by the Board of Ethics, as set forth in § 7-2.B(5) of
this Charter:



         (a)   shall render any action, including but not limited
to any contract or agreement involved voidable at the option of the Town;



         (b)   may result in the discipline of Officials and
employees in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and Ordinances;
and,



          (c)   may result in disqualifying individuals or
entities from engaging in business with the Town for a period of time to be
established by Ordinance.



   C.   Conflict of Interest and Corrupt Practices.  No Official shall
violate the provisions of the General Statutes, this Charter or Ordinances
pertaining to conflicts of interest and corrupt practices.  The Ordinance
set forth in § 3-9.B of this Charter shall define and set forth the
parameters of conflicts of interest and corrupt practices.



SECTION 3-10:  REMOVAL OF ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS.



   A.   Standard for Removal.  Unless otherwise set forth in this
Charter, any Elected Official or Appointed Official (with the exception of
members of Boards and Commissions, who may be removed in accordance with §
7-1.H of this Charter), may be removed from office, for cause, by the
Legislative Council by a vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of the entire membership
of the Council; subject to any applicable provisions of the General Statutes.



      (1)   The applicable provisions of the General Statutes shall
be taken into consideration with regard to the removal proceedings of the
Town Clerk, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Building Official and
any other Officials designated for protection by the General Statutes.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the grounds for cause set forth herein,
the Mayor shall have the power to remove any Appointed Official who serves a
term coterminous with the Mayor (as specifically set forth in this Charter
and any Ordinance creating the applicable Department); unless otherwise
provided for in this Charter or by law.



   B.   Recitation of Charges.  No such Elected or Appointed Official
of the Town ("charged party") may be removed except upon charges, which shall
be proffered following a majority vote of the Legislative Council.  Removal
may not occur in the absence of a hearing thereon before a plenary session of
the Council.



   C.   Notice.  Written notice by the Council of the charges and time
and place of hearing shall be given to the charged party at least fifteen
(15) Days prior to such hearing.  Said notice shall either be (1) mailed to
the charged party by registered or certified mail, in each case, return
receipt requested and postage prepaid or national recognized overnight
courier, with receipt and all fees prepaid; or, (2) addressed to an officer
authorized to serve legal process with a direction to make personal service
upon the charged party of the same, within the time prescribed.



   D.   Grounds of Cause.  Such charges shall be for:



      (1)   A finding by the Board of Ethics of neglect or
dereliction of official duty or a violation of (a) the conflict of interest
policy and ethics provisions of this Charter and/or Ordinances; or, (b) any
other provisions of law pertaining to unethical conduct, corrupting influence
or illegal activities (including violations of federal, state or local law);



      (2)   Conviction of a felony;



      (3)   Conviction of a lesser crime involving fraudulent or
dishonest conduct;



      (4)   Determination of physical or mental incapacity to serve,
based upon the best evidence as presented by competent authority;



      (5)   Determination of incompetence based upon the best
evidence as presented by competent authority;



      (6)   Documented poor performance of an Appointed Official
kept in the normal course of business;



      (7)   Habitual absence from office, as may be defined by the
Mayor for Appointed Officials or by the adopted rules of procedure for the
Legislative Council or Board or Commission;



      (8)   A delinquency materially affecting the person's general
character or fitness for office; or,



      (9)   Such actions as may be set forth in the Ordinance by the
Council.



   E.   Right to Counsel.  Such Elected or Appointed Official shall
have the right to be represented by counsel at the hearing, to present
evidence and testimony personally and through witnesses, and to cross-examine
witnesses.



   F.   Public Hearing.  Such hearing shall be open to the public and
transcribed, except as otherwise permitted by Law.



   G.   Appeal.  Any such Elected or Appointed Official may, within
thirty (30) Days from the date when the decision to remove is taken following
such hearing, take any appeals as may be permitted by law.



CHAPTER IV:  LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL



SECTION 4-1:  LEGISLATIVE POWER.



   The legislative power and authority of the Town shall be vested in the
Legislative Council.  No enumeration of powers set forth in this Charter
shall be deemed to limit the legislative authority of the Council as provided
for in the General Statutes.



SECTION 4-2:  OFFICERS OF THE COUNCIL.



   A.   The members of the Council shall meet on the first Monday after
the commencement of their terms of office as provided in §§ 3-3.A(2) and
C(2) of this Charter and shall choose one of its members to be President of
the Council and another to be President Pro Tempore of the Council, each for
the term of office.



   B.   Such President shall preside over all meetings of the Council
and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed by
the Council, but such President shall not vote more than once on any question.



   C.   During the President's absence or disability, the President's
duties shall be performed by the President Pro Tempore.



SECTION 4-3:  PROCEDURES OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL - PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
IN COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS.



   A.   Meetings and Rules of Procedure.  The Council shall:



      (1)   Rules of Procedure: Quorum.  Adopt rules of procedure
including the creation of such committees as it deems necessary, within
forty-five (45) days following the election of members, which rules may be
amended from time to time.



         (a)   The rules of the prior Council term shall apply
until such rules are adopted. 



         (b)   A majority of the total membership of the Council
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business.



      (2)   Regular Meetings and Committee Meetings.  Fix the time
and place of its regular and committee meetings and shall post such meetings
as required by the General Statutes.  The Council shall schedule at least
one regular meeting and one Committee meeting a month.



      (3)   Special Meetings and Emergency Meetings.  At the first
meeting of the Council following the Town election, the Council shall provide
a method for the calling of Special Meetings in accordance with the General
Statutes.  Emergency Meetings shall be convened as set forth in § 5-5.D of
this Charter.



   B.   Public Hearings.  At least one public hearing shall be held by
the Council or any committee thereof before any Ordinance or Statutory
Resolution shall be passed.  Meeting Notice of such public hearing shall be
given, in accordance with the requirements of the General Statutes.



   C.   Open Meetings and Public Comment Sessions.  All meetings of
the Legislative Council shall be open to the public in accordance with the
General Statutes.  Moreover, there shall be a public comment session prior
to the commencement of all regular meetings of the Legislative Council.  The
time and duration of the public comment sessions shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of Standing Rules of Order of the Hamden
Legislative Council, adopted in accordance with § 4-3.A(1) of this
Charter.  With respect to the meetings of the standing and special
committees and special meetings of the Legislative Council, the public may
address any item on the agenda.  With respect to the regular meetings of the
Legislative Council, the public may address any item on the agenda and any
other matters concerning the Town that are within the purview of the
Legislative Council.



SECTION 4-4:  CLERK OF THE COUNCIL.



   A.   There shall be a Clerk of the Council, recommended by the
President and approved by the Council, whose compensation shall be fixed by
the Council, and who shall keep for public inspection copies of every
proposed Ordinance and a record of all proceedings including all roll call
votes.



   B.   All records so kept shall be authenticated by the signature of
such Clerk of the Council or the President of the Council or both.



   C.   The Clerk of the Council shall be responsible for the
publication of such notices of hearing and publication of Ordinances, as may
be necessary, and perform such other duties as the Council may determine.



SECTION 4-5:  GENERAL POWERS.



   In addition to the grant of legislative authority as set forth in the
General Statutes, the Legislative Council, by majority vote (unless otherwise
set forth in this Charter), shall have the power to:



   A.   enact, amend or repeal Ordinances, Statutory Resolutions,
Resolutions, Orders or Motions consistent with this Charter or the General
Statutes;



   B.   create or abolish Boards, Commissions, Departments, Offices and
positions, unless required by the Charter or reorganized as permitted by §
8-1.C(1) of this Charter, for the preservation of good order, peace, health
and safety of the Town and its inhabitants, including the power to enact a
code of ethics regulating the conduct of all Officials and employees of said
Town;



   C.   increase or decrease the budget or any item thereof;



   D.   contract for legislative services, upon action by Order or
Motion;



   E.   contract, upon action by Order or Motion, for the use of
facilities of the United States or any federal agency, the State and any
political subdivision thereof, or may, by agreement, join with any other such
political subdivision to provide services and facilities;



   F.   to appropriate, notwithstanding the provisions of this Charter
to the contrary, necessary funds for the purpose of meeting a Public
Emergency as set forth in § 5-5.C of this Charter; and,



   G.   set the charges, if any, to be made for services by the Town or
for the execution of powers vested in the Town as provided in this Charter.



In addition to all other powers, for purposes set forth in the General
Statutes relating to municipal sewerage systems and to the extent it wishes
to exercise such powers, the Council is deemed the body having power to make
annual appropriations for the Town.  Furthermore, the Council shall have the
power and duties which, on the effective date of this Charter, were conferred
by Law upon Boards, Commissions and Officials of the Town existing
immediately prior to such date except as otherwise specifically provided in
this Charter.



SECTION 4-6:  COUNSEL TO COUNCIL.



   The Legislative Council may appoint and may remove by majority vote a
Counsel, who shall be an attorney, admitted to practice law in this State and
shall have been practicing for at least five (5) years. Such Counsel shall
have such duties as the Council shall determine. Such Counsel shall receive
compensation as fixed by the Legislative Council.



SECTION 4-7:  ORDINANCES, STATUTORY RESOLUTIONS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS OR
MOTIONS: THE ROLE OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL AND THE MAYOR.



   A.   Transmittal of Legislative Actions to the Mayor.  Except in
the case of Resolutions, including those relating to the procedures of the
Council, every proposed Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion
shall be transmitted by the Clerk of the Council to the Mayor for action
within five (5) Days after passage by the Council.  The provisions of §§
4-7 and 4-8 of this Charter shall not apply to the adoption of the Budget
Ordinance.  The procedures for the adoption of the Budget Ordinance is
subject to the provisions of §§ 10-3 and 10-4 of this Charter.



   B.   Mayoral Action.  The Mayor shall return to the Clerk of the
Council such Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion within fifteen
(15) Days after passage by the Council.



      (1)   Approval by the Mayor or Failure of the Mayor to Take
Action.  In the event the Mayor approves or fails to take action within such
fifteen (15) Days, such Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or Motion
shall become effective and operational as set forth in this section.  In the
event the Mayor shall fail to take action upon such matters, the Town Clerk
shall endorse such fact upon the official copy of the matter.



      (2)   Veto by the Mayor.  Every Ordinance, Statutory
Resolution, Order or Motion vetoed by the Mayor shall be returned within the
same fifteen (15) Days to the Clerk of the Council with a statement of the
reasons for the veto.



   C.   Legislative Action Following Mayoral Veto.  Following receipt
of the Mayor's veto, any vetoed Ordinance, Statutory Resolution, Order or
Motion again approved by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3rds)
of the Council present and voting at a meeting, shall become effective in
accordance with this section.



   D.   Effective Date.



      (1)   Ordinances and Statutory Resolutions.  Every Ordinance
or Statutory Resolution, unless it shall specify a later date, shall become
effective on the twenty-first (21st) Day after Public Notice, of Final
Action, with the exception that an Ordinance stated to be a public emergency
measure which shall be effective immediately, as set forth in § 5-5.E(4) of
this Charter.



      (2)   Resolutions, Orders or Motions.  Every Resolution,
Order or Motion, unless it shall specify a later date, shall become effective
upon Final Action.



SECTION 4-8:  PUBLIC NOTICE OF FINAL ACTION.



   A.   Public Notice of Final Action.  Public Notice regarding
Ordinances and Statutory Resolutions shall be provided within ten (10) Days
after Final Action.  Public Notice of Resolutions, Orders and Motions shall
be provided within twenty-four (24) hours of Final Action.



   B.   Public Notice of public emergency Ordinances or measures shall
be addressed in § 5-5.E of this Charter.



   C.   Every Ordinance and Statutory Resolution, after passage, shall
be given a serial number and be officially recorded and preserved by the Town
Clerk as a public record as may be set forth in the General Statutes.



SECTION 4-9:  PETITION FOR OVERRULE.



   A.   All Ordinances and Statutory Resolutions of the Council, except
fixing the tax rate and the enactment of emergency Ordinances, shall be
subject to overrule.



      (1)   If within twenty (20) Days after Final Action, a
petition signed by not less than fifteen (15%) percent of the Electors of the
Town, as determined from the last official voting list, is filed with the
Town Clerk requesting a referendum, the Council shall, at its next regular
meeting, fix a time not more than thirty (30) Days after such meeting for
such election, which shall be called and held in the manner provided by the
General Statutes.



      (2)   Any Ordinance or Statutory Resolution so referred to the
voters shall stand approved unless a majority of those voting thereon at such
election shall have voted "no" and at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the
Electors entitled to vote on the question shall have voted.



      (3)   The Council may by an affirmative vote of at least
two-thirds (2/3rds) of those present and voting add non binding referenda to
be on the ballot of such election.



   B.   This section shall not apply to the borrowing of funds.  The
borrowing of funds shall be governed solely by the provisions of §§ 10-8
and 10-9 of this Charter.  Moreover, this section shall not apply to the
Budget.  The Budget overrule shall be governed solely by the provisions of
§ 10-5 of this Charter.



SECTION 4-10:  SELECTION OF INDEPENDENT AUDITORS.



   The Council shall designate annually a certified public accountant or
firm of certified public accountants, as an independent auditor, to audit the
books and accounts of the Town as provided in the General Statutes and in
accordance with best practice standards as may be set forth and promulgated
by the General Accounting Office ("GAO"), Governmental Accounting Standards
Board ("GASB"), Finance Accounting Standard Board ("FASB"), the Government
Finance Officers Association ("GFOA"), their successor or like-minded
professional standard setting organizations addressing the financial
standards for municipalities.  The Council shall competitively select
independent auditors and require the rotation of such auditors by requiring
their replacement by another firm at the conclusion of the audit contract,
which shall not exceed a maximum period of six (6) consecutive years.



SECTION 4-11:  APPROVAL OF MAYORAL APPOINTMENTS.



   All appointments made by the Mayor that require approval by the
Legislative Council shall be deemed automatically approved if the Council
fails to approve or disapprove such appointments within forty-five (45) Days
of written notice to its Clerk of such an appointment.



SECTION 4-12:  INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS AND REGIONAL COOPERATION.



   The Town shall take into cognizance the opportunities to engage in
regional initiatives in order to provide the most efficient delivery of
services to the Town.  In this context, the town should utilize all laws
pertaining to regionalism, inter-local agreements and cooperative
arrangements.



CHAPTER V:  THE MAYOR



SECTION 5-1:  ELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   At each general Town election, a Mayor shall be chosen by the Electors
of the Town.  Such Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the Town
and shall receive such compensation as shall be set by the Council.  The
Mayor shall devote full time to the duties of the office.



SECTION 5-2:  DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall:



   A.   be responsible for the administration of all Departments and
Officials, in charge of persons or Boards and Commissions appointed by the
Mayor, and shall oversee and direct the same; 



   B.   be an ex-officio, nonvoting member of all Town Boards and
Commissions appointed by the Mayor, except the Board of Ethics or where such
membership is inconsistent with the General Statutes or this Charter; 



   C.   see that the provisions of all Laws, this Charter, the
Ordinances and Statutory Resolutions governing the Town are faithfully
executed; shall cause to be prepared and printed, within ninety (90) Days
after the close of the fiscal year, an annual Town report; shall recommend to
the Council such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient; shall keep
the Council fully advised as to the financial condition of the Town; shall
prepare and submit to the Council an annual budget and shall exercise such
other powers and duties as may be required by Ordinance, Statutory
Resolution, Order or Motion of the Legislative Council consistent with the
General Statutes and this Charter; and,



   D.   submit to the Council:



      (1)   a quarterly report on all contracts executed within the
budget limits or other authority established by the Legislative Council.



      (2)   a request for approval by a Majority Vote of the
Legislative Council, of any contracts:



         (a)   in excess of One Hundred Thousand ($100,000.00)
Dollars which are exempted from the competitive procurement and solicitation
requirements of this Charter and any Ordinances or regulations adopted
hereunder. The Legislative Council is authorized to modify the threshold
based upon the consumer price index or other like measure indexed for
inflation or deflation.  This provision shall not apply to emergency
transactions, which are addressed in § 5-5.C(3) of this Charter.



   (b)   which contain a term which will either fall in multiple fiscal
years; or, shall continue for a period longer than twelve (12) months.



SECTION 5-3:  APPOINTMENTS, TERMS OF OFFICE AND GENERAL POWERS.



   A.   The Mayor shall, except as otherwise provided in this Charter,
appoint and may remove all Department Heads and other Mayoral appointees of
the Town as set forth in this Charter.  This provision shall not apply to
Elected Officials who are Department Heads.



   B.   Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, the terms of all
such Department Heads or Mayoral appointees, established by Ordinance or by
budget, shall terminate at the same time as the term of the Mayor (unless
otherwise subject to the terms of an Employment Contract as set forth in §
8-2.C of this Charter); except such appointees may continue to serve until
their successors are appointed and qualified.



   C.   The Mayor may, subject to the approval of the Council, perform
the duties of any office under the Mayor's jurisdiction, except those of the
Director of Finance in the performance of the duties and powers prescribed by
Law to Town Treasurers, as provided in § 8-4.A of this Charter.



   D.   As set forth in § 8-1.B and C of this Charter, the Mayor shall
have the power, subject to the approval of the Council, to provide for the
creation of any Department, delegating to said Department any of the powers
reserved to the Mayor under this chapter and to appoint a Department Head for
such Department thereby created.  The Mayor shall have the power to create
for a new position, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council.



SECTION 5-4:  APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS OR COMMISSIONS.



   A.   When a Vacancy occurs on any appointed Town Board or
Commission, the Mayor shall provide Public Notice that such position is
Vacant, at least two (2) weeks prior to filling of the position.  In
addition to the requirement set forth in § 7-1.K of this Charter, the Mayor
shall publish or post, as the case may be, such notice (1) on the Town
web-site; (2) in a conspicuous location available to the public in the office
of the Town Clerk and in such location in Town Hall as designated by the
Mayor; and, (3) if practicable, in a newspaper of local availability to the
residents of the Town.



   B.   The Mayor shall invite the Electors of the Town who are
interested in serving to apply by submitting resumes of their qualifications
for membership on such Board or Commission to the Town Clerk.



   C.   The Town Clerk shall maintain and submit to the Mayor a list of
all candidates for the position.



   D.   The Mayor shall nominate an individual from this list and
submit the nomination to the Legislative Council, which shall approve or
disapprove the Mayor's selection.



SECTION 5-5:  EMERGENCY POWERS.



   A.   Declaration of a Public Emergency.  A public emergency
pertaining to the Town may be declared by the (1) President of the United
States: (2) Governor of the State of Connecticut; (3) Mayor; or, (4) upon the
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Legislative Council present
and voting; although there shall be, at least, nine (9) members voting in the
affirmative.  If practicable, the declaration of Public Emergency by the
Mayor or the Council shall set the duration in the event it is expected to
last for more than forty-five (45) Days.



      (1)   Public Emergency.  A public emergency is any condition
that exists or threatens to arise involving or threatening to damage or
injure the lives, health or property of the inhabitants of the Town or
curtail Town services necessary to meet the requirements of the emergency.



      (2)   Termination of Public Emergency.  The termination of
the emergency shall be determined and declared by the Mayor or by the
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of the Legislative Council present
and voting; however, unless asserted in the declaration or otherwise
extended, the Public Emergency shall terminate at 11:59:59 P.M. of the
forty-fifth (45th) Day following the declaration.



   B.   Authority of the Mayor.  The Mayor shall exercise within the
limits of the Town all the emergency powers given to the chief executive
officer of a municipality under the General Statutes with regard to the
allocation of personnel.  Upon declaration of a public emergency, the Mayor
may mobilize, organize and direct the forces of the Town and call upon and
cooperate with the federal government or the State or its political
subdivisions.



   C.   Appropriations and Expenditures for Emergencies.



      (1)   Public Emergency Contingency.  The Legislative Council
may, by Ordinance, establish a maximum amount of funding for public
emergencies in a contingency fund within the Town Budget.  The Mayor may
obligate the Town in an amount not to exceed the maximum amount ("public
emergency contingency") to meet or mitigate any declared public emergency.
The Mayor shall report any action taken hereunder at the next meeting of the
Legislative Council.



      (2)   Emergency Appropriations.  Notwithstanding the
provisions of §§ 10-7.D and E of this Charter, in the event that funds in
addition to the public emergency contingency are required to meet or mitigate
a declared public emergency, the Mayor shall determine the necessary amount
and seek Legislative Council approval, at an Emergency Meeting, to authorize
transfers.



         (a)   Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this
Charter, the Legislative Council may, if necessary, appropriate funds in
addition to the public emergency contingency.



         (b)   The affirmative vote of at least two-thirds
(2/3rds) of the members of the Legislative Council is required to authorize
any such emergency appropriation.



         (c)   The Order of the Legislative Council approving any
emergency appropriation shall specify the nature of the emergency and source
of revenue.  Unless the Mayor certifies that the emergency threatens the
immediate public health or safety, the Legislative Council shall hold a
public hearing on any proposed special or emergency appropriation.



      (3)   Emergency Expenditures.  The Mayor may obligate the
Town in an amount of money not to exceed One Hundred Thousand ($100,000.00)
Dollars (or such other additional amount as may be approved by the Council)
from the public emergency contingency or, if not available from the
contingency, from other unexpended funds identified by the Director of
Finance, to cope with such public emergency until the Legislative Council
convenes.  The authority set forth in this provision shall not apply in the
event the Legislative Council has not been provided with notice under §
5-5.D of this Charter.



   D.   Emergency Meetings of the Legislative Council.  In the event a
Public Emergency is declared, the Mayor or President of the Legislative
Council may call an emergency meeting of the Council upon three (3) hours
notice and may summon Council members to attend such meeting in such manner
as the Council may prescribe by Ordinance.  Notwithstanding any provision of
law or this Charter to the contrary, at such meeting, the Council may
transact any item or items of business relevant to such emergency.



   E.   Public Emergency Ordinances and Measures.  Upon the
declaration of a Public Emergency, the Legislative Council may enact Public
Emergency Ordinances and other measures in order to meet such emergency. 
Rules and procedures for the adoption of Public Emergency Ordinances and
measures shall be governed by the provisions of a Public Emergency Procedural
Ordinance which shall establish the terms of Final Action.



      (1)   Public Hearing and Notice Requirements.  No public
hearing or Meeting Notice shall be required for any Ordinance stated to be a
Public Emergency Ordinance or measure, unless otherwise required by the
General Statutes.



      (2)   Procedural time-frame.  The time-frame set forth in
§§ 4-7 through 4-8 of this Charter shall not apply to the adoption of a
Public Emergency Ordinance or measure; however, the procedural measures set
forth in that provision shall be addressed in the Public Emergency Procedural
Ordinance, if practicable.



      (3)   Requirements.  An emergency Ordinance shall contain a
specific statement of the emergency and shall require a Majority Vote of the
Legislative Council.



      (4)   Effective Date.   An emergency Ordinance shall become
effective immediately upon final action as set forth in the Emergency
Procedures Ordinance.  However, Public Notice of such Public Emergency
Ordinance shall take place promptly following final action.



      (5)   Automatic Repeal of Public Emergency Ordinance or
Measure.  Every such Public Emergency Ordinance or measure, including any
amendments thereto, shall automatically stand repealed at the termination of
the forty-fifth (45th) Day following Final Action of said Ordinance.



CHAPTER VI:  OTHER ELECTED OFFICIALS



SECTION 6-1:  TOWN CLERK.



   A.   There shall be a Town Clerk as required by the General Statutes
and as set forth in this Charter.



   B.   Powers and Duties.  The Town Clerk shall have all the powers
and duties prescribed by the General Statutes, this Charter and such other
powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Council.



      (1)   Registrar of Vital Statistics.  The Town Clerk shall
serve as Registrar of Vital Statistics, unless otherwise set forth by the
General Statutes.



      (2)   Assistants and Employees.  The Town Clerk shall appoint
and may remove, subject to the provisions of the Merit System, all assistants
and employees of this office.



      (3)   Compensation.  The Town Clerk's compensation and
benefits shall be set by the Council.



      (4)   Fees.  All fees collected by the Town Clerk shall be
paid to the Town, except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes.



      (5)   Certification.  For the purpose of meeting best
practices and the highest professional standards, the Town Clerk shall, upon
eligibility, participate in the certification program for town clerks, as set
forth in the General Statutes.



SECTION 6-2:  REGISTRARS OF VOTERS.



   There shall be Registrars of Voters as required by the General Statutes
and as set forth in this Charter.



CHAPTER VII:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



SECTION 7-1:  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



   A.   Creation of Boards and Commissions: Number of Members, Terms. 
In addition to those Boards and Commissions established by this Charter, the
Legislative Council shall by Ordinance establish the Boards and Commissions
of the Town.  Unless this Charter or Special Acts provides otherwise, the
Legislative Council shall set forth, by Ordinance:



      (1)   The number of Board and Commission members (and
alternates) and terms of office, which may be staggered.  Except as
otherwise provided by the General Statutes, the number shall always be odd
and the term of office shall not exceed a term of five (5) years, which may
be staggered.



      (2)   Any such Ordinance shall make provision for (a) the
appointment of a chair and a delineation of the responsibilities of the
presiding officer; (b) the keeping of records and posting of agendas as
required by the General Statutes; (c) minority party representation in
accordance with § 7-1.F of this Charter; (d) public participation
(including, but not limited to, public speaking); and, (e) the frequency of
meetings of all Boards and Commissions.  The agendas of Boards and
Commissions shall be approved by the Chair of such entity.



      (3)   A majority of the total membership of each such Board
and Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business;
unless, otherwise required by the General Statutes.



   B.   Appointment.  Except as otherwise provided by the General
Statutes or this Charter, all members or alternate members of Boards or
Commissions shall be appointed by the Mayor as set forth in this Charter,
subject to approval by the Legislative Council.  All Board or Commission
members shall serve until the completion of their respective terms or until
their successors have been appointed and qualified.



   C.   Vacancy.  Unless otherwise set forth in the General Statutes
or in this Charter, in the event of a Vacancy on any Board or Commission, a
successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the
Legislative Council, for the unexpired portion of the term, as set forth in
this Charter.



   D.   Residency Requirement.  Except as otherwise provided by
Ordinance, no person may serve on a Board or Commission unless such person is
an Elector of the Town.  If any such person who is a member of a Board or
Commission shall move from the Town, such person's membership on such Board
or Commission shall be immediately terminated.



   E.   Dual Appointment Prohibited; Exceptions.  Except where
otherwise provided by general or special law, no person may serve as an
appointed member of more than one Board or Commission at the same time, with
the exception of a Charter Revision Commission or other Boards or Commissions
of finite duration.  Members of the Legislative Council may only serve on a
Board or Commission if assigned as a representative to such Board or
Commission for the sole purpose of representing the Council.



   F.   Political Composition: Minority Party Representation. Unless
otherwise required by the General Statutes or as otherwise set forth in this
Charter, the political affiliation of the members of all appointed Boards or
Commissions or panel of alternates shall reflect the requirements of the
General Statutes with respect to minority party representation. This
provision shall apply to all Boards or Commissions established or required by
this Charter or established by Ordinance.



   G.   Compensation Prohibited.  Except as otherwise set forth in
this Charter or by Ordinance, no member of any appointed Board or Commission
shall receive compensation for services as such member.



   H.   Removal.  Unless otherwise set forth in the General Statutes
or this Charter, the Mayor may initiate proceedings to remove a member of any
appointed Board, Commission, or relevant position or "panel of alternates"
for any of the following reasons: (1) misconduct in the performance of
duties; (2) persistent absence; (3) conviction of a felony; (4) conviction of
a misdemeanor which would undermine the public confidence in the member's
ability to perform the duties of office.  Rules of Procedure for the removal
of said member, and additional grounds for removal, shall be set by Ordinance.



   I.   Restrictions Pertaining to Members of the Civil Service
Commission and Ethics Commission.  No person who has served in the previous
three (3) years as a Public Official, other than a member of the Commissions
set forth in this sub-section, or a political party officer, shall be
appointed to membership on the Commission.  For purposes of this section,
the term "Public Official" means an individual who holds or has held a
municipal office (as defined in C.G.S. § 9-372 but shall not include a
justice of the peace or notary public) in the Town and the term "political
party officer" means an officer of a national committee of a political party,
state central or town committee or any person employed by such committee for
compensation.



   J.   Required Cooperation.  Each Official and employee of any
Department of the Town shall assist the Boards and Commissions and the
pertinent Departments in carrying out the provisions of this section. 
Furthermore, in the event a Board or Commission is attached to a Department,
the Department Head shall cooperate with said Board or Commission in
formulating and carrying out the operational and management policies of the
Department.



   K.   Publication of Boards and Commissions: Applicant Pool.  In
addition to the requirements of § 5-4.A of this Charter, during the month of
November of each year, the Mayor shall cause to be (1) published on the Town
web-site; (2) posted in a conspicuous location available to the public in the
office of the Town Clerk and in such location in Town Hall as designated by
the Mayor; and, (3) if practicable, published in a newspaper of local
availability to the residents of the Town, a list of all the Boards and
Commissions of the Town, for the purpose of creating an applicant pool.  Any
Elector desirous of serving on any Board or Commission may express such
desire in writing addressed to the Town Clerk who shall forward such
correspondence to the Mayor or other such appointing authority who shall
retain such correspondence on file for two (2) years.  The appointing
authority of any member of any Board or Commission shall review such notices
prior to making the appointment to such Board.



SECTION 7-2:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE CHARTER.



   A.   Civil Service Commission.



      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be a Civil Service
Commission which shall have the authority to exercise the powers and duties
contained in the General Statutes, this Charter and Ordinances pertaining to
the administration and operation of the Merit System and the civil service
and human resources policies of the Town.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Commission shall
consist of three (3) Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in § 7-1.B
of this Charter.  The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Executive Secretary.  The chief examiner shall
serve as the Executive Secretary of the Commission.  The Executive Secretary
shall be an ex officio, non-voting member of the Commission and shall be
responsible for such matters as required by the General Statutes and the
Commission.  The Department Head of the Town agency responsible for
personnel and human resources may be appointed to serve as the chief examiner.



         (b)   Term.  The Mayor shall appoint members for a term
of six (6) years, commencing on the 1st Day of September of the year of
appointment.  The terms shall be staggered, as required by the General
Statutes and as established at the date of the original appointments.



         (c)   Oath of Office.  Said Commission members shall
take the oath prescribed by the General Statutes.



         (d)   Minority Party Representation.  Said Commission
members shall be subject to the requirements of the General Statutes
pertaining to civil service boards.



         (e)   Restrictions.  Said Commission members shall be
subject to the restrictions set forth in the General Statutes and this
Charter.



         (f)   Removal.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this
Charter, the Mayor may remove a member of said Commission in the manner set
forth in the General Statutes; and, upon removal shall fill the unexpired
term of the member in accordance with the provisions of § 7-1.B of this
Charter.



      (3)   Merit System Ordinance.  Said rules of the Civil
Service Commission shall be set forth in the form of an Ordinance to be
approved by the Legislative Council, upon the advice of the Mayor (following
consultation with the Department Head responsible for personnel and human
resources and the Civil Service Commission), as set forth in this Charter. No
Ordinance shall be adopted which circumvents or otherwise violates the
requirements of this Charter pertaining to a Merit System and civil service
rules and regulations for the hiring and promotion of public employees.



   B.   Board of Ethics.



      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be a Board of Ethics which
shall have the authority to exercise the powers and duties contained in the
General Statutes, this Charter and Ordinances pertaining to conflict of
interest and ethics, administration of a code of ethics, including the
issuance of advisory opinions and policies, and to investigate, render
probable cause findings and conduct hearings pertaining to allegations of
unethical conduct, corrupting influence or illegal activities (including
violations of federal, state or local law) levied against any Official or
employee of the Town, unless otherwise provided by Law.  In addition to the
aforementioned powers and duties, the Board shall have such other duties and
powers as may be provided by any code of ethics Ordinance or other Ordinances.



         (a)   Subpoena Authority.  In a manner consistent with
the provisions of the General Statutes, the Board may issue subpoenas or
subpoenas duces tecum, enforceable upon application to the Superior Court, to
compel the attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books,
documents, records and papers.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Board shall consist of
five (5) members and two (2) alternates, all Electors of the Town, appointed
as set forth in § 7-1.B of this Charter.  The Board shall choose a chair
and such other officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Term of Members.  The Mayor shall appoint a
member(s) for a term of five (5) years, commencing on the 1st Day of February
of the year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at
the date of the original appointments (Historical Note: See, § 11-9 of this
Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on
November 8, 1983).



            (i)   Term of Alternate Members.  The Mayor shall
appoint alternates for a term of two (2) years, on the 1st Day of January of
the year of appointment (Historical Note: See, § 11-10 of this Charter
pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on
November 8, 1983).



         (b)   Assignment of Alternate Members.  If a regular
member of the Board is absent or is disqualified, the chairman of the Board
shall designate an alternate to so act.



         (c)   Restrictions.  The Board members shall not be
Officials or employees of the Town.  They shall hold no other appointed
office in the Town except Justice of the Peace or Notary Public.



         (d)   Interference.  The activities, votes and rulings
of the Board shall not be subject to oversight or reversal by any Town
Official or body.  The opinions of the Town Attorney required by this
Charter shall not be deemed to constitute interference for purposes of this
sub-section.



         (e)   Local Law.  Any reference in this Charter to
local law shall mean the Charter, the Ordinances, Statutory Resolutions and
any other regulations or policies approved by the Legislative Council under
an Ordinance establishing a method for adopting such regulations or policies.



      (3)   Oversight of the Ethics and Conflict of Interest
Policies of the Town.  The Board of Ethics shall oversee and regulate the
ethics and conflict of interest policies of the Town.



      (4)   Code of Ethics Ordinance.  Said rules and regulations
of the Board of Ethics shall be set forth in the form of an Ordinance to be
approved by the Legislative Council, upon the advice of the Mayor and the
Board of Ethics, as set forth in this Charter.



         (a)   No Ordinance shall be adopted which circumvents or
otherwise violates the requirements of this Charter pertaining to the
requirements of the General Statutes pertaining to the requirements of:



            (i)   probable cause findings;



            (ii)   confidentiality of complaints;



            (iii)   investigations;



            (iv)   the conduct of hearings;



            (v)   informing the complainant and respondent of
findings;



            (vi)   continuing confidentiality in the event of
a finding of no probable cause; and,



            (vii)   public disclosure of a finding of probable
cause.



         (b)   Moreover, the Ordinance shall include a provision
pertaining to the expeditious review of complaints and the issuance of
determinations or other actions by the Board of Ethics.



         (c)   Upon request of the Legislative Council or the
Board of Ethics, prior to legislative action, the Town Attorney shall render
an opinion pertaining to the compliance of the provisions of a proposed
ethics Ordinance or any amendment thereto with the requirements of this
Charter, the General Statutes and Law.



      (5)   Finding of a Violation.  A finding by the Board of
Ethics of a violation of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics provisions of
this Charter or its related implementing Ordinances, pertaining to
allegations of unethical conduct, corrupting influence or illegal activities
(including violations of federal, state or local law), shall be referred to:



         (a)   The Legislative Council in the case of any Elected
Official;



         (b)   The appointing authority in the case of any
Appointed Public Official; and,



         (c)   The person's supervisor in the case of any
employee,



for appropriate disciplinary action to be taken within thirty (30) Days of
receipt of the Board's finding(s) and decision.



Such finding(s) and decision would subject the parties to the provisions of
§§ 3-9.B(3) and 3-10 of this Charter, which may include removal from
office.  The findings pertaining to violations of this Charter shall cite
the opinions of the Town Attorney pertaining to the application of any of the
provisions of this Charter, if any.  In the event there is no such opinion
and an interpretation of a provision of the Charter is required to facilitate
such finding, the Board shall consult with the Town Attorney or, in the event
of recusal by the Town Attorney, an independent counsel appointed for such
purpose.



      (6)   Appeal.  Any Public Official or employee may, within
thirty (30) Days from the date any disciplinary action is voted or taken
pursuant to the Board's decision that a violation of this Charter and/or any
such code of ethics has occurred, take such appeal as may be permitted by the
General Statutes, if any.  In the event there is no such appeal permitted by
the General Statutes, the findings shall be final.



   C.   Police Commission.



      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be a Police Commission
which shall have the authority to exercise the powers and duties contained in
this Charter and Ordinances pertaining to the oversight of the general
management (including operations) of the Police Department of the Town and
the equipment used by the members of the Department.  In this regard, the
Commission shall approve or disapprove policies, rules and regulations
proposed by the Chief of Police as set forth in § 8-5.A (4) of this Charter.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Commission shall
consist of five (5) Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in § 7-1.B
of this Charter.  The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Term.  Following the municipal election of 2013
and biennially thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint members for a term of two
(2) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of January of the year of
appointment.



      (3)   Functions of the Commission. For the purposes of meeting
the requirements of the General Statutes, this Charter and any applicable
Ordinances, the Commission shall:



         (a)   confer with and advise the Mayor and the Chief of
Police with respect to the general management of the Police Department;



         (b)   review and comment on the budget request of the
Police Department prior to its submission to the Mayor;



         (c)   have the sole power to appoint, promote and remove
all personnel, including officers and members of the Police Department under
such regulations as it adopts for that purpose.



            (i)   Said power to appoint and promote personnel
shall be exercised, by majority vote, from the top three (3) candidates on
any applicable Merit System eligibility list promulgated under civil service
rules and regulations.



            (ii)   Said power to remove shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter and law.



            (iii)   With regard to the power to appoint,
promote and remove officers and members of the Department, the Chief of
Police shall provide a recommendation to the Commission.



      (4)   Complaints.  The appointed officers and members of the
Department shall hold office during good behavior and until removed for cause
upon written charges and after hearing.  The Commission shall meet and hear,
upon written request, the complaint of:



         (a)   any member of the Police Department by reason of
the acts or conduct of any officer.



         (b)   any citizen of the Town by reason of any alleged
misconduct or malfeasance of any member of the Police Department.



   As a party to any proceeding or hearing, any member of the Police
Department may be represented by counsel.  Said Commission shall make such
recommendations as it deems reasonable to adjust a complaint heard by it but
shall not commit the Town for the payment of money damages and may not affect
the rights of any person under the Merit System.



   D.   Fire Commission.



      (1)   Establishment. There shall be a Fire Commission which
shall have the authority to exercise the powers and duties contained in this
Charter and Ordinances pertaining to the oversight of the general management
(including operations) of the Fire Department of the Town and the equipment
used by the members of the Department.  In this regard, the Commission shall
approve or disapprove policies, rules and regulations proposed by the Fire
Chief as set forth in § 8-5.B(2) of this Charter.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Commission shall
consist of five (5) Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in § 7-1.B
of this Charter.  The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.



         (a)    Term.  Following the municipal election of 2013
and biennially thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint members for a term of two
(2) years for a term commencing on the 1st Day of January of the year of
appointment.



      (3)   Duties and Responsibilities.  For the purposes of
meeting the requirements of the General Statutes, this Charter and any
applicable Ordinances, the Commission shall:



         (a)   confer with and advise the Mayor and the Fire
Chief with respect to the general management of the Fire Department.



         (b)   review and comment on the budget request for the
Fire Department prior to its submission to the Mayor.



         (c)   have the sole power to appoint, promote and remove
all personnel including sworn personnel under such regulations as it adopts
for that purpose.



            (i)   Said power to appoint and promote personnel
shall be exercised, by majority vote, from the top three (3) candidates on
any applicable Merit System eligibility list, promulgated under civil service
rules and regulations.



            (ii)   Said power to remove shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter and law.



            (iii)   With regard to the power to appoint,
promote and remove personnel, the Fire Chief shall provide a recommendation
to said Commission.



         (d)   appoint Fire Marshal(s) and Deputy Fire Marshal(s)
as set forth in the General Statutes.



      (4)   Complaints.



         (a)   The Commission shall meet and hear, upon written
request, the complaint of any member of the Fire Department by reason of the
acts or conduct of any officer.



         (b)   The Commission shall meet and hear, upon written
request, the complaint of any citizen of the Town by reason of any alleged
misconduct or malfeasance of any member of the Fire Department.



         (c)   Any member of the Department may be represented by
counsel at any proceeding or hearing to which he is a party.



         (d)   Said Commission shall make such recommendations as
it deems reasonable to adjust a complaint heard by it but shall not commit
the Town for the payment of money damages and may not affect the rights of
any person under the Merit System.



   E.   Zoning Board of Appeals.



      (1)   Establishment. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals
to exercise the following powers and duties as more explicitly set forth in
the General Statutes:



         (a)   To hear and decide zoning appeals;



         (b)   To hear and decide all land use matters as may be
permitted by law; and,



         (c)   To determine and vary the application of the
zoning bylaws, Ordinances or regulations in cases of exceptional difficulty
or unusual hardship.



The ability to hear cases shall be limited as set forth in the General
Statutes.  The validity and effect of variances shall be governed by the
General Statutes.  The provision of § 7-1.E of this Charter shall be
confirmed in the form of an Ordinance.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Board (comprised of
five (5) regular members and three (3) members of a "Panel of Alternates")
shall consist of eight (8) Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in §
7-1.B of this Charter.  The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.  The Board shall follow the requirements of the
General Statutes pertaining to the call of public meetings, the
administration of oaths, compelling of attendance of witnesses, preparation
of meeting minutes and the filing of rules, regulations and requirements (and
the amendment or repeal thereof) and decisions as public records.



         (a)   Term.  The Mayor shall appoint members for a term
of five (5) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of the
year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the
date of the original appointments.



            (i)   Term of the Panel of Alternates.  The Mayor
shall appoint members to the Panel of Alternates for a term of five (5)
years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of the year of
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments.



         (b)   Assignment of the Panel of Alternates.  Members
of the Panel of Alternates shall be designated to act in the place of a
member as set forth in the General Statutes.



         (c)   Restrictions.  The regular members and Panel of
Alternates shall not be members of the body acting as the Zoning Commission.



         (d)   Vacancy.  Notwithstanding the provisions of §
7-1.C of this Charter, any Vacancy in the regular members of the Board or
Panel of Alternates, shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by
the Mayor.



   F.   Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be a Planning and Zoning
Commission to exercise the powers and duties as set forth in the General
Statutes.  The provision of § 7-2F of this Charter shall be confirmed in
the form of an Ordinance or action by the Legislative Council in accordance
with the provisions of the General Statutes.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Commission shall
consist of nine (9) regular members and three (3) alternate members, all
Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in § 7-1.B of this Charter. 
The Commission shall choose a chair and such other officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Term.  The Mayor shall appoint members for a term
of three (3) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of the
year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the
date of the original appointments (Historical Note: See, § 11-11 of this
Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on
November 8, 1983).



            (i)   Term of the Alternate Members.  The Mayor
shall appoint alternate members for a term of three (3) years, on the 1st Day
of February of the year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as
established at the date of the original appointments (Historical Note: See,
§ 11-12 of this Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the
Charter adopted on November 8, 1983).



         (b)   Assignment of Alternate Members.  When a regular
member of the Planning and Zoning Commission is absent, the Chairman of the
Commission shall designate an alternate, choosing alternates in rotation so
that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible.  If any
alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall
be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.



      (3)   Division of Commission.  The Commission may be divided
into a zoning section and a planning section, each to consist of four (4)
members and the chairman.  Each section shall be subject to the provisions
of § 7-1.F of this Charter.  The Chair shall preside over both sections.



   G.   Building Board of Appeals.



      (1)   Establishment.  As required by the General Statutes,
there shall be a Building Board of Appeals to exercise the powers and duties
as set forth in the General Statutes and the Basic Building Code of the State.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Commission shall
consist of five (5) regular members, all Electors of the Town, unless
otherwise required by the General Statutes, appointed as set forth in §
7-1.B of this Charter.  The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Term.  The Mayor shall appoint members for a term
of five (5) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of January of the
year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the
date of the original appointments.



   H.   Personnel Appeals Board.



      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be a Personnel Appeals
Board for the purpose of hearing and determining any grievance, as shall be
defined by Ordinance, of any employee or group of employees who are members
of the classified service.  The Board shall adopt rules of procedures which
shall insure any aggrieved employee a prompt and fair hearing and an
opportunity to be heard in person or by the employee's chosen
representative.  The provision of § 7-2.H of this Charter shall be
confirmed in the form of an Ordinance or action by the Legislative Council in
accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Board shall consist of
five (5) Electors of the Town holding no salaried municipal office, appointed
as set forth in § 7-1.B of this Charter. The Commission shall choose a chair
and such other officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Term.  The Mayor shall appoint regular members
for a term of three (3) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of
February of the year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as
established at the date of the original appointments (Historical Note: See,
§ 11-13 of this Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the
Charter adopted on November 8, 1983).



         (b)   Minority Party Representation.  Notwithstanding
the provisions of § 7-1.F of this Charter, the minority party requirements
set forth in the applicable General Statutes shall apply in the event such
statutory standard is more restrictive than the Charter.



         (c)   Quorum.  The quorum requirements shall conform to
the requirements of the General Statutes.



      (3)   The Board shall have such other duties and powers as may
be prescribed by the Council.



      (4)   Statutory Appeal.  The decisions of the Board may be
appealed to the Superior Court as set forth in the General Statutes.



   I.   Library Board.



      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be a Library Board which
shall have the authority to establish policies for the operation and use of
all public libraries in the Town and shall exercise full supervision over all
public library operations in accordance with the General Statutes, this
Charter and Ordinances.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Board shall consist of
five (5) Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in § 7-1.B of this
Charter.  The Commission shall choose a chair and such other officers as it
may desire.



         (a)   Term.   The Mayor shall appoint members for a
term of five (5) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of
the year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the
date of the original appointments (Historical Note: See, § 11-14 of this
Charter pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on
November 8, 1983).



      (3)   Such Board shall appoint and may remove the Library
Director and any Assistant Directors.  Subject to the provisions of the
Merit System, said Board shall appoint such other personnel as are necessary
to administer the library system of the Town.



   J.   Inland Wetlands Commission.



      (1)   Establishment.  There shall be an Inland Wetlands
Commission which shall promulgate such regulations, in conformity to those
adopted by the State, as are necessary to protect the wetlands and
watercourses within the Town (Transition Provision E: See, § 11-15 of this
Charter pertaining to the repeal and/or the effect of conflicting provisions
of the Code of Ordinances).



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Commission shall
consist of eleven (11) Electors of the Town appointed as set forth in §
7-1.B of this Charter.  The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Term.  The Mayor shall appoint members for a term
of three (3) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of May of the year
of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of
the original appointments.



         (b)   Ex-officio Members.  The Mayor and Town Planner
shall serve as ex-officio members of the Commission, without vote.  The
Legislative Council may, by Ordinance, establish an ex officio membership for
a member of the Council.



      (3)   Duties and Appointment and Membership.  The Commission
shall carry out the provisions of the General Statutes pertaining to the
protection of wetlands and watercourses within the Town limits.



SECTION 7-3:  APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS REQUIRED BY THE CHARTER.



   The Legislative Council shall adopt Ordinances setting forth the
organizational structure and powers of Boards and Commissions pertaining to
the following matters:



   A.   Economic development;



   B.   Public housing;



   C.   Human rights, opportunities and relations;



   D.   Veterans affairs;



   E.   Parks, recreation and youth services;



   F.   Retirement, pensions and/or disabilities;



   G.   Environmental policy, energy use, climate change, natural
resources, open space, solid waste, recycling, litter and blight; and,



   H.   Regulation and management of traffic and parking.



SECTION 7-4:  APPOINTED BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED BY ORDINANCE OR
AS OTHERWISE MAY BE PRESCRIBED BY THE GENERAL STATUTES.



   The Legislative Council may establish, by Ordinance or as otherwise may
be prescribed by the General Statutes, such additional Boards and Commissions
as are necessary to effectuate the powers and purposes of the Town as
enumerated in the General Statutes, Special Acts and this Charter.



SECTION 7-5:  BOARDS APPOINTED BY THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.



   A.   Board of Assessment Appeals.



      (1)   Establishment. There shall be a Board of Assessment
Appeals which shall have such powers as set forth in the General Statutes.



      (2)   Appointment and Membership.  The Board shall consist of
three (3) Electors of the Town, appointed by the Legislative Council.  The
Commission shall choose a chair and such other officers as it may desire.



         (a)   Term.  The Council shall appoint members for a
term of three (3) years, for a term commencing on the 1st Day of February of
the year of appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the
date of original appointments (Historical Note: See, § 11-16 of this Charter
pertaining to the historical antecedents under the Charter adopted on
November 8, 1983).



         (b)   Minority Party Representation.  Said Commission
members shall be subject to the requirements of § 7-1.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Miscellaneous.  Notwithstanding the provisions of
the Charter to the contrary, the Legislative Council shall set the
compensation for members of the Board of Assessment Appeals and no person
holding an elective, appointive or salaried office or position in the Town
shall be eligible to serve.  Said Board shall have all powers and duties
conferred or imposed by the General Statutes on boards of tax review or
assessment appeals.



SECTION 7-6:  CONTINUANCE OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



   Boards and Commissions established under the authority of prior
Charters which may be modified, altered or abolished by this Charter will
continue under the provisions of this Charter; unless otherwise specified.



SECTION 7-7:  MERGER OR CONSOLIDATION OF BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



   The functions of any Board or Commission required under this Chapter
may be merged or consolidated with another by Ordinance.



CHAPTER VIII:  THE TOWN GOVERNMENT: DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS



SECTION 8-1:  THE AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH THE DEPARTMENTS OF TOWN GOVERNMENT.



   A.   Powers and Purposes.  In addition to the Departments
specifically set forth in §§ 8-3 through 8-7 of this Charter, the Town,
acting within the powers and duties enumerated in the General Statutes, any
applicable Special Acts and this Charter may establish, by Ordinance, such
Departments necessary to carry out and organize the functions of
government.  The express intent of this Charter is to afford the Mayor and
the Legislative Council the ability to organize the government in order to
achieve a balance of efficiency and service to the people of the Town
consistent with the provisions herein.



   B.   Creation of Departments.  Accordingly, the Legislative Council
may, by Ordinance proposed by the Mayor, establish the Departments of the
Town.  Each of these Departments shall be constituted to perform such
functions and have such powers and duties as are imposed by the General
Statutes, this Charter and Ordinances.  Moreover, the head of each
Department established by Ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of
this Charter generally applicable to Department Heads and shall serve
coterminously with the term of the appointing Mayor (however, may continue to
serve until a successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified); unless
otherwise provided by the General Statutes or this Charter.  All Departments
shall be entitled to office space provided by the Town and shall remain open
during such hours as the Mayor may direct.



   C.   Reorganization Plans.



      (1)     The delineation of departmental categories in this
Charter is advisory and may be altered pursuant to a reorganization plan
proposed by the Mayor and approved by the Legislative Council.  Accordingly,
any departmental categories may be reorganized and Department Heads may be
reassigned (unless otherwise prohibited by law). The reorganization plan is
subject to the limitation that all governmental functions set forth in this
Charter shall continue to be provided to the residents of the Town; unless
such function was eliminated as the result of a repealed Federal or State
mandate and not otherwise in the best interest of the Town to continue. 
Moreover, any reorganization plan shall include specific reference to the
departmental function(s) set forth in this Charter that will be carried out
in said reorganization and shall be accompanied by an opinion of the Town
Attorney verifying that the reorganized function complies with the Charter
requirements.



      (2)   Any internal departmental reorganization plan proposed
by a Department Head, pertaining to non-budgetary matters, shall be forwarded
to the Mayor for review, approval and final action, prior to announcement and
implementation of the plan by the Department.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, with regard to the Police and Fire Departments such internal
departmental reorganizational plan shall be forwarded by the Department Head
(following review and approval by the Mayor) to the Police Commission and the
Fire Commission, as applicable, for review, approval and final action, prior
to announcement and implementation of the plan.



SECTION 8-2:  APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT HEADS AND OTHER MAYORAL DEPARTMENTAL
APPOINTEES; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Appointment.  Except as otherwise provided by law or the
provisions of this Charter, all Department Heads and other Mayoral appointees
shall be appointed by and subject to the authority of the Mayor, following
approval by the Legislative Council.  The terms of the Department Heads
established by Charter are set forth in each applicable section.  The terms
of Department Heads and other Mayoral appointees established by Ordinance or
otherwise shall be coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor unless
otherwise set forth by agreement of the Mayor and the Legislative Council by
Ordinance (for Departments not set forth in this Charter), by employment
contract (as set forth in § 8-2.C of this Charter) or both.



   B.   Removal.  The Department Head or appointee may be removed from
office by the Legislative Council, in accordance with the provisions of §
3-10 of this Charter or by authority of the Mayor, in accordance with §
3-10.A(2) and the provisions of Chapter VIII of this Charter.



      (1)   Vacancy.  In the event of a Vacancy in the office of
any Department Head or other Mayoral appointee, a successor may be appointed
as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter.



      (2)   Full-time Service.  The general rule is that all
Department Heads and Mayoral appointees shall devote full time to the duties
of office; subject to modification by Ordinance or adoption of the budget,
following a written determination by either the Mayor or the Legislative
Council that full-time service is not required.



   C.   Employment Contracts.  Except for employees of the Mayor's
office and the Legal Department (unless otherwise required by law) and
notwithstanding the provisions of § 8-2 of this Charter, the Mayor may, with
the approval of the Council, enter into an employment contract with a
Department Head or Mayoral appointee not covered by the provisions of the
Merit System.  Such contracts shall be subject to the following provisions:



      (1)   The term of the contract shall not exceed three (3)
years, provided that any such contract shall include an initial ninety (90)
day probationary period.  Moreover, the contract term shall not extend more
than twelve months following the commencement of the term of office following
that of the appointing Mayor.



      (2)   The contract may extend for said period, only if
recommended by the Mayor and approved by a two-thirds (2/3rds) vote of the
Council present and voting.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 3-10 of this
Charter, the Mayor may remove the contract employee at any time.  However,
the contract shall contain a provision that would provide the employee with a
sole remedy in the event such employee is removed without cause; which
provision shall not apply in the event the employee is removed for cause or
within the first ninety (90) days of such contract.



      (4)   In the event the Mayor announces an intention not to run
for re-election or following September 1 of the year in which there is a
Mayoral election, whichever is earlier, the Mayor shall not recommend nor
shall the Council act upon an employment contract under this provision.



The Mayor may instruct the Personnel Director to prepare job descriptions,
conduct searches, interviews and examinations for any position to be filled
under this section.



   D.   Effect of Charter on Department Heads.  Unless otherwise
terminated pursuant to law, the status of Department Heads holding office
subject to appointment on the effective date of this Charter shall continue
until the end of their term.  Thereafter, the provisions of this Charter
shall apply.



   E.   Authority of Department Heads.  Once appointed as described in
this Charter, the Department Head shall appoint, hire, discipline and remove
all deputies, assistants and other employees of the Department as provided
for in the budget and subject to (1) the authority of the Mayor or designee;
(2) any specific provisions of this Charter or law pertaining to the
authority of the Department Head and the relationship with a governing Board
or Commission; (3) the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission;
and, (4) any applicable collective bargaining agreements.  This provision
shall not apply to Mayoral appointees assigned to a particular department.



   F.   Qualifications of Department Heads.  The job qualifications of
all Department Heads, in addition to those enumerated in this Charter, by the
General Statutes or Special Act shall be established by Ordinance following
the recommendation of the human resources or personnel director or as may
otherwise be designated by Ordinance.  Said job qualifications shall be
prepared in accordance with nationally accepted professional standards and
best practices in the applicable field and shall be reviewed and updated, if
necessary, every four (4) years and whenever a Vacancy occurs in the position.



   G.   Compensation.  The salaries and compensation of all Officials,
Department Heads and employees of the Town shall be set by Ordinance or
through the budget, except where otherwise fixed by the General Assembly or
as otherwise covered by the Merit System and civil service rules, collective
bargaining agreement(s) or contract.



   H.   Residency.  The Legislative Council may, in its discretion,
establish by Ordinance a residency requirement or compensation benefit for
residency in the Town for all Department Heads, to the extent permitted by
law and subject to the provisions of applicable collective bargaining
agreements.



   I.   Liability.  Any Public Official, any employee of any
Department or member of any Board or Commission of the Town who shall, in
order to provide for the payment of any bill, account or claim against the
Town, knowingly instruct, or vote to instruct, or in any manner cause, the
Director of Finance to draw upon any specific item of the appropriations as
made by the Legislative Council other than the item against which such bill,
account or claim is properly and legally chargeable, shall be personally
liable to the Town for the amount of such bill, account or claim.



   J.   Surety Bonds of Certain Town Officials.  The following
employees of the Town, shall severally give bonds, with surety, to said Town
in such manner and form as the General Statutes or Ordinances shall
prescribe, for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective
offices:  the Director of Finance, Purchasing Agent,  Tax Collector, and
any and all Public Officials and employees of said Town in any Department
thereof, charged with the custody and control of property, monies, or goods
of said Town, or the collection or disbursement of the same, as determined by
the Director of Finance or otherwise required by the General Statutes, this
Charter or Ordinance.  The premiums for said bonds shall be paid by the Town.



   All bonds, except that of the Director of Finance, shall be set by and
lodged with the Director of Finance of said Town.  The Director of Finance's
bond shall be set by and lodged with the Mayor.  In case of the refusal or
neglect of any Official or employee to give the bond so required, such office
shall be deemed Vacant by reason of such refusal or neglect, and, on a
declaration being made to the Legislative Council by the Director of Finance
to that effect, such Vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided by this
Charter.



   K.   Position Titles.  The position titles of the Department Heads
set forth in this Charter reflect the title at the time of the adoption of
this Charter.  Titles may be changed; however, the functions and fiduciary
obligations specifically set forth in this Charter shall not be altered.



SECTION 8-3:  THE LEGAL DEPARTMENT - TOWN ATTORNEY.



   A.   Established.  The Town Attorney shall be the head of the Legal
Department of the Town.  In this respect, the Town Attorney shall have the
power to employ bond counsel and such other assistant Town Attorneys, and any
special assistants required, all of whom shall be attorneys admitted to
practice law in this State, and who shall be responsible to the Town Attorney.



   B.   Appointment of the Town Attorney.  The Mayor shall appoint the
Town Attorney as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter.  The Town Attorney
shall serve a term coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to
the provisions of §§ 3-10.A (2) and 8-2.B of this Charter and until a
successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



      (1)   The Mayor shall, subject to the approval of the Council,
propose the rates of compensation to be received by the Town Attorney and
assistants.



   C.   Qualifications.  The Town Attorney shall be an attorney
admitted to practice law in this State and who shall have been practicing for
at least five (5) years.



   D.   Powers and Duties.  The Town Attorney shall be the legal
advisor of the Mayor, and all other Departments, Public Officials, Boards,
Commissions or agencies of the Town, in all matters affecting the interests
of the Town.  In this respect, the Town Attorney shall:



      (1)   appear for and protect the rights of the Town in all
actions, suits or proceedings brought by or against it or any of its
Departments, Public Officials, Boards, Commissions or agencies.



      (2)   have the power, with the approval of the Mayor and
subject to such rules and limitations as the Council may from time to time
adopt, to appeal from orders, decisions or judgments in such cases and to
compromise and settle any claims by or against the Town subject to approval
of the Mayor.



      (3)   prepare or approve the form of all contracts or other
instruments to which the Town is a party or in which it has an interest, and
shall prepare all codifications of Ordinances as may be required by the
General Statutes or the Council.



      (4)   review, at least every five (5) years, the Ordinances
and Statutory Resolutions of the Town to ensure compliance with the General
Statutes and this Charter and to make recommendations to the Legislative
Council accordingly.



   E.   Opinions of the Town Attorney.  Upon written request of the
Mayor or a member of the Council, the Town Attorney shall furnish them with
written opinions on any questions of Law with respect to any Town matter,
including, but not limited to interpretations pertaining to the applicability
and enforcement of the provisions of this Charter.  The opinions of the Town
Attorney shall be indexed and kept in the office of the Town Attorney.  Said
book shall be a matter of public record and the property of the Town and
shall be delivered by the Town Attorney to a successor upon resignation,
removal, or the expiration of the term of office.  Said opinions shall be
determinative with respect to interpretations of law and the Charter and the
actions of the Officials, Boards and Commission of the Town.



SECTION 8-4:  GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION.



   There shall be established a system of government administration
specifically designed to reduce duplication of services and efficiently
foster the delivery of services to the Town. The benefits of such system
shall be conferred upon the general government and, where permitted or by
mutual agreement, upon the Department of Education.



   A.   The Department of Finance.  The Department shall be
responsible for the keeping of accounts and financial records, the assessment
and collection of taxes, special assessments and other revenues, the custody
and disbursement of Town funds and money, the control over expenditures and
such other powers and duties as may be required by the General Statutes, this
Charter, Ordinance or Order or Motion of the Council.



      (1)   The Director of Finance.  The Department Head shall be
the Director of Finance who shall, under this Charter and Ordinances, be
subject to the direction of the Mayor in all matters concerning the financial
affairs of the Town. The director shall be responsible for the efficiency,
discipline and good conduct of the Department and have direct supervision of
the members of the Department.  The Director of Finance shall have a
fiduciary responsibility to the Town and shall, at all times, be required to
accurately report information to the Mayor and the Legislative Council.



         (a)   Appointment.   The Mayor shall appoint the
Director of Finance as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter.  The Director
of Finance shall serve a term coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor,
subject to the provisions of §§ 3-10.A (2) and 8-2.B of this Charter and
until a successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications.  Said Director of Finance shall
be qualified by education, training and experience in public administration
and public finance, including, but not limited to budget, purchasing and
personnel practices as well as additional qualifications as may be
established by Ordinance. Said qualifications shall be in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the
applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees.  Except as
provided in this chapter, the Director of Finance shall appoint and may
remove, subject to the provisions of the Merit System, all other employees of
this Department.  Additionally, the Director of Finance shall have all the
duties and powers prescribed by Law to town treasurers and shall be
responsible for town deposits.



         (d)   Additional Duties and Responsibilities. The
Director of Finance shall:



            (i)   Keep accounts showing the financial
transactions for all Departments and agencies of the Town.



            (ii)   Prescribe the forms of such accounts, with
the approval of the Mayor.



            (iii)   Prepare financial reports for each quarter
and for each fiscal year and such other periods as may be required by the
Mayor.



            (iv)   Prepare monthly reports to the Legislative
Council on transfers as they are prescribed in § 10-7.D of this Charter.



   B.   The Tax Collector.



      (1)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the Tax Collector
as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter utilizing the recruitment provisions
of the Merit System; however, the Tax Collector may be removed from office as
set forth in §§ 3-10 and 8-2.B of this Charter or as may be required by
law.  The Tax Collector shall hold office until Completion of Service or
until a successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



      (2)   Qualifications.  The Tax Collector shall be required to
meet the requirements, qualifications and certifications as may be set forth
in the General Statutes.  Said qualifications shall be in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the
applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



      (3)   Powers and Duties.  The Tax Collector shall collect all
taxes and assessments duly levied by the Town, as provided for in the General
Statutes of the State of Connecticut, this Charter and the Ordinances and
such other duties as the Council may prescribe.  In addition, the Tax
Collector shall:



         (a)   be responsible to the Director of Finance, or such
other official as may be designated by the Mayor, in the performance of
duties.



         (b)   report all tax collection information as
prescribed by the Director of Finance in accordance with the policies of the
Department of Finance.



         (c)   pay to the accounts designated by the Director of
Finance all monies collected in accordance with the policies of the
Department of Finance.



   C.   The Assessor.



      (1)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the Assessor as
set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter, utilizing the recruitment provisions
of the Merit System; however, the Assessor may be removed from office as set
forth in §§ 3-10 and 8-2.B of this Charter or as may be required by law. 
The Assessor shall hold office until Completion of Service or until a
successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



      (2)   Qualifications.  The Assessor shall be required to meet
the requirements, qualifications and certifications as may be set forth in
the General Statutes.  Said qualifications shall be in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the
applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



      (3)   Powers and Duties.  The Assessor shall have the powers
and shall perform all duties prescribed for assessors in the General
Statutes, together with such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by
this Charter, the Ordinances and such other duties as the Council may
prescribe.  In addition, the Assessor shall be responsible to the Director
of Finance, or such other official as may be designated by the Mayor, in the
performance of duties.



   D.   The Purchasing Agent.



      (1)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the Purchasing
Agent as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter, utilizing the recruitment
provisions of the Merit System; however, the Purchasing Agent may be removed
from office as set forth in §§ 3-10 and 8-2.B of this Charter or as may be
required by law.  The Purchasing Agent shall hold office until Completion of
Service or until a successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



      (2)   Qualifications.  The Purchasing Agent shall be required
to meet the requirements, qualifications and certifications required by the
Town in accordance with nationally accepted professional standards and best
practices in the applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this
Charter.



      (3)   Powers and Duties.  The Purchasing Agent shall be
responsible for managing the centralized purchasing system for the Town and
shall contract for and purchase all services, supplies, equipment, materials
and other commodities required by all Departments, offices, Boards,
Commissions and other agencies of the Town, including, where practicable, the
Board of Education, in a manner consistent with this Charter and the
Ordinances.  The Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for the efficiency,
discipline and good conduct of the system.  In addition, the Purchasing
Agent shall:



         (a)   In the performance of duties be responsible to the
Director of Finance, or such other official as may be designated by the Mayor.



         (b)   With respect to said Board of Education, be
required to take advantage of incentives, cooperative agreements and
consortiums generally available to boards of education in order to expedite
the acquisition of goods and services for said Board to meet the curriculum
and scheduling requirements of the Board, upon reasonable notice by the
Board.  The rules governing purchasing and procurement, including a
definition of "reasonable notice", shall be set forth by Ordinance.  The
Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good
conduct of the system.



         (c)   Facilitate, where in the best interest of the
Town, participation in any joint purchasing program administered by the State
of Connecticut, any Regional Council of Governments, the Connecticut
Conference of Municipalities, the Connecticut Association of Boards of
Education or any other public agency, including another municipality or
municipalities, or other nonprofit organization the members of which are
public bodies.



      (4)   Centralized Purchasing System.  There shall be a
centralized purchasing system for the Town (including, where practicable, the
Board of Education) covering the purchase of all services, supplies,
materials, equipment and other commodities required.  In order to advance
the provisions of this Charter, the Legislative Council shall, upon
recommendation of the Purchasing Agent, establish by Ordinance the rules and
regulations governing the operation of said central purchasing system in a
manner consistent with the General Statutes, this Charter, Ordinance and
standards established by organizations such as the National Institute of
Governmental Purchasing and the National Association of State Purchasing
Officials as well as the Model Procurement Code and Ordinances prepared by
the American Bar Association.  The rules and regulations shall include, but
not be limited to, provisions governing:



         (a)   Additional roles and responsibilities of the
Purchasing Agent;



         (b)   Competitive procurement and solicitation
requirements, including local business preference;



         (c)   Specifications; requisition standards; and,
inspection and testing methodologies, following consultation with the Mayor,
Director of Finance and appropriate Town Officials; and,



         (d)   Storage; recycled and recyclable products;
transfer or sale of surplus property and appropriate reporting standards;
and, inventory control.



The Purchasing Agent shall review such Ordinance, every two years, and make
recommendations pertaining to the purchase of all services, supplies,
materials, equipment and other commodities required as well as the factors,
including, but not limited to, cost, competition and  processes, that assure
compliance with the provisions of this Charter.



      (5)   Repealer.   Any provisions referring to purchasing
inconsistent with the terms of this section referred to elsewhere in this
Charter are hereby expressly repealed.



   E.   Personnel and Human Resources.



      (1)   Equal Employment Opportunity.  It shall be the policy
of the Town to afford equal opportunity to all qualified applicants and to
all Public Officials and employees of the Town with respect to initial
employment, advancement and general working conditions, without regard to
race, religious creed, color, age, gender, marital status, sexual orientation
or civil union status, ancestry, national origin, physical disability or any
other persons as may be defined or otherwise protected by the General
Statutes.  Public Notice shall be given for all openings in Town positions,
including Mayoral appointments, prior to the filling of such positions.  For
these purposes Public Notice shall be posted, prior to the date that final
applications may be due, as determined by the Director of Personnel.



      (2)   The Merit System and Personnel and Human Resources
Policy of the Town. It shall be the policy of the Town to establish and
maintain, by Ordinance and regulation, consistent with the policies of this
Charter, a Merit System and civil service rules and regulations that will
assure recruitment of the best available persons to appointment to Vacant
positions in the Classified Services of the Town on the basis of merit and in
conformity with recognized principles of public personnel administration. 
Moreover, the Director of Personnel shall endeavor to train and evaluate
employees and bargain fairly with the collective bargaining representatives
of employees.



      (3)   Director of Personnel.



         (a)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the
Director of Personnel as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter.  The
Director of Personnel shall serve a term coterminous with that of the
appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of §§ 3-10.A (2) and 8-2.B of
this Charter and until a successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications.  The Director of Personnel shall
be required to meet the requirements, qualifications and certifications
required by the Town in accord with nationally accepted professional
standards and best practices in the applicable field as developed pursuant to
§ 8-2.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Powers and Duties.  The Director of Personnel
shall be the primary advisor to the Mayor and Legislative Council regarding
the personnel and human resources policies of the Town and the administrator
of the Personnel, Human Resources and Merit System, including the civil
service rules and regulations, as set forth in § 7-2.A(2)(a) of this
Charter.  In the event the Director is appointed the chief examiner, as
required by the General Statutes, said Director shall serve as Executive
Secretary of the Civil Service Commission.  The Director shall be
responsible for using best practices in the field pertaining to the following:



            (i)   Administration of up-to-date civil service
lists and the competitive examinations necessary for the hiring and promotion
of Town personnel (including, the Board of Education, where practicable);



            (ii)   Planning and implementing a system to
achieve productivity improvements through training and technology;



            (iii)   Ensuring that job descriptions are current
and reflect the skills and tasks necessary to conduct the business of the
Town;



            (iv)   Undertaking the cost effective selection
and administration of benefits for Town employees;



            (v)   Assisting the Civil Service Commission in
its deliberations and investigations;



            (vi)   Establishing and maintaining timely and
up-to-date eligibility lists for the various classes and positions of
employees and notifying the Department Heads (including the Superintendent of
Schools) of the expiration of said lists no less than six (6) months prior to
said expiration and certifying eligible employees to the appropriate
Departments in accordance with selection standards;



            (vii)   Maintaining all necessary performance
records and ratings and all other records necessary for the administration of
the Commission and the Department;



            (viii)   Making an annual report to the Civil
Service Commission, the Legislative Council and the Mayor; and



            (ix)   Such other duties as set forth by Ordinance
or by the Civil Service Commission in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter and Ordinances.



SECTION 8-5:  PUBLIC SAFETY, HEALTH AND COMMUNITY SERVICES.



   A.   The Police Department.



      (1)   The Police Department shall be responsible for the
preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of
criminals, regulation of traffic, protection of the rights of persons and
property and enforcement of the Laws of the State and the Ordinances of the
Town and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith.



      (2)   All sworn members of the Department shall have powers
and duties with respect to the service of criminal process and enforcement of
criminal laws as are vested in police officers by the General Statutes.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the power of
special constables appointed in accordance with the General Statutes.



      (4)   The Chief of Police - Powers and Duties.  The head of
the Police Department shall be the Chief of Police who shall be responsible
for the general management and operations of the Police Department.  In this
regard, the Chief shall propose, in writing, policies, rules and regulations
concerning the general management and operations of said Department and the
conduct of all its members, subject to approval by the Board of Police
Commissioners.



         (a)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the Chief
of Police as set forth in § 8-2.B of this Charter; however, the Chief may be
removed from office in accordance with the provisions of the General
Statutes.  The Chief of Police shall hold office until Completion of Service
or until a successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications.  The Chief of Police shall meet
the requirements, qualifications and certifications as may be set forth in
the General Statutes and required by the Town in accordance with nationally
accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable field as
developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Additional Duties and Responsibilities.



            (i)   The Chief shall be responsible for the
training, efficiency, discipline and good conduct of all members of the
Department and the care and custody of all property used by said Department,
and shall consult with the Police Commission on the general management of the
Department, including, but not limited to, prior consultation on budgetary
matters and as otherwise required by § 8-1.C of this Charter.



            (ii)   The Chief may discipline members of the
Department for violation of rules and regulations of the Department.  Any
such disciplinary action may be appealed by the individual to the Police
Commission.  The appeal of such disciplinary action shall stay the
imposition of the discipline until the appeal is decided by the Commission
unless the Chief finds that immediate suspension with pay is required to
ensure the public safety, which finding is subject to immediate review by the
Commission.



            (iii)   The Chief shall assign all members of the
regular divisions to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties.



   B.   The Fire Department.



      (1)   The Fire Department shall consist of the regular and
volunteer divisions which shall be responsible for the protection of life and
property in the Town from fire and other like disasters and emergencies, and
for the enforcement of all Laws, Ordinances, and regulations relating to fire
prevention and fire safety.



      (2)   The Fire Chief - Powers and Duties.  The head of the
Fire Department shall be the Fire Chief who shall be responsible for the
general management and operations of the Fire Department.  In this regard,
the Chief shall propose, in writing, policies, rules and regulations
concerning the general management and operations of said Department and the
conduct of all its members, subject to approval by the Fire Commission.



         (a)   Appointment.   The Mayor shall appoint the Fire
Chief as set forth in § 8-2.B of this Charter; however, the Chief may be
removed from office in accordance with the provisions of the General
Statutes.  The Fire Chief shall hold office until Completion of Service or
until a successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications.  The Fire Chief shall meet the
requirements, qualifications and certifications as may be set forth in the
General Statutes and required by the Town in accordance with nationally
accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable field as
developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Additional Duties and Responsibilities. 



            (i)   The Fire Chief shall assign all members of
the regular divisions to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties.



            (ii)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the
training, efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the regular and
volunteer divisions and for the care and custody of all property used by the
Department.



            (iii)   The Fire Chief shall consult with the Fire
Commission on the general management of the Department, including, but not
limited to, prior consultation on budgetary matters and as otherwise required
by § 8-1.C of this Charter;



            (iv)   The Chief may discipline members of the
Department for violation of rules and regulations of the Department, where
applicable in accordance with the General Statutes.



            (v)   Any such disciplinary action may be appealed
by the individual to the Fire Commission.  The appeal of such disciplinary
action shall stay the imposition of the discipline until the appeal is
decided by the Commission unless the Chief finds that immediate suspension
with pay is required to ensure the public safety, which finding is subject to
immediate review by the Commission.



      (3)   The Fire Marshal.  The Fire Marshal(s) and Deputy Fire
Marshal(s) shall be appointed as set forth in § 7-2.D(3)(d) of this Charter.



      (4)   Volunteer Companies.  Nothing in this Charter shall be
construed to affect the organization, status or property of the active
volunteer fire companies.  Whenever regular and volunteer companies are
acting together, they shall be under the command of the ranking officer of
the regular Fire Department present at the scene.



   C.   The Health District.



      (1)   Under provisions of the General Statutes governing
Health Districts, the Town is authorized to enter into such a District.  Any
provisions of this Charter to the contrary notwithstanding, if such a
District is joined, it shall act in place of the Health Department and the
District Director shall act as Health Director for the Town.



      (2)   At the time of the adoption of this Charter in 2011, the
Town was party to an agreement utilizing the services of the Quinnipiack
Valley Health District.  Said continued utilization of the services of the
Health District is subject to the approval of the Town.



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town may chose to
provide health services to its residents in any manner as may be granted by
the General Statutes.



   D.   Community Services.  There shall be established by Ordinance,
Departments of the Town that deal with key functions such as human services,
recreation and other community services.  Such administrative offices shall
always have in place up-to-date action plans to address the health, human
service and recreation needs of children, youth, adults and the elderly and
shall implement these plans in close coordination with the appropriate state
offices and with other pertinent private and public agencies.



SECTION 8-6:  GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE.



   A.   Department of Public Works and Parks.



      (1)   Powers.  The Department of Public Works and Parks
shall, except as otherwise supplemented by the Legislative Council, have
supervision and control of the planning, constructing and reconstructing,
altering, paving, repaving, maintaining, cleaning, lighting and inspecting of
all Town infrastructure, including, but not limited to, streets, bridges,
parkways, public drains, sidewalks and curbs, sanitation, trees, buildings
and grounds and fleet maintenance. Unless otherwise authorized and agreed to
by the Mayor and the Legislative Council, the Department shall be responsible
for controlling, maintaining, developing, operating and managing all public
grounds, buildings, equipment and facilities provided by the Town for park
purposes.



         (a)   Any provision of this section to the contrary not
withstanding, the Department of Public Works and Parks may maintain and care
for school buildings and grounds, but only if and to the extent and for the
period requested by the Board of Education and approved by the Council,
provided the costs are charged against the Board of Education's
appropriations.



      (2)   Director of Public Works and Parks.  The head of the
Department shall be the Director of Public Works and Parks, who shall
exercise the powers and duties of the Department under the direction of the
Mayor.



         (a)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the
Director of Public Works and Parks as set forth in § 8-2.A of this
Charter.  The Director of Public Works and Parks shall serve a term
coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions of
§§ 3-10.A(2) and 8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor shall be
appointed and shall have qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications. The Director of Public Works and
Parks shall be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative
qualifications or experience.  Said qualifications shall be in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the
applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees.  Subject to
the Merit System, except as hereinafter provided, the Director shall appoint
and may remove all other employees of the Department.



         (d)   Tree Warden.  The Director of Public Works and
Parks shall supervise the tree warden, with all the powers and duties
provided by Law.



         (e)   Additional Park functions.  The Director shall
(i) perform such park duties as the Mayor may direct; (ii) consult with any
Board or Commission established to address park and/ or recreational
functions; (iii) prepare regulations for the use of said park facilities for
recreational programs; and, (iv) recommend, to the Department Head
responsible for recreational activities, the fees to be charged for such use.



   B.   Engineering Department.



      (1)   Powers.  The Department shall be responsible for
providing professional engineering services to assist in maintaining and
improving the Town's infrastructure.  Moreover, the Department shall provide
or supervise planning, surveying, design, and construction administration and
inspection services for the Town's capital improvement projects, including
highway, bridge, storm drainage, and other municipal infrastructure projects.



      (2)   The Town Engineer.  The head of the Department shall be
the Town Engineer who shall, under the Charter and Ordinances, be subject to
the general direction of the Mayor in all matters concerning the engineering
needs of the Town. The director shall be responsible for the efficiency,
discipline and good conduct of the Department and have direct supervision of
the members of the Department.



         (a)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the Town
Engineer as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter.  The Town Engineer shall
serve a term coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the
provisions of §§ 3-10.A (2) and 8-2.B of this Charter and until a successor
shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications.  Said Town Engineer shall be a
professional engineer licensed or certificated by the State in accordance
with the General Statutes, experienced in the active practice of the
profession.  Furthermore, said qualifications shall be in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the
applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees.  The Town
Engineer shall have charge of all engineering work of the Town and shall
appoint (subject to the provisions of the Merit System) and remove such other
assistants as may be required.



         (d)   Responsibilities.  The Town Engineer shall be
responsible to the Mayor and shall have the duty of advising the Department
of Public Works and Parks and any other Board, Commission or Department
concerning engineering problems.



SECTION 8-7:  TOWN PLANNING, ZONING ENFORCEMENT, ENVIRONMENT AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT.



   A.   Town Planning and Zoning Enforcement Responsibilities.  There
shall be Department(s) established for the coordination of the planning and
zoning functions, including, but not limited to the master plan or plan of
development (or the successor planning requirements), building code
inspection and enforcement, building zone regulations, subdivision
regulation, the renewal activities and the capital planning activities of the
Town.  Each of these Departments shall be constituted to perform such
functions and have such powers and duties as are imposed by the General
Statutes, Special Acts, this Charter and the Ordinances.  The directors of
each Department established by Ordinance shall be subject to the provisions
of this Charter generally applicable to Department Heads.



   B.   Building Department.



      (1)   Powers.  The Department shall be responsible for
administering and enforcing the State of Connecticut Building Code and the
provisions of the General Statutes and regulations that govern residential,
commercial and industrial construction.  Moreover, the Department shall
assist the Fire and Police departments in emergency situations pertaining to
enforcement of the provisions of the Building Code.



      (2)   Building Official.  The head of the Department shall be
the Building Official who shall perform such duties as may be required by Law.



         (a)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint and may
remove the Building Official, subject to the provisions of the General
Statutes and, if consistent therewith and applicable thereto, the Merit
System.  In accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes, the
Building Official shall hold office for the prescribed term, subject to
reappointment, or until a successor shall be appointed and shall have
qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications.  Said Building Official shall
meet the qualification and license requirements as set forth in the General
Statutes and meet such education, training and experience in accord with
nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the
applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this Charter.



         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees.  Said
Building Official may appoint and may remove, subject to the provisions of
the Merit System, such assistants as may be necessary.



   C.   The Town Planning and Zoning Department.



      (1)   Powers.  The Department shall, except as otherwise
supplemented by the Legislative Council, be responsible for ensuring
appropriate development and adaptation to changes of the built environment;
protecting the Town's natural resources; updating and enforcing zoning,
inland wetland and water course, subdivision, aquifer protection, flood
plain, village district regulations; processing applications for land use;
providing oversight of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Inland Wetland and Water Course Commission, and other Commissions or
Boards that fall within the purview of the Department; and enforcing the
Anti-Blight and Property Maintenance and related Ordinances of the Town.



      (2)   The Town Planner.  The Town Planner shall be the head
of Town Planning and Zoning Department and shall have the duty of advising
the Mayor and the Town Planning and Zoning Commission concerning a
comprehensive plan of development.  The Town Planner shall have the duty of
advising the Town Planning and Zoning Commission, and any other Commission or
Department concerning the effect of any actions it may take on said
comprehensive plan.  The Town Planner shall be responsible to the Mayor.



         (a)   Appointment.  The Mayor shall appoint the Town
Planner as set forth in § 8-2.A of this Charter.  The Town Planner shall
serve a term coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the
provisions of §§ 3-10.A (2) and 8-2.B of this Charter of this Charter and
until a successor shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



         (b)   Qualifications. The Town Planner shall be a
graduate municipal planner or otherwise professionally qualified by training
or experience, including but not limited to any certifications by
professional organizations in the planning field.  Said qualifications shall
be in accord with nationally accepted professional standards and best
practices in the applicable field as developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of this
Charter.



         (c)   Appointment and Removal of Employees.  Subject to
the provisions of the Merit System, the Town Planner may appoint and may
remove all other employees of the Department.



      (3)   Zoning Enforcement Officer.  The Town Planner shall
appoint and may remove subject to the provisions of the Merit System a Zoning
Enforcement Officer who shall be responsible for the enforcement of zoning
regulations and have such other duties as the Council may prescribe.



   D.   Other Departments.  The Town may establish other Departments
to administer programs pertaining to the environmental, economic development
and planning needs of the Town.



CHAPTER IX:  EDUCATION



SECTION 9-1:  BOARD OF EDUCATION.



   A.   Board of Education Established.  There shall be a Board of
Education consisting of the Mayor, ex-officio, and nine (9) Electors of the
Town, elected as set forth in § 3-3 of this Charter.



   B.   Said Board shall have all the powers conferred and imposed by
the General Statutes on boards of education in respect to the control and
management of schools.



SECTION 9-2:  BUDGET.



   The Board of Education shall submit its budget to the Mayor at the same
time as other Departments of the Town.  If the Board receives an
appropriation greater or less than its original request, it shall forthwith
revise its estimates of expenditure in accordance therewith and file a copy
thereof with the Mayor and with the Council.  The Board shall report monthly
to the Mayor and to the Council a comparison of actual and estimated
expenditures.  The Director of Finance shall keep a full and complete record
of all financial transactions of the Board of Education.



CHAPTER X:  BUDGET



SECTION 10-1:  FORMULATION AND SUBMISSION OF TOWN BUDGETARY REQUESTS.



   A.   Submission of Budgetary Request. Prior to the submission of the
budget of the Mayor to the Council, each Department of the Town supported
wholly or in part of Town funds, including the Board of Education, shall
submit to the Mayor and the Director of Finance at such time in such form and
containing such information as the Director of Finance may require, a
budgetary request showing services, activities and work accomplished during
the current fiscal year and to be accomplished during the ensuing fiscal year.



   B.   Contents of Budgetary Request.  The budgetary request shall
include a detailed estimate of the expenditures to be made by the Department,
and the revenue, other than tax revenues, to be collected in the ensuing
fiscal year and such other information as may be required by the Council, the
Mayor, or the Director of Finance.



   Forms provided by the Director of Finance for the itemized estimates of
income and expenditures shall require no less than the following data:



      (1)   an itemization of all proposed expenditures for services
or administration to be provided, including manpower and monetary
requirements.



      (2)   comparative figures for: (a) actual or estimated income,
other than income from tax revenues, and expenditures for the current fiscal
year; and, (b) Actual income, other than income from tax revenues, and
expenditures for the preceding fiscal year, and proposed expenditures for
current operations during the ensuing fiscal year.



SECTION 10-2:  THE MAYOR, AND THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND THE BUDGET.



   A.   Mayor Transmits Proposed Town Budget to the Legislative
Council.  Annually, not later than the eighteenth (18th) Day of March
("Budget Transmittal"), the Mayor, having reviewed or revised the budgetary
requests outlined in § 10-1 of this Charter, shall present to the Council a
budget that shall provide a listing of all Town funds for the appropriate
period(s) and a budget message that shall:



      (1)   explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of
work programs;



      (2)   outline the proposed financial policies of the Town
government for the ensuing year;



      (3)   describe the important features of the budget -
including major changes from the current fiscal year;



      (4)   summarize the Town's debt position; and,



      (5)   include such other material as the Mayor deems desirable.



   B.   Contents of the Proposed Town Budget.  The Proposed Town
Budget shall show:



      (1)    estimates of revenue, presenting the itemized receipts
collected in the preceding fiscal year, the receipts collected during the
current fiscal year prior to the time of preparing the estimates, total
receipts estimated to be collected during the current fiscal year, and
estimates of the receipts to be collected in the ensuing fiscal year; and,



      (2)   itemized estimates of expenditures, presenting the
actual expenditures for each Department for the last completed fiscal year
and for the current fiscal year prior to the time of preparing the estimates,
total expenditures as estimated for the current fiscal year, and the requests
of the several Departments for the ensuing fiscal year.



      (3)   The contents of the Proposed Town Budget shall also
contain:



         (a)   an estimate of the available surplus or deficit,
at the end of the current fiscal year;



         (b)   proposed expenditures for debt service for the
ensuing fiscal year;



         (c)   the proposed property tax levy for the ensuing
fiscal year;



         (d)    the recommendations of the Mayor and the Director
of Finance of the amounts to be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year for
all items, including those of the Board of Education (as outlined in § 9-2
of this Charter); and,



         (e)   such other information as the Council may
require.  The Mayor shall report to the Council the reason for all such
recommendations.



   C.   Proposed Capital Expenditures.  As a part of the annual
Proposed Town Budget or as a separate report attached thereto, the Mayor
shall present a program of proposed Capital Expenditures for the ensuing
fiscal year and for five fiscal years thereafter. Estimates of the cost of
such expenditures shall be submitted by each Department annually in the form
and manner prescribed by the Mayor and the Director of Finance. The Mayor
shall recommend to the Council those expenditures to be undertaken during the
ensuing fiscal year and the method of financing the same.



   D.   Public Inspection. At the time of Budget Transmittal, the Mayor
shall make available for public inspection in the Town Clerk's Office and the
library system several copies of the Proposed Town Budget and all supportive
material and supplements which are available to the Council, in accordance
with the Public Notice provisions of this Charter.



SECTION 10-3:  LEGISLATIVE ACTION ON THE PROPOSED TOWN BUDGET.



   A.   Public Hearing(s) on the Proposed Town Budget.  Annually, the
Council shall hold one or more public hearings not later than the first (1st)
Day of May, at which any Elector or taxpayer may have an opportunity to be
heard regarding the Proposed Town Budget.



      (1)   Meeting Notice.  On or before the twenty-fifth (25th)
Day of April, the Council shall cause to be issued a Meeting Notice
(including a general summary of the proposed budget) for one or more Public
Hearings on the Proposed Town Budget.



      (2)   Public Inspection.  In accordance with the Public
Notice provisions of this Charter, the Council shall make available for
general distribution to the public of the Town of Hamden, copies of the
Proposed Town Budget including the Board of Education budget in detail,
containing the Mayor's proposals regarding revenues and expenditures, the
comparative figures for the current fiscal year, and the amount to be raised
by taxation.



      (3)   Modification of the Proposed Budget.  After the Public
Hearing(s) on the Proposed Town Budget, the Council may add or increase
programs or amounts and may delete or decrease programs or amounts, except
that no items of expenditure required by Law or for debt service may be
deleted or decreased.



   B.   Adoption of the Proposed Town Budget by the Legislative
Council.  Subject to the provisions of § 10-4 of this Charter, the Council
shall adopt the Proposed Town Budget not later than the seventeenth (17th)
Day of May, and shall make the same available for public inspection in
accordance with the Public Notice provisions of this Charter ("Adopted Town
Budget").



      (1)   Establishment of the Tax Levy.  At the time the Council
adopts said budget, it may also at said time or such later date as the
General Statutes may permit, fix the tax rate in mills, which shall be levied
on the taxable property in the Town for the ensuing fiscal year.



      (2)   Failure to Adopt a Town Budget.  Should the Council not
have adopted a Town Budget within the allotted time, the Proposed Town
Budget, as originally submitted by the Mayor, shall be deemed to have been
adopted by the Council as the Town Budget Ordinance and the Mayor shall have
the right to fix the tax rate and expenditures shall be made in accordance
with the budget so adopted, subject to the provisions of § 10-5 of this
Charter.



      (3)   Lapsed Funds.  Any portion of an annual appropriation
unexpended and unencumbered at the close of a budget year shall lapse.



SECTION 10-4:  APPROVAL, VETO, ACCEPTANCE AND VETO OVERRIDE OF THE ADOPTED
TOWN BUDGET.



   A.   Transmittal of Adopted Town Budget to Mayor. Annually, the
Adopted Town Budget shall be transmitted to the Mayor by the Clerk of the
Council within five (5) Days after Council action thereon, but not later than
the twenty-second (22nd) Day of May, whichever is earlier.



      (1)   Mayoral Action.  Not later than the first (1st) Day of
June or within fifteen (15) Days after said transmittal (whichever is
earlier), the Mayor shall (a) approve; (b) fail to take action; or (c) veto
the Adopted Town Budget.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Mayor's veto
power shall not extend to appropriation items in the Town budget regarding
debt service or the auditing of Town Books and accounts.  In the event the
Mayor fails to take action upon the Adopted Town Budget, the Town Clerk shall
endorse such fact upon the official copy of said Town Budget Ordinance.



      (2)   Legislative Override of Mayoral Veto.  The Adopted Town
Budget vetoed by the Mayor shall be returned within the same fifteen (15)
Days to the Clerk of the Council with a statement of the reasons for the veto.



         (a)   Following receipt of the Mayor's veto, but not
later than the 10th day of June, any vetoed Adopted Town Budget, again
approved by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3rds) of the
Council present and voting at a meeting, shall become effective in accordance
with this section at which time the Mayor shall have the right to fix the tax
rate and expenditures shall be made in accordance with the budget so adopted,
subject to the provisions of § 10-5 of this Charter.



         (b)   In the event the Mayor's veto is sustained, the
Proposed Town Budget, as originally submitted by the Mayor, shall be deemed
to have been adopted by the Council as the Town Budget Ordinance and the
Mayor shall have the right to fix the tax rate and expenditures shall be made
in accordance with the budget so adopted, subject to the provisions of §
10-5 of this Charter.



      (3)   Effective Date of Town Budget Ordinance.  The Town
Budget Ordinance shall become effective on the twenty-first (21st) Day after
Public Notice of Final Action; subject to the provisions of §10-5 of this
Charter.



      (4)   Public Notice. Public Notice of Final Action shall be
provided within twenty-four (24) hours of Final Action.



SECTION 10-5:  PETITION FOR BUDGET OVERRULE.



   A.   The Town Budget Ordinance, except for fixing the tax rate,
shall be subject to overrule.  If within twenty (20) Days after Final Action
on the budget as provided in § 10-4 of this Charter, a petition signed by
not less than fifteen (15%) percent of the Electors of the Town, as
determined from the last official voting list, is filed with the Town Clerk
requesting a referendum, the Council shall, at its next regular meeting, fix
a time not more than thirty (30) days after such meeting for such election,
which shall be called and held in the manner provided by the General Statutes.



      (1)   The Council may by a two-thirds (2/3rds) vote of those
present and voting, add non binding referenda to be on the ballot of such
election.



      (2)   The budget so referred to the Electors of the Town shall
stand approved unless a majority of those voting thereon at such election
shall have voted "no" and at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the Electors
entitled to vote on the question shall have voted.



   B.   Temporary financing and spending shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the General Statutes.



   C.   Failure of the Overrule. In the event the conditions set forth
in § 10-5.A (2) of this Charter are not achieved, the Final Action on the
Adopted Town Budget shall be effective immediately as the Town Budget
Ordinance, upon the certification of the election results.



   D.   Success of the Overrule.  In the event the conditions set
forth in § 10-5.A (2) of this Charter are achieved, the Final Action on the
Adopted Town Budget shall be null and void.  Within fifteen (15) Days
thereafter, the Legislative Council and the Mayor shall enact a Town Budget
Ordinance in accordance with procedures which shall be established by
Ordinance.  The procedures shall include, at least one public hearing and,
to the extent practicable, follow the process set forth in §§ 10-3 and 10-4
of this Charter along a compressed time-line; however, preserving the veto
and override authority as herein set forth.  Moreover, in formulating the
Town Budget Ordinance, the Legislative Council and the Mayor shall take
cognizance of the results of the budget overrule.



SECTION 10-6:  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first (1st) Day of July
and end on the thirtieth (30th) Day of June next following.



SECTION 10-7:  EXPENDITURES AND ACCOUNTING.



   A.   Purchases, Payments, Authorization, Receipt of Funds.  The
Role of the Director of Finance.



      (1)   No purchase shall be made on account of the Town except
as prescribed by this Charter.  The Director of Finance shall record the
amount of authorized purchases and contracts for future purchases as
encumbrances against the appropriation from which they are to be paid.



      (2)   No voucher, claim or charge against the Town shall be
paid until the same has been audited and approved by the Director of Finance
or the Director's agent for correctness and legality.  Checks shall be drawn
by the Director of Finance for the payment of approved claims.



      (3)   The Director of Finance shall prescribe the time at
which and the manner in which persons receiving money on account of the Town
shall pay the same to the Town.



      (4)    In the absence or inability of the Director of Finance
to act with regard to the provisions of § 10-7.A of this Charter, the Mayor
may designate a person to temporarily act in place of the Director of Finance.



   B.   The several Departments, Commissions and Boards of the Town,
including the Board of Education, shall not involve the Town in any
obligation to spend money for any purpose in excess of the amount
appropriated therefore until the matter has been approved and voted by the
Council.



   C.   Each order drawn shall state the Department, Board or
Commission or the appropriation against which it is to be charged.



   D.   General and Special Fund Transfers.



      (1)   Intradepartmental Transfers.  On or before the first
day of July each year, the Legislative Council shall establish, by Ordinance,
an amount of appropriation and restrictions, if any, under the approved
budget (general and special funds) which the Mayor or any Public Official of
any Department, Commission, Board (except the Board of Education) designated
by the Mayor, shall be authorized to transfer between line items within any
Department, Commission or Board.  Said transfers under this section shall
not require approval by the Legislative Council unless the provisions of §
10-7.D(1)(b) of this Charter shall apply.



         (a)   Said Ordinance may establish individual and/or
aggregate transfer limitations.



         (b)   No such transfer in excess of such authorized
amount shall be implemented unless it shall be (i) by Order proposed by the
Mayor or any Public Official of any Department, Commission or Board
designated by the Mayor; and, (ii) approved by majority vote of the
Legislative Council.



      (2)   Interdepartmental Transfers.



         (a)     Pertaining to the End of Fiscal Year.  The
Legislative Council, by Order, may authorize the Director of Finance to make
during the last ninety (90) Days of a fiscal year, interdepartmental
transfers (general and special funds) in an amount that shall be established
by the Legislative Council on or before the first day of July each year, by
Ordinance.



         (b)   Transfers of Unencumbered Appropriations.  The
Council may by Order, upon the approval of the Mayor, transfer any
unencumbered appropriations balance or portion thereof from one Department,
Board or Commission to another.



      (3)   Approved Transfers.  Each approved transfer shall be
described in the monthly financial report prepared in accordance with §
8-4.A(1)(d)(iv) of this Charter.



      (4)   Prohibited Transfers.  No transfer shall be made from
any appropriations for debt service and other statutory charges.



   E.   Additional Appropriations. Additional appropriations over and
above the total budget may be made from time to time by amendment of the
Budget Ordinance by the Council, upon recommendation of the Mayor and
certification from the Director of Finance that there is available an
unappropriated and unencumbered general fund cash balance to meet such
appropriations.



   F.   Liability of Officials or Employees. If any Official or
employee of the Town or the Board of Education shall knowingly incur any
obligation or shall authorize or make any expenditure in violation of the
provisions of this Charter or take part therein, such action may be cause for
removal as set forth in §3-10 of this Charter, civil action or both.  In
addition, the Town may, by vote of the Legislative Council, undertake to
recover from such Official or employee, an amount equal to such obligation or
expenditure so made.



SECTION 10-8:  PUBLIC FUNDS AND FINANCE.



   A.   Issuance Authorized.  The Town shall have the power to incur
indebtedness by authorizing the issuance of its bonds and notes for such
purposes, upon such terms and to such extent as is authorized by the General
Statutes and any applicable Special Acts.  Said power shall extend to
general obligation bonds, bond anticipation notes, temporary notes, emergency
bond issues, revenue anticipation notes, tax anticipation notes and other
issuances permitted by the General Statutes and applicable Special Acts.



   B.   Procedures.  The Legislative Council shall, by Ordinance,
adopt procedures for the authorization, structure and timing of the issuance
of bonds and notes for the purposes authorized by the General Statutes,
applicable Special Acts and this Charter.



      (1)   Capital Project Bonds.  The vote of the Legislative
Council to approve the issuance of Capital Project Bonds shall be by an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of all the members of the Council.



      (2)   Non-Capital Project Bonds.  The vote of the Legislative
Council to approve the issuance of Non-Capital Project Bonds shall be by an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3rds) of all the members of the Council.



   C.   Approval of Mayor.  Such bonds shall not be authorized unless
in accordance with the provisions of § 10-8.B (1) or (2), whichever is
applicable and approved by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of
this Charter.



SECTION 10-9:  REFERENDUM ON BORROWING OF FUNDS.



   A.   Debt Service Limitation.



      (1)   Capital Projects.  Borrowing for capital projects that
will cause the related debt service of the Town to exceed ten (10%) percent
of the then current fiscal year's budget shall be submitted to binding
referendum.



      (2)   Non-Capital Projects.  Borrowing for non-capital
projects that will cause the related debt service of the Town to exceed four
(4%) percent of the then current fiscal year's budget shall be submitted to
binding referendum.



   B.   The referendum shall take place at the next general election or
at a special election called for and held in the manner provided by the
General Statutes.



   C.   Approval of the borrowing by the Council shall take place not
less than sixty (60) Days prior to such election.



   D.   Any capital project that would cause the debt service of the
Town to exceed ten (10%) percent of the current fiscal year's budget shall
not be allowed to proceed past the design stage, and borrowing of funds shall
not be allowed to proceed unless a majority of those voting thereof at such
election shall have voted in favor thereof.



CHAPTER XI:  TRANSITION AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



SECTION 11-1:  LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.



   No action or proceedings, civil or criminal, pending on the effective
date of this Charter brought by or against the Town, or any Commission, Board
or Department thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this
Charter or by anything herein contained; but all such actions or proceedings
may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any
Commission, Board or Department which is a party thereto may by or under this
Charter be assigned or transferred to another Commission, Board or
Department, but in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the
head of the Commission, Board or Department to which such functions, powers,
and duties have been assigned or transferred by or under this Charter.



SECTION 11-2:  PERIODIC REVIEW OF THE CHARTER.



   No later than April of 2020, and no more than every ten (10) years
thereafter, the Council shall appoint a Charter Revision Commission, pursuant
to the General Statutes.  Nothing in this section limits the right of the
Council to appoint one or more Charter Revision Commissions other than the
Commission required by this section, but no such Commission shall be
appointed if its appointment would preclude the Council from appointing a
Commission as required by this section.



SECTION 11-3:  EXISTING LAWS AND ORDINANCES.



   All special acts of the legislature and Ordinances of the Town, except
as the same are in conflict with this Charter, shall continue in full force
and effect until amended or repealed.



SECTION 11-4:  AMENDMENT OF CHARTER.



   This Charter may be amended in the manner prescribed by Law and shall
take effect as set forth by the General Statutes.



SECTION 11-5:  SAVING CLAUSE.



   If any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this
Charter nor the context in which a section or part of a section so held
invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a
section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section
or part of a section to which such holding shall directly apply.



SECTION 11-6:  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The provisions of this Charter and amendments thereto, as to the
administration of the Town, shall become effective upon adoption by the
voters of the Town of Hamden; unless otherwise set forth in the Charter.



SECTION 11-7:  "TRANSITION PROVISION A" PERTAINING TO § 3-3.B(2) OF THIS
CHARTER - THE GENERAL ELECTION SCHEDULED FOR 2012.



   On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2012, the
Electors of the Town shall elect, in accordance with the provisions of the
General Statutes and the applicable provisions of this Charter, Registrars of
Voters for the term two years as set forth in "Transition Provision D"
applicable to § 3-3.B(2) of this Charter.



SECTION 11-8:  "TRANSITION PROVISION B" PERTAINING TO § 3-3.C(3) OF THIS
CHARTER - THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR THE REGISTRARS OF VOTER ELECTED IN THE
GENERAL ELECTION SCHEDULED FOR 2012.



   Commencing at twelve midnight on the Wednesday following the first
Monday of the January next succeeding their election, the Registrars of
Voters, elected in November 2012, pursuant to the transition provision
applicable to § 3-3.C(3) of this Charter, shall hold their offices for a
term of two (2) years, until the Wednesday following the first Monday of the
third January succeeding their election.



SECTION 11-9:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR REGULAR
MEMBERS OF BOARD OF ETHICS DERIVED FROM § 19-5.A OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF
THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office for the regular members of the
Board of Ethics is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about
January 1, 1984 at which time the Mayor appointed one (1) member for a term
of five (5) years, one (1) member for a term of four (4) years, one (1)
member for a term of three (3) years, one (1) member for a term of two (2)
years and one (1) member for a term of one (1) year.  Thereafter, the
members were appointed annually for five year terms.  It should be further
noted that at some time, based upon custom and practice, the commencement
date of the term shifted from January the 1st to February the 1st.



SECTION 11-10:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR ALTERNATE
MEMBERS OF BOARD OF ETHICS DERIVED FROM § 19-5.A OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF
THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office for the alternate members of the
Board of Ethics is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about
January 1, 1984 at which time the Mayor appointed one (l) alternate member
for a term of two (2) years and one (1) alternate member for a term of one
(1) year.  Annually thereafter, during the month of January, one (1)
alternate member shall be appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter, the
members were appointed annually for two year terms.  It should be further
noted that at some time, based upon custom and practice, the commencement
date of the term shifted from January the 1st to February the 1st.



SECTION 11-11:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR REGULAR
MEMBERS OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION DERIVED FROM § 13-1 OF THE PRIOR
REVISION OF THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office for the Regular Members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission is derived from the appointments by the Mayor
on or about February 1, 1966 at which time the Mayor appointed three (3)
members for a term of one (1) year; three (3) for a term of two (2) years;
and, three (3) for a term of three years, all to take office February 1,
l966.  Thereafter, three (3) members were to be appointed, annually, during
the month of January, for three (3) year terms.



SECTION 11-12:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR ALTERNATE
MEMBERS OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION DERIVED FROM § 13-2 OF THE PRIOR
REVISION OF THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office for the Alternate Members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission is derived from the appointments by the Mayor
on or about February 1, 1966 at which time the Mayor appointed one (l)
alternate member for a term of one (1) year; one (1) alternate member for a
term of two (2) years; and, one (1) alternate member for a term of three (3)
years.  Thereafter, each member was to be appointed, annually, during the
month of January, for one (1) year term.



SECTION 11-13:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR MEMBERS OF
THE PERSONNEL APPEALS BOARD DERIVED FROM §17-5 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE
CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office for the members of the Personnel
Appeals Board is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about
February 1, 1966 at which time the Mayor appointed one (1) member for a term
of five (5) years; one (1) member for a term of four (4) years; one (1)
member for a term of three (3) years; one (1) member for a term of two (2)
years; and, one (1) for a term of one year.  Thereafter, members were to be
appointed, annually, during the month of January, for five (5) year terms. 



SECTION 11-14:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR MEMBERS OF
THE LIBRARY BOARD DERIVED FROM § 14-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE CHARTER
(REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office for the members of the Library
Board is derived from the appointments by the Mayor on or about February 1,
1966 at which time the Mayor appointed one (1) member for a term of five (5)
years; one (1) member for a term of four (4) years; one (1) member for a term
of three (3) years; one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; and, one (1)
for a term of one year.  Thereafter, members were to be appointed, annually,
during the month of January, for five (5) year terms.



SECTION 11-15:  "TRANSITION PROVISION E" PERTAINING TO § 7-2.J OF THIS
CHARTER - THE INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION.



   The Legislative Council shall repeal §§ 33.104 through 33.106 of the
Code of Ordinances, within thirty (30) Days following the effective date of
this Charter.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this Charter
shall be determinative and dispositive of all matters under the jurisdiction
of the Inland Wetlands Commission, in the event conflicting Ordinance
provisions have not been repealed.



SECTION 11-16:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR MEMBERS OF
THE BOARD OF TAX REVIEW DERIVED FROM § 4-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION OF THE
CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office of the members of the Board of Tax
Review (which has been renamed the Board of Assessment Appeals) is derived
from the appointments by the Legislative Council on or about February 1, 1966
at which time the Legislative Council appointed one (1) member for a term of
three (3) years; one (1) member for a term of two (2) years; and, one (1) for
a term of one year.  Thereafter, members were to be appointed, annually,
during the month of January, for three (3) year terms.



SECTION 11-17:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR THE SIX
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION DERIVED FROM § 12-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION
OF THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office of the six members of the Board of
Education is derived from the elections in November of 1985 and 1989.



SECTION 11-18:  HISTORICAL NOTE REGARDING THE TERM OF OFFICE FOR THE THREE
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION DERIVED FROM § 12-1 OF THE PRIOR REVISION
OF THE CHARTER (REV. NOVEMBER 8, 1983).



   The baseline for the terms of office of the three members of the Board
of Education is derived from the elections in November of 1983.



CHAPTER XII:  SUNSET PROVISIONS



SECTION 12-1:  GENERALLY.



   The provisions of this section shall expire and be of no force and
effect following any transition provisions in the Charter or upon enactment
of provisions to establish the Boards and Commissions as set forth in this
Charter.  Upon the effective date of the enactment, the applicable provision
may be removed from the Charter and shall be replaced with the following:
"This provision is intentionally left blank in accordance with this Chapter
of the Charter and the enactment of the Ordinance dated ____________".



SECTION 12-2:  ETHICS COMMISSION.



   The following provisions pertaining to the Board of Ethics shall remain
in full force and effect until such time as the code of ethics Ordinance is
enacted.



   A.   Duties and Powers: Advisory Opinions.  The Board shall render
advisory opinions concerning the application of this Charter and/or any code
of ethics adopted by the Town to any Public Official or employee upon his or
her request.  Such advisory opinions shall be published and filed with the
Town Clerk with such deletions as may be necessary to prevent disclosures of
the identity of the Public Official or employee involved.



   B.   Duties and Powers: Investigations.



      (1)   Probable Cause.  Upon the written complaint of any
person, signed under penalty of false statement, or upon its own complaint,
the Board shall investigate any alleged violation of the Charter and/or any
such code of ethics.  Any investigation whether or not there is probable
cause to believe that a violation of this Charter and/or any such code of
ethics has occurred shall be confidential and not open to the public unless
the respondent requests otherwise. If such probable cause is found, the Board
shall initiate hearings to determine whether there has been such violation.



      (2)   Hearings.  All hearings pursuant to this subsection
shall be open to the public.  The Town Attorney or the designated
representative of the Town Attorney, who shall also be an attorney, shall
attend such hearings and rule on all matters concerning the application of
the rules of evidence, which shall be the same as in judicial proceedings. 
At such hearings, the respondent shall have the right to be represented by
legal counsel, the right to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, documents, records and papers and to examine and
cross-examine witnesses.  The Board may administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents,
records and papers.  At the request of the Board, any judge may issue a
capias for the appearance of the respondent, witnesses, and the production of
books, documents, records and papers.  The Board shall find no person in
violation of the provisions of this Charter and/or any such code of ethics
except upon the concurring vote of four (4) of its members.



SECTION 12-3:  PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.



   The following provisions pertaining to the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall remain in full, force and effects, until such time as the
replacement enabling Ordinance(s) is (or are) enacted.



   A.   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the provisions of § 6-5 of
this Charter, a Parks and Recreation Commission consisting of five (5)
Electors of the Town, not more than three (3) of whom shall be from the same
political party.  Annually during the month of January the Mayor shall
appoint one (1) member for a term of five (5) years.  The members of said
Commission shall serve until their successors have been appointed and
qualified.



   B.   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall study the recreation
facilities and programs of the Town, shall develop proposals as to the
improvement of the facilities and programs, make recommendations to the
Director and Mayor concerning the activities of the Department, and aid the
Director in carrying out the program of the Department.  The Parks and
Recreation Commission shall set the fees for the use of the Town's recreation
facilities and programs subject to the approval of the Council. 



CHAPTER XIII:  HISTORICAL PROVISIONS



SECTION 13-1:  STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.



   A.   Members of the Classified Services.  All persons holding
permanent positions in the service of the Town (at the effective date of
January 1, 1966 under the 1966 Charter, hereinafter "1966 Charter Effective
Date") including employees of a Board or Commission, whose positions are
included in the classified positions by the terms of Chapter XVII of the 1966
Charter, shall immediately become members of the classified service and
retain such positions until promoted, transferred, reduced or removed in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Charter through the
Charter of November 8, 1983 and as may now be set forth in Chapter VIII of
this Charter.



      (1)   All other employees of the Town at the 1966 Charter
Effective Date, whose positions are not abolished by the provisions of said
Charter, shall retain such position pending action by the Council or the
appropriate officer charged by the Charter with the power of appointment and
removal.



      (2)   Any provision of Law in force on the effective date of
the 1966 Charter, and not inconsistent with the provisions of said Charter,
in relation to personnel appointment, ranks, grades, tenure of office,
promotions, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil rights or any other
rights or privileges of employees of the Town or any office, Department or
agency thereof shall continue in effect, until or unless amended or repealed
by the Council.



      (3)   Any permanent employee presently in the classified
service of the Town of Hamden whose position is abolished by the adoption of
the 1966 Charter shall be relocated to other comparable employment with the
Town of Hamden at a salary or wage not less than that such permanent employee
is presently receiving.



   B.   Validation of Pension Rights.  The rights of all persons,
(including their eligible survivors), in the employment of the Town actually
receiving or entitled to receive pensions or retirement allowances prior to
the 1966 Charter Effective Date are expressly validated and preserved and the
Town shall continue to pay such pensions and allowances.



   C.   Retirement.  The Hamden Employees Retirement Act adopted May
8, l962, is not affected by the 1966 Charter, provided, wherever the words
"First Selectman" or "Board of Selectman" appear, the word "Mayor" shall be
substituted and further provided that where the words "Representative Town
Meeting" are used, the words "Legislative Council" shall be substituted and
further provided that where the words "Treasurer" or "Board of Finance" are
used the words "Director of Finance" shall be substituted.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter



         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; PRIOR ORDINANCES; ERRORS
AND OMISSIONS



         11.   ELECTIONS; VOTING DISTRICTS



         12.   HEARING PROCEDURE FOR MUNICIPAL CITATIONS



CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; PRIOR ORDINANCES; ERRORS AND OMISSIONS



Section



   10.01   Interpretation



   10.02   Application to future legislation



   10.03   Captions



   10.04   Definitions and rules of interpretation



   10.05   Rule of severability



   10.06   Reference to other sections



   10.07   Reference to offices



   10.08   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Ordinances saved



§ 10.01  Interpretation.



   (A)   The provisions of this and subsequent chapters in this volume
shall constitute and be designated and cited as "The Hamden Code of 1977."
The codification has been made in one ordinance under appropriate titles,
chapters and sections by authority of the Connecticut General Statutes.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the Connecticut General Statutes.



   (C)   Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
Connecticut General Statutes, the reference indicates that the section is
analogous or similar to the Connecticut General Statute section. Footnotes,
cross references and other comments are by way of explanation only and should
not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



   (D)   All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although the same may not
be so limited specifically.



§ 10.02  Application to future legislation.



   All of the provisions of Title I, not incompatible with future
legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or
supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.03  Captions.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not
be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  Definitions and rules of interpretation.



   (A)   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the
town, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed,
unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context
clearly requires otherwise:



      (1)   The expressions "this code" or "this code of ordinances"
shall mean the Hamden Code as adopted by this ordinance, and as hereinafter
modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new titles, chapters
or sections.



      (2)   The nouns "city", "town", "this town", "the town",
"village", "municipal corporation" or "municipality" when used in this code
shall denote the Town of Hamden irrespective of its population or legal
classification.



      (3)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders.



      (4)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and
words in the plural shall include the singular.



      (5)   The word "person" and its derivatives and the word
"whoever" shall include a natural person, firm, partnership or a corporate
body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate.



      (6)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term "person" or "whoever" as applied to any unincorporated
entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.



      (7)   A general term following a specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.



      (8)   Either conjunction "and", "or" shall include the other
as if written "and/or."



      (9)   The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.



      (10)   The word "council" shall mean the legislative council
of Hamden, Connecticut.



      (11)   The word "property" shall include real and personal
property.



      (12)   "Personal property" includes every species of property
except real property.



      (13)   "Real property" includes lands, tenements and
hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.



      (14)   The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall
include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership,
joint tenant of the whole or a part of the building or land, either alone or
with others.



      (15)   Except as provided in the traffic code, the word
"street" means the entire width between property lines of every way or place
of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as
a matter of right, and the word "sidewalk" means that portion of a street
between the curb lines of the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent
property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.



      (16)   Whenever the word "shall" appears in this code it shall
be considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided.



      (17)   "This state" when used in this code shall mean the
State of Connecticut.



      (18)   When the abbreviation "Conn. Gen. Stat." appears it
shall mean Connecticut General Statutes.



§ 10.05  Rule of severability.



   Each chapter, section or, whenever divisible, part section of this code
of ordinances is declared to be severable, and the invalidity of any chapter,
section or divisible part section, shall not be construed to affect the
validity of any other chapter, section or part section of this code.



§ 10.06  Reference to other sections.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.07  Reference to offices.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the Town of Hamden exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.08  Errors and omissions.



   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word, the omission of any word necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of a word to which no meaning can be attached,
or the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express such
intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provision
shall have the same effect as though the correct word was contained in the
text as originally published. No such alteration shall be made or permitted
if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  Ordinances repealed.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code
of ordinances,



§ 10.12  Ordinances unaffected.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.13  Ordinances saved.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intent of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving the purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent
thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.



CHAPTER 11:  ELECTIONS; VOTING DISTRICTS



Section



Elections



   11.01   Procedure for listing electors



   11.02   Procedure for dissolving tie votes



   11.03   Advisory nonbinding referenda



Municipal Elections Voting Districts



   11.05   First voting district



   11.06   Second voting district



   11.07   Third voting district



   11.08   Fourth voting district



   11.09   Fifth voting district



   11.10   Sixth voting district



   11.11   Seventh voting district



   11.12   Eighth voting district



   11.13   Ninth voting district



State and Federal Elections Voting Districts



   11.20     First voting district



   11.21     Second voting district



   11.22     Third voting district



   11.23     Fourth voting district



   11.24     Fifth voting district



   11.25     Sixth voting district



   11.26     Seventh voting district



   11.27     Eighth voting district



   11.28     Ninth voting district



   11.29     Tenth voting district



ELECTIONS



§ 11.01  PROCEDURE FOR LISTING ELECTORS.



   The registrars of voters in this town, in perfecting the list of
qualified electors therein as provided by law, shall enter the names on the
official lists by the street and number, when the houses are numbered, and
not alphabetically, so that there shall be entered on the list first, the
street, avenue, road or alley; second, the number of the house or residence
in numerical order; and third, the resident electors in the house or
residence, in alphabetical order. Those electors, if any, who cannot be so
registered, shall be registered  alphabetically.



(‘66 Code, § 81-1)



§ 11.02  PROCEDURE FOR DISSOLVING TIE VOTES.



   If the electors of this town shall fail to choose a candidate for any
office, by reason of an equality of votes at any electors' meeting, the mayor
shall forthwith warn an electors' meeting for the purpose of dissolving the
tie vote, which special electors' meeting shall be warned, organized,
conducted and proceeded with as are biennial electors' meetings, except that
the ballots shall contain only the names of the candidates to be voted for. 
The registry list used at the meetings shall be the list last completed.



(‘66 Code, § 81-2)



§ 11.03  ADVISORY NONBINDING REFERENDA.



   (A)   Council may submit question to electors.  The Legislative
Council of the town, upon written request of any member, and upon a
two-thirds majority vote of all of its members, present or absent, at a
meeting of the Council, may submit any question to a vote of the electors of
the town as an advisory, nonbinding referendum, to be voted upon at the next
regular state or municipal election.



   (B)   Elector may apply for petition papers.



      (1)   Likewise, any elector of the town may apply with the
Town Clerk for petition papers for an advisory, nonbinding referendum on any
question.  The application shall contain a statement of the question for
which the referendum is sought.  Within five business days, the Town Clerk
shall provide the elector with a sufficient number of copies of petition
papers for seeking signatures for the referendum.  Each petition paper shall
contain the same statement of the referendum question, shall bear the
certificate of the Town Clerk showing the date on which the petition paper
was issued, and shall indicate the name and address of the person to whom it
was issued.  To bring the referendum question to the Legislative Council for
consideration, the petition papers must be signed by 10% of the qualified
electors of the town as determined from the last official voting list.



      (2)   To be valid, any petition paper returned must be filed
with the Town Clerk within 90 calendar days after the date on which it was
issued, must have the name and address of the circulator (who must be an
elector registered to vote in the town) of the petition paper, contain a
statement that the circulator either knows personally or was given
satisfactory evidence of the identity of each petition signer, and each
petition paper must be signed and dated by the circulator under penalties of
false statement.



      (3)   On the next business day following return of a petition
paper, the Town Clerk shall certify to the validity of the petition paper and
refer it to the Office of the Registrar of Voters, which within ten business
days shall verify which signatures are by registered voters and shall return
the petition paper to the Town Clerk with its findings endorsed thereon. 
On  the  next business day after a sufficient number of verified signatures
have been returned to the Town Clerk, the Town Clerk shall submit the
petition papers to the Council for its consideration at its next regular
meeting.



      (4)   Upon receipt of the petition papers, the Council shall
refer the referendum question to an appropriate committee for public hearing
before the next regular meeting of the Council.  At the Council meeting
following the public hearing, the Council, by a majority vote of all its
members present may submit the referendum question to a vote of the electors
as described in division (A) above.  If the board takes no action within 40
days, the referendum question shall be deemed approved.



   (C)   Question to appear on ballot if signatures equal certain
amount.  Likewise, following (B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) above, if the number
of verified signatures equals or exceeds 15% of the qualified electors of the
town as determined from the last official voting list, said advisory,
nonbinding referendum question shall appear on the ballot at the next regular
state or municipal election. 



(Ord. 213, adopted 7-6-82)



MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS VOTING DISTRICTS



§ 11.05  FIRST VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A) The First Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of
all the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of
Turtle Avenue and the Hamden-Wallingford-Cheshire town lines, South on Turtle
to the Mill River. South on the Mill River to Mt. Carmel Avenue. West on Mt.
Carmel to Whitney Avenue. South on Whitney to Sherman Avenue. South and West
on Sherman to a point opposite Old Hill Street, then East overland to the
Farmington Canal Trail. South on the Farmington Canal Trail to a point
opposite Anns Farm Road, then East overland to Anns Farm. East on Anns Farm
to Knob Hill Drive. South on Knob Hill To Forest Street. East on Forest
Street to Whitney Avenue. North on Whitney to Riverside Drive. East on
Riverside to South New Road. North on South New Road to the Mt. Carmel
Connector. East on the Mount Carmel Connector to the Mill River. South on the
Mill River to the Hamden-North Haven town line. North on the town line to the
Wallingford town line. West on the town line to Turtle Avenue.



   (B)  The polling place for the first voting district shall be the 
Miller Memorial Library, 2901 Dixwell Avenue.



(Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 11.06  SECOND VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The Second Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise
of all the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of
the Farmington Canal Trail and the Wilbur Cross Parkway, West on the Wilbur
Cross Parkway to Benham Street. West on Benham Street to Circular Avenue.
South on Circular to Ursini Drive. West and South on Ursini Drive to a point
opposite East Clover Circle, then West overland to East Clover Circle. West
on East Clover to the intersection of East Clover, Lane Street and Clover
Circle. West on Clover Circle to the West Branch of the Farm Brook. South on
the Farm Brook to the Wilbur Cross Parkway. Southwest on the Wilbur Cross
Parkway to Wintergreen Avenue. East on Wintergreen to Pleasant Drive. South
on Pleasant to Baker Road. North on Baker Road to Belden Road. West and South
on Belden to Twin Brook to Belair Road. South on Belair to West Side Drive.
East and North on West Side to Brook Street. South on Brook to Reyna Road.
South on Reyna to West Helen Street. West, South and East on West Helen to
Pine Rock Avenue. South on Pine Rock to Helen Street. East on Helen to Elmer
Avenue. South on Elmer to Laconia Street. East on Laconia to Glenbrook
Avenue. North on Glenbrook to Helen Street. East on Helen to Langer Street.
North on Langer to Gorham Avenue. East on Gorham to Circular Avenue. South on
Circular to Putnam Avenue. East on Putnam to the Farmington Canal Trail.
North on the Farmington Canal Trail to the Wilbur Cross Parkway.



   (B)  The polling place for the second voting district shall be the
Hamden Collaborative Learning Center, 306 Circular Avenue. 



(Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5- 27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12; Am. Ord. 664, adopted
9-28-15; Am. Ord. 667, adopted 1- 19-16)



§ 11.07  THIRD VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The Third Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of
all the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of
Putnam Avenue and the Farmington Canal Trail, West on Putnam to the
intersection of Dixwell Avenue and Circular Avenue. North on Circular to
Gorham Avenue. West on Gorham to Langer Street. South on Langer to Helen
Street. West on Helen Street to Glenbrook Street. South on Glenbrook to
Laconia Street. West on Laconia to Elmer Avenue. South on Elmer to Woodin
Street. West on Woodin to Pine Rock Avenue. North on Pine Rock to Wilmont
Road. West and South on Wilmont to Oberlin Road. West and South on Oberlin to
Woodin Street. West on Woodin to a point opposite West Side Drive. South
overland from that point to the Hamden-Norfh Haven town line. South and East
on the town line to Dixwell Avenue. North on Dixwell to Ailing Street. East
on Ailing to the Farmington Canal Trail. North on the Farmington Canal Trail
to Putnam Avenue.



   (B)  The polling place for the third voting district shall be the M.L.
Keefe Center, ll Pine Street.



(Ord. 240, adopted  ll-5-84;  Am.  Ord.  332,  adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord.
488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 11.08  FOURTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)    The Fourth Voting District of the Town of Hamden shall
comprise of all the territory within the following limits: from the
intersection of Forest Street and Evergreen Avenue, South on Evergreen to
Dixwell Avenue. Southwest on Dixwell to Shepard Avenue. Northwest on Shepard
to Mix Avenue. Southwest on Mix to Kaye View Drive. Southwest on Kaye View to
Mix Avenue. Southwest on Mix to Benham Street. East on Benham to the Wilbur
Cross Parkway. East on the Wilbur Cross Parkway to Connolly Parkway. East on
Connolly to the Mill River. South on the Mill River to Lake Whitney. South
along the West Bank of the Lake to Mather Street. South on Mather to Waite
Street. East on Waite to Whitney Avenue. North on Whitney to the Mill River.
North on the Mill River to the Mt. Carmel Connector. Northwest on the
Connector to South New Road. South on South New Road to Riverside Drive. West
on Riverside to Whitney Avenue. South on Whitney to Forest Street. West on
Forest to Evergreen.



   (B)  The polling place for the fourth voting district shall be 
Spring Glen School, 1908 Whitney Avenue.



(Ord. 240, adopted  ll-5- 84;  Am.  Ord.  332,  adopted 5-12-93; Am.
Ord. 488, adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 11.09  FIFTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The Fifth District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of the
Farmington Canal Trail and the Wilbur Cross Parkway, East on the Wilbur Cross
Parkway to Connolly Parkway. East on Connolly to the Mill River. South on the
Mill River to Lake Whitney. South along the west shore of the lake to Mather
Street. Southeast on Mather to Servoss Street. East on Servoss to Whitney
Avenue. South on Whitney to the Hamden-New Haven town line. West on the town
line to Dixwell Avenue. North on Dixwell to Ailing Street. East on Ailing to
the Farmington Canal Trail. North on the trail to the Wilbur Cross Parkway.



   (B)  The polling place for the fifth voting district shall be the
Board of Education Building, 60 Putnam Avenue.



(Ord. 240, adopted 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 11.10  SIXTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The Sixth District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Whitney
Avenue and the Hamden-New Haven town line, East on the town line to the
Quinnipiac River. North on the River to the Hamden-North Haven town line.
West on the town line to Whitney Avenue. South on Whitney to Waite Street.
West on Waite to Mather Street. Southeast on Mather to Servoss Street. East
on Servoss to Whitney Avenue. South on Whitney to the Hamden-New Haven town
line.



   (B)  The polling place for the sixth voting district shall be the
Ridge Hill School, 120  Carew Road.



(Ord. 240, adopted 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 11.11  SEVENTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The Seventh District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Mix
Avenue and Skiff Street, West on Skiff to Howard Drive. West on Howard to
Paradise Avenue. North on Paradise to Autumn Ridge Road. West on Autumn Ridge
to Dunbar Hill Road. North and East on Dunbar Hill to Hill Street. North on
Hill to West Shepard Avenue. Northwest on West Sheppard to the Hamden-Bethany
town line. South on the town line to the Hamden-Woodbridge town line. South
and East on the Hamden-Woodbridge town line to the intersection of the town
line, Wintergreen Brook and Wintergreen Avenue. South on Wintergreen to the
Hamden-New Haven town line. East on the town line to a point opposite the
intersection of West Side Drive and Woodin Street, then North overland to
that intersection.  East on Woodin to Oberlin Road. North, West, North and
East on Oberlin to Wilmont Road. North and East on Wilmont to Pine Rock
Avenue. South on Pine Rock to Woodin Street. East on Woodin to Elmer Avenue.
North on Elmer to Helen Street. West on Helen to Pine Rock Avenue. North on
Pine Rock to West Helen Street. West, North and East on West Helen to Reyna
Road. North on Reyna to Brook Street. Northwest on Brook to West Side Drive.
Southwest on West Side to Belair Road. Northwest on Belair to Twin Brook
Road. Southwest on Twin Brook to Belden Road. North, East and South on Belden
to Baker Road. Southeast on Baker to Pleasant Drive. Northeast on Pleasant to
Wintergreen Avenue. West on Wintergreen to the Wilbur Cross Parkway.
Northeast on the Wilbur Cross Parkway to Circular Avenue. North on Circular
to Benham Street. East on Benham to Mix Avenue. Northeast on Mix to Kaye View
Drive. North on Kaye View to Mix Avenue. Northeast on Mix to Skiff Street.



   (B)  The polling place for the seventh voting district shall be the
Dunbar Hill School, 315 Lane Street.



(Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 11.12  EIGHTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The Eight District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Forest
Street and Evergreen Avenue. West on Forest to Knob Hill Drive. North on Knob
Hill to Anns Farm Road. West on Anns Farm to the end, then West overland to
the Farmington Canal Trail. North on the Farmington Canal Trail to a point
opposite the intersection of Old Hill Street and Sherman Avenue, then West
overland to Sherman Avenue. Southwest on Sherman to Shepard Brook (South of
Overlook Drive). Northwest on Shepard Brook to Shepard Avenue South of
Timberwood Trail). South on Shepard Avenue to West Shepard Avenue. West and
South West on West Shepard to Hill Street. South on Hill to Dunbar Hill Road.
West and South on Dunbar Hill to Autumn Ridge Road. East on Autumn Ridge to
Paradise Avenue. South on Paradise Avenue to Howard Drive. East on Howard to
Skiff Street Extension. East on Skiff Street Extension to Mix Avenue. North
on Mix to Shepard Avenue. Southeast on Shepard Avenue to Dixwell Avenue.
Northeast on Dixwell to Evergreen Avenue. North on Evergreen to Forest Street.



   (B)  The polling place for the eighth voting district shall be the
Bear Path School, 10 Kirk Road.



(Ord. 240, adopted ll-5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 11.13  NINTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The Ninth District of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Turtle
Avenue and the Hamden-Wallingford-Cheshire town lines, Northwest on the town
line to the Hamden-Bethany-town line. South on the town line to a point
opposite West Shepard Avenue, then East overland to West Shepard. East on
West Shepard to Shepard Avenue. North on Shepard to Shepard Brook. Southeast
on the Brook to Sherman Avenue. Northeast on Sherman to Whitney Avenue. North
on Whitney to Mt. Carmel Avenue. East on Mt. Carmel to the Mill River. North
on the River to Turtle Avenue. Northeast on Turtle to the town line.



   (B)  The polling place for the ninth voting district shall be the West
Woods School, 350 West Todd Street.



(Ord. 240, adopted  ll- 5-84; Am. Ord. 332, adopted 5-12-93; Am. Ord. 488,
adopted 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 629, adopted 12-3-12)



STATE AND FEDERAL ELECTIONS VOTING DISTRICTS



§ 11.20  FIRST VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the first voting
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of Mt. Carmel Avenue and the
Hamden-North Haven Town Line, West on Mt. Carmel to Whitney Avenue. South on
Whitney to Evergreen Avenue. South on Evergreen to Forest Road. East on
Forest to Whitney Avenue. South on Whitney to Washington Avenue. South on
Washington to Dixwell Avenue. East on Dixwell to the Hamden-North Haven Town
Line. North on the town line to Mt. Carmel Avenue.



   (B)  The polling place for the first voting district shall be the
Miller Library, 2901 Dixwell Avenue.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.21  SECOND VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the second voting
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of the Farmington Canal Trail and
Putnam Avenue north on the trail to Oregon Avenue west on Oregon to Dixwell
Avenue. North on Dixwell to Concord Street. West on Concord to Dante Place.
North on Dante to Church Street. West on Church to Bank Street. North on Bank
to Taft Street. West on Taft to Circular Avenue. North on Circular to Gilbert
Avenue. West on Gilbert to Valley Road. North, west, and then south on Valley
to Gilbert Avenue. West on Gilbert to the Wilbur Cross Parkway. South west on
the parkway to the watercourse (Belden Brook) between Belden Road and Mueller
Drive. South on the brook to Woodin Street. East on Woodin to Dixwell Avenue.
North on Dixwell to Putnam Avenue. East on Putnam to the Canal Trail. North
on the Trail to Oregon Avenue.



   (B)  The polling place for the second voting district shall be the
Helen Street School, 285 Helen Street.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.22  THIRD VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the third voting
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of Putnam Avenue and the F. Canal
Trail, West on Putnam to Dixwell Avenue. South on Dixwell to Woodin Street.
West on Woodin to a point opposite West Side Drive. South to the Hamden-New
Haven Town Line. South and east on the town line to Homelands Terrace. North
on Homelands to Morse Street. West on Morse to Wadsworth Street. North on
Wadsworth to Mill Rock Road. East on Mill Rock to Newhall Street. North on
Newhall to Putnam Avenue. West on Putnam to the Canal Trail.



   (B)  The polling place for the third voting district shall be the M.L.
Keefe Center, 11 Pine Street.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.23  FOURTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the fourth voting
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of the W. C. Parkway and the Canal
Trail, south on the trail to Mather Street. East on Mather to Waite Street.
East on Waite to Ridge Road. North on Ridge to the Hamden-North Haven Town
Line. West, north, and northeast on the town line to Dixwell Avenue. West on
Dixwell to Washington Avenue. North on Washington to Dixwell Avenue. North on
Dixwell to Forest Street. West on Forest to Evergreen Avenue. South on
Evergreen to Dixwell Avenue. Southwest on Dixwell to the W.C Parkway. East on
the Parkway to the F.Canal Trail.



   (B)  The polling place for the fourth voting district shall be the
Spring Glen School, 1908 Whitney Avenue.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.24  FIFTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the fifth district
of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of the F. Canal Trail and Mather
Street. South on the Trail to Putnam Avenue. East on Putnam to Newhall
Street. South on Newhall to Mill Rock Road. East on Mill Rock to Wadsworth
Street. South on Wadsworth to Morse Street. East on Morse to Homelands
Terrace. South on Homelands to the Hamden-New Haven Town Line. East on the
town line to the Mill River. North on the river to Lake Whitney. Northwest
along the western bank of the lake to Waite Street. Southwest on Waite to
Mather Street. West on Mather to the F. Canal Trail.



   (B)  The polling place for the fifth voting district shall be the
Board of Education Building, 60 Putnam Avenue.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.25  SIXTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  The sixth district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all
the territory within the following limits: from the intersection of Ridge
Road. and the Hamden-North Haven Town line east, south, and then west on the
town line to the Mill River. North on the river to Lake Whitney. Northwest
along the eastern bank of the lake to Waite Street. East on Waite Street to
Ridge Road. North on Ridge to the Hamden-North Haven Town Line.



   (B)  For State and Federal Elections and Primaries, the polling place
for the sixth district voting district shall be the Ridge Hill School, 120
Carew Road.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.26  SEVENTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the seventh
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of the W.C. Parkway and the F. Canal
Trail south on the trail to Oregon Avenue. West on Oregon to Dixwell Avenue.
North on Dixwell To Concord Street. West on Concord to Dante Place. North on
Dante to Church Street. West on Church to Bank Street. Northwest on Bank to
Taft Street. Southwest on Taft to Circular Avenue. Northwest on Circular to
Gilbert Avenue. Southwest on Gilbert to Valley Road. North, southwest, and
then south on Valley to Gilbert Avenue. West on Gilbert to the W. C. Parkway.
Southwest on the Parkway to Belden Brook. South on the Brook to the
Hamden-New Haven Town Line. West, southwest, and then northwest to
Wintergreen Avenue. North on Wintergreen to Main Street. West and north on
Main to Benham Street. East on Benham to Dunbar Hill Road. North on Dunbar
Hill to Cooper Lane. East and south on Cooper to Benham Street. East on
Benham to the W.C. Parkway. Northeast on the Parkwy to the F. Canal Trail.



   (B)  The polling place for the seventh voting district shall be the
Dunbar Hill School, 315 Lane Street.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.27  EIGHTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the eighth
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of the W.C. Parkway and Dixwell
Avenue North on Dixwell to Skiff Street. West on Skiff to Howard Drive. North
on Howard to Shepard Avenue North on Shepard to Hillfield Road. West on
Hillfield to Johnson Road. Northwest on Johnson to the watercourse (Eatons
Brook) that traverses Johnson Road, Hotchkiss Lane and Choate Avenue South on
the brook to Choate Avenue West on Choate to Still Hill Road. North on Still
Hill to Deerfield Drive. West on Deerfield to Exeter Road. South on Exeter to
West Woods Road. West and south on West Woods to the Hamden-Bethany Town
Line. South on the Hamden-Bethany Town Line to the Hamden-New Haven Town
Line. East on the Hamden-New Haven Town Line to Wintergreen Avenue North on
Wintergreen to Main Street. West and north on Main to Benham Street. East on
Benham to Dunbar Hill Road. North on Dunbar Hill to Cooper Lane East and
south on Cooper to Benham Street. East on Benham to the W.C. Parkway.
Northeast on the Parkway to Dixwell Avenue



   (B)  The polling place for the eighth voting district shall be the
Bear Path School, 10 Kirk Road.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.28  NINTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)  For state and federal elections and primaries, the ninth district
of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of West Woods Road. and the
Hamden-Bethany Town Line north on the Town Line to the Hamden-Cheshire Town
Line. East on the town line to the Hamden-North Haven Town Line. Southwest on
the town line to Mt. Carmel Avenue Southwest on Mt. Carmel to Whitney Avenue
Southeast on Whitney to Sherman Avenue Southwest on Sherman to Rocky Top
Road. West on Rocky Top to Shepard Avenue North on Shepard to Hillfield Road.
West on Hillfield to Johnson Road. Northwest on Johnson to the watercourse
(Eatons Brook) that traverses Johnson Road, Hotchkiss Lane, and Choate Avenue
South on the brook to Choate Avenue West on Choate to Still Hill Road. North
on Still Hill to Deerfield Drive. West on Deerfield to Exeter Road. South on
Exeter to West Woods Road. West and south on West Woods to the Hamden-Bethany
Town Line.



   (B)   The polling place for the Ninth Voting District shall be West
Woods School, 350 West Todd Street.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



§ 11.29  TENTH VOTING DISTRICT.



   (A)   For state and federal elections and primaries, the tenth
district of the Town of Hamden shall comprise of all the territory within the
following limits: from the intersection of Dixwell Avenue and Skiff Street.
west on Skiff to Howard Drive. North on Howard to Shepard Avenue North on
Shepard to Rocky Top Road. East on Rocky Top to Sherman Avenue Northeast on
Sherman to Whitney Avenue Southeast on Whitney to Evergreen Avenue South on
Evergreen to Dixwell Avenue Southwest on Dixwell to Skiff Street.



   (B)   The polling place for the tenth voting district shall be the
Hamden Middle School, 2623 Dixwell Avenue.



(Ord. 620, adopted 8-1-12)



CHAPTER 12:  HEARING PROCEDURE FOR MUNICIPAL CITATIONS



Section



   12.01   Appointment of hearing officer



   12.02   Procedure



   12.03   Miscellaneous provisions



§ 12.01  APPOINTMENT OF HEARING OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other
than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct
the hearings authorized by this section.



(Ord. 512, passed 3-7-05)



§ 12.02  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any time within 12 months from the expiration of the final
period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any
citation issued under any ordinance adopted pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat.,
§§ 7-148 or 22a-226d, for an alleged violation thereof, shall send notice
to the person cited. Such notice shall inform the person cited:



      (1)   Of the allegations against him or her and the amount of
the fines, penalties, costs or fees due;



      (2)   That he or she may contest his or her liability before a
citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice
within ten days of the date thereof;



      (3)   That if he or she does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and



      (4)   That such judgment may issue without further notice.



   (B)   If the person who is sent notice pursuant to division (A) of
this section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he or she
may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official
designated by such municipality. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any
proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or
other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail
written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the first notice
provided for in division (A) of this section shall be deemed to have admitted
liability, and the designated municipal official shall certify such person's
failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall
thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for
by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in
division (D) of this section.



   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing
of notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any
reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance.
An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by
the issuing official or policeman shall be filed and retained by the
municipality, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The
presence of the issuing official or policeman shall be required at the
hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his or her
liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his or her
behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may
present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If such person fails to
appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him or
her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable
statutes or ordinances. The hearing officer may accept from such person
copies of police reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other
official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of
such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and with such methods of proof as he or she deems fair and
appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be
strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
The hearing officer shall announce his or her decision at the end of the
hearing. If he or she determines that the person is not liable, he or she
shall dismiss the matter and enter his or her determination in writing
accordingly. If he or she determines that the person is liable for the
violation, he or she shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of
the municipality.



   (D)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the
hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than
12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the clerk of a superior court facility designated by the Chief Court
Administrator together with an entry fee of $8. The certified copy of the
notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such
12-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed
as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of
such record of assessment and court costs of $8, against such person in favor
of the municipality. Notwithstanding any provision of the general statutes,
the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have
the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment
may issue without further notice to such person.



   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-259, at a Superior Court facility designated by the
Chief Court Administrator, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in
accordance with the rules of the judges of the Superior Court.



(Ord. 512, passed 3-7-05)



§ 12.03  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   In construing this chapter, feminine or neutral pronouns shall be
substitutes for those of masculine form and vice versa and the plural of the
singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in which
the context may require.



(Ord. 512, passed 3-7-05)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter



         30.   CODE OF ETHICS



         31.   PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS



         32.   REGIONAL AUTHORITIES AND COUNCILS



         33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



         34.   CIVIL PREPAREDNESS



         35.   OTHER OFFICIALS



         36.   MISCELLANEOUS



         37.   OTHER DEPARTMENTS



CHAPTER 30:  CODE OF ETHICS



Section



   30.01   Definitions



   30.02   Code established; purpose



   30.03   Violation of code



   30.04   Responsibilities of public office



   30.05   Conflict of interest



   30.06   Personal interest to be filed with clerk



   30.07   Disclosure of private interest



   30.08   Gifts and favors



   30.09   Disclosure of confidential information



   30.10   Improper use of official position



   30.11   Board of ethics, members



   30.12   Board to adopt rules and regulations



   30.13   Board to receive complaints, hold hearings



   30.14   Board to report findings; render advisory opinions



   30.15   Reserved



   30.16   Applicability of code



§ 30.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.



   (A)   "APPEARS BEFORE."  A person appears before a board
commission, agency or department when such person addresses a board,
commission, agency or department and if applicable publicly states his/her
name and address for the record.



   (B)   "EMPLOYEES." All employees of the town and of all governmental
bodies created under the provisions of the town charter, ordinances, or
applicable statutes.



   (C)   "FINANCIAL INTEREST."  Ownership of any interest as the
result of which a person has received within the past calender year or is
presently receiving or in the future is entitled to receive more than $1,000
per calendar year or ownership of, or interest in more than two (2%) percent
of a business entity.



   (D)   "GIFT."  A favor, hospitality or economic benefit other than
compensation but which does not include campaign contributions reported as
required by state law, gifts received from a relative if given on account of
kinship, or any value received by will, intestate succession, or as a
distribution from an inter vivos or testamentary trust if established by a
spouse ancestor.



   (E)   "INCOME."  Economic benefit received.



   (F)   "INTENTIONALLY."  A person acts intentionally, or with
intent, with respect to the nature of his/her conduct or to a result of
his/her conduct when it is his/her conscious objective or desire to engage in
the conduct or cause the result.



   (G)   "INTEREST."  Having a share or concern in some project or
affair, as being involved, as liable to be affected or prejudiced, as having
self-interest, and as being the opposite of disinterest.



   (H)   "KNOWINGLY."  A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge,
with respect to the nature of his/her conduct or to circumstances surrounding
his/her conduct when he/she is aware of the nature of such conduct or that
the circumstances exist.  A person acts knowingly, or with knowledge, with
respect to a result of his/her conduct when he/she is aware that such conduct
is reasonably certain to cause the result.



   (I)   "OFFICIALS." Elected and appointed officials, whether paid or
unpaid, members of the legislative council and of all governmental bodies
created under the provisions of the town charter, ordinances, or applicable
statutes.



   (J)   "PARTICIPATING."  The rendering of advice, or recommendation,
investigation, approval, disapproval, or otherwise.



   (K)   "PERSON INTEREST."  Either an interest in the subject matter
or a relationship with the parties before a Board of Commission impairing the
impartiality expected to characterize each member of such Board or Commission.



   (L)   "THIS CODE." The code of ethics for the town officials and
employees.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.02  CODE ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE.



   (A)   There is established a code of ethics for all town officials
and employees.



   (B)   The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards for
all officials and employees by prohibiting acts or actions incompatible with
the best interests of the town and by directing disclosure by the officials
and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting
the town.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.03  VIOLATION OF CODE.



   Violation of this code or § 19-3 of the charter, may constitute a
cause for suspension, removal from office or employments, or other
disciplinary actions. The provisions and purpose of this code and the rules,
regulations and standards as shall be established hereunder are declared to
be in the best interests of the town.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.04  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PUBLIC OFFICE.



   Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold
office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the
Constitution of the United States and the constitution of this state and to
carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality and thus
to foster respect for all government. Violation of any provisions of this
code should raise conscientious questions for the councilman or other
official or employees concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other
action is indicated to promote the best interests of the town.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.05  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   (A)   No official or employee shall engage in any business or
transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or
indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official
duties in the public interest, or would tend to impair his independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his official duties.



   (B)   No official or employee shall engage in or accept private
employment or render services for private interests when the employment or
service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or
would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his official duties.



   (C)   No paid official or employee shall:



      (1)   Appear in behalf of private interests before any
governmental body of the town.



      (2)   Accept a retainer or compensation that is contingent
upon a specific action by a governmental body.



      (3)   Represent private interests in any action or proceeding
against the interests of the town in any litigation to which the town is a
party.



   (D)   No member of the Zoning Commission or Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Inland Wetlands Board or Commission or nay town agency exercising
the powers of any zoning commission or board, zoning board of appeals or
inland wetland board or commission shall participate on behalf of the town in
any manner is such board member or commissioner has a financial or personal
conflict of interest including but not limited to those conflicts set forth
above in divisions (A) through (C) of this section.



   (E)   No member of the Zoning Commission or Board or Zoning Board of
Appeals or nay town agency exercising the powers of any zoning commission or
board or board of appeals, shall participate in the hearing or decision of
the board or commission of which he or she a member upon any matter in which
he or she is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial
sense.



   (F)   No member of the Zoning Commission or Board or Zoning Board of
Appeals, or any town agency exercising the powers of any zoning commission or
board or zoning board of appeals, shall appear for or represent any person,
firm, corporation or other entity in any matter pending before the Planning
or Zoning Commission or Board or said Board of Appeals or any agency
exercising the powers of any such commissioner board in the same town,
whether or not he or she is a member of the board or commission hearing the
matter.



   (G)   No member of the Inland Wetlands Board or Commission shall
participate in the hearing or decision of such board or commission of which
he or she is a member upon any matter in which he or she is directly or
indirectly interested in a personal or financial sense.



   (H)   No member of any land use board or commission or board or
commission having jurisdiction or exercising any power over any land use or
purchasing decisions may appear before their agency in any matter in which
they knowingly have a pecuniary interest or from representing anyone else
before the agency.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.06  PERSONAL INTEREST TO BE FILED WITH CLERK.



   Any official or employee who has a substantial or controlling financial
or significant personal interest in any transaction or contract with the
town, or in the sale of real estate, materials, supplies, or services to the
town, shall make known promptly by a writing filed with the town clerk such
interest in any matter on which he may be called to act in his official
capacity. He shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in the
transaction or the making of the contract or sale, except as may be requested
by the Legislative Council in accordance with the provisions of § 30.07.



(Adopted 3-3-69, Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.07  DISCLOSURE OF PRIVATE INTEREST.



   A member of the council who has a private interest in any matter
pending before the council shall disclose on the records of the council the
full nature and extent of the interest. This provision shall not apply if the
councilman abstains from all discussion and disqualifies himself from voting
on the matter. Any other official or employee who has a financial or other
private interest, and who, at the request of the council, participates in
discussion with or gives an official opinion to the council, shall disclose
on the records of the council the full nature and extent of the interest.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-28-07)



§ 30.08  GIFTS AND FAVORS.



   No official or employee shall accept any valuable gift, whether in the
form of service, loan, thing or promise from any person, firm or corporation
which to his knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner
whatsoever in business dealings with the town having any relationship or
connection with the official or employee, in the discharge of his duties.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.09  DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL  INFORMATION.



   No official or employee, without proper legal authorization, shall
disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or
affairs of the town. No official or employee shall use information acquired
in the course of his public duties, to advance the financial or other private
interest of himself or others.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84)



§ 30.10  IMPROPER USE OF OFFICIAL POSITION.



   (A)   No official or employee shall request or permit the use of
town-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit, except when the services are available to the public
generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of the official or
employee in the conduct of official business.



   (B)   No official or employee shall grant any special consideration,
treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to
every other citizen.



   (C)   No official or employee, without proper legal authorization,
shall disclose confidential information concerning the property, government
or affairs of the town. No official or employee shall use information
acquired in the course of his or her public duties to advance the financial
or other private interest of himself or herself or others.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, adopted 6-18-07;
Am. Ord. 601, adopted 2-7-11)



§ 30.11  BOARD OF ETHICS, MEMBERS.



   The administration of this code of ethics shall be charged to the
mayor, who shall appoint a board of ethics, subject to the approval by
two-thirds vote of the members of the council, consisting of five members,
not more than three of whom shall be members of the same political party and
two alternates, all of whom shall be resident electors of the town. The mayor
shall initially appoint one member for a term of one year, one for a term of
two years, one for a term of three years, one for a term of four years, and
one for a term of five years. The Mayor shall also initially appoint one
alternate member for a term of two years and one for a term of one year.
Annually thereafter during the month of January, the mayor shall appoint one
member for a term of five years and one alternate member for a term of two
years. Each member of the board shall serve until his successor has been
appointed and qualified.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.12  BOARD TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Pursuant to § 19-5 of the town charter, the board shall adopt and
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the administration of § 19-3
and § 19-5 of the town charter and of this code consonant with the
provisions hereof. The rules and regulations so adopted and promulgated and
all amendments thereof shall be made available at the office of the
legislative council.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.13  BOARD TO RECEIVE COMPLAINTS, HOLD HEARINGS.



   The board shall receive written complaints of violations of the town
charter and/or of this code and shall, upon such complaint or on its own
initiative, investigate same, and may hold hearings thereon as provided in §
19-5 of the town charter and in accord with its rules and regulations.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.14  BOARD TO REPORT FINDINGS; RENDER ADVISORY OPINIONS.



   (A)   The board shall report its findings of a violation of the
charter and/or any such Code of Ethics to the Council in the case of any
elected officer, to the appointing authority in the case of any appointed
officer and to the persons's supervisor in the case of any employee for
appropriate disciplinary action.



   (B)   The board may also render advisory opinions to any official or
employee of the town pursuant to his or her written request.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



§ 30.15  RESERVED.



§ 30.16  APPLICABILITY OF CODE.



   This code shall apply in all instances except when superseded by an
applicable ,statutory or charter provision and when the statutory or charter
provision is mandatory, or when the statutory or charter provision is
discretionary but deemed by the board to be more appropriate or desirable.



(Adopted 3-3-69; Am. Ord. 233, adopted 8-6-84; Am. Ord. 552, passed 6-18-07)



CHAPTER 31:  PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS



Section



Rules and Regulations



   31.01   Scope and application



   31.02   Hours of employment



   31.03   Holidays



   31.04   Vacations



   31.05   Additional annual payments for salaried employees



   31.06   Sick leave



   31.07   Authorized absence



   31.08   Health and insurance benefits



   31.09   Benefits maintained if employee transferred



   31.10   Retirement age



Medical Examinations



   31.15   Purpose



   31.16   Employees affected



   31.17   Procedure



   31.18   Control



Retirement Plan



   31.30   Definitions



   31.31   Rules of construction



   31.32   Participation



   31.33   Credited service; break in service



   31.34   Member contributions



   31.35   Service employees; eligibility for pension



   31.36   Guardian employees; eligibility for pension



   31.37   Service employees; amount of benefits



   31.38   Guardian employees; amount of benefits



   31.39   Form and commencement of benefits



   31.40   Service employees; death benefits



   31.41   Guardian employees; death benefits



   31.42   Cost of living benefit



   31.43   Funding



   31.44   Administration



   31.45   Amendments and terminations



   31.46   Certain rights and limitations



   31.47   Rollover provisions



Retiree Health Care Plan



   31.50   Retiree health care trust



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 31.01  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   The following personnel policies shall apply to all regular employees
of the town, except where any provision here covered is a matter of contract.
Regular employees are those who have completed a & month period of
employment, and who work an average of 20 or more hours per week. These
policies shall be applicable upon completion of an employee's 6-month period
of employment and shall be retroactive. Each department head shall administer
these policies and post a copy in their respective offices.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.02  HOURS OF EMPLOYMENT.



   The working hours for personnel shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
with one hour for lunch. Each employee, at the discretion of the department
head, is entitled to a 10 minute break in the morning and a 10 minute break
in the afternoon. All departments shall arrange to keep the office manned all
day, except departments with only one employee, who shall notify the
switchboard operator when it is necessary to leave an office unmanned
temporarily. Salaried employees required to work overtime shall be allowed
compensatory time off at the discretion of the department head, and when the
compensatory time off does not interfere with the operation of the
department. Salaried employees of the public works department, working
overtime, designated lay the department head as emergency, shall be
compensated at an hourly rate commensurate with their salary rate.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.03  HOLIDAYS.



   Official holidays are the days on which are celebrated New Years' Day,
Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving and
Christmas. If any of the above holidays fall on a Sunday, the following
Monday shall be deemed the official date of the holiday. If the holiday falls
on a Saturday, a substitute day shall be granted at the discretion; of the
department head and when the time off does not interfere with the operation
of the department. Employees on an hourly basis must work the day before and
the day after the holiday to get credit for the holiday. If there is a
conflict between these rules and the federal Monday holiday law, the federal
law shall prevail.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.04  VACATIONS.



   (A)   Regular full-time employees shall accrue paid vacations: after
6 months' service in the current fiscal year, 5 days; after one year, 10
days; after 5 years, 10 days plus one additional day for each complete
additional year of service to a maximum of 20 days.



   (B)   Vacations may not be accumulated from year to year unless
written approval is granted by the mayor upon application by the department
head. Not more than 10 days' vacation time may be taken at any one time,
unless an employee obtains the approval of the department head. A holiday
observed while an employee is on vacation entitles the employee to one more
day of vacation time.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.05  ADDITIONAL ANNUAL PAYMENTS FOR SALARIED EMPLOYEES.



   Salaried employees shall be entitled to annual payments on account of
continuous years of service on the anniversary date of the commencement of
their employment, based on the following schedule: 7 years, $100; 10 years,
$200; 15 years, $300; 20 years, $400.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.06  SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   Sick leave shall be accrued at the rate of 1-1/4 working days
for each calendar month of service during the fiscal year, and may be
accumulated, commencing with 1948, to a total of not more than 90 days. Sick
leave is not a privilege which an employee may use at his discretion, but
shall be allowed only for:



      (1)   Personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from
causes beyond the employee's control.



      (2)   The illness of a member of the employee's household that
requires the employee's personal care and attention.



      (3)   Enforced quarantine of the employee in accordance with
community health regulations.



   (B)   On request, substantiation of illness by a doctor's
certificate must be furnished.



   (C)   An employee eligible for workmen's compensation shall receive
from the town an amount which, when added to the workmen's compensation
benefits, shall equal his base salary; the benefit shall not be charged
against sick leave due him. They mayor may deny the additional payment by the
town upon recommendation by a department head. An employee may not receive
both sick leave pay and pay to supplement his workmen's compensation when he
is eligible for workmen's compensation benefits.



   (D)   Upon written application, sick leave may be granted to an
employee beyond his accrued time on written approval of the mayor.



   (E)   On the first working day of every month, each department head
shall file with the personnel office a record of the total number of sick
days used by each employee in his department. 



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.07  AUTHORIZED ABSENCE.



   (A)   Military leave without pay will be granted to employees on
regular duty. An employee with military status for whom a two-week active
duty period each year is mandatory will be granted the difference in pay
which, when added to his military pay, will equal his normal week's pay,
exclusive of his vacation. If he desires to take his vacation during the
two-week training period, he will receive his vacation pay in addition to an
amount, which, when added to his military pay, will equal his normal week's
pay. If an employee's military pay is equal to, or more than, his normal
week's pay, he will receive no compensation from the town for the two-week
military training period. Before applying for this benefit, an employee in
the military will produce from his commanding officer a letter stating his
military pay.



   (B)   Employees shall be granted three days' personal leave in the
event of a death in the immediate family, and one day in the event of the
death of other relatives. "IMMEDIATE FAMILY" means parent, child, sibling or
spouse of the employee or the employee's spouse, or any other related person
of the employee actually resident in his household.



   (C)   The mayor may grant a regular employee leave of absence
without pay for study or such other reason as is deemed in the best interests
of the town. If, at the expiration of the leave of absence, the employee does
not file a request to return to work within 30 days, the mayor shall consider
his action as a resignation effective on the first day of the leave of
absence.



   (D)   Employees drawn for jury duty will be paid their regular
salary less compensation received for the duty.



   (E)   No absence is authorized unless prior report is made to
immediate supervisor. Compensation adjustment shall be made for unauthorized
absence.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.08  HEALTH AND INSURANCE BENEFITS.



   All salaried employees are provided with the following benefits:



   (A)   Blue Cross, semi-private with maternity rider.



   (B)   C.M.S., Century Basic Contract.



   (C)   Major Medical.



   (D)   Retirement plan, as defined.



   (E)   Participating life insurance, plus double indemnity and weekly
disability benefits; optional and contributory.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.09  BENEFITS MAINTAINED IF EMPLOYEE TRANSFERRED.



   Employees in a covered department on transfer to some other department
to which these regulations apply shall maintain all benefits accrued during
his employment in former department.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



§ 31.10  RETIREMENT AGE.



   The maximum retirement age for all town employees shall be 70 years.



(Adopted 10-6-70)



MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS



§ 31.15  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Protection of retirement program.



   (B)   More efficient-less time loss.



   (C)   Workmen's compensation-retrospective rating plan.



('66 Code, Appendix V, § 1)



§ 31.16  EMPLOYEES AFFECTED.



   Employees affected are all classified positions.



('66 Code, Appendix V, § 2)



§ 31.17  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Specifications of all classified positions shall be amended to
include medical examination and chest %-ray requirement for new employees to
insure that their physical condition will be satisfactory to carry out the
duties they will be required to perform.



   (B)   When a new employee is appointed and before he commences work,
the personnel director shall refer the appointee to the health department for
tests on vision, color perception, hearing, height and weight.



   (C)   Thereafter, he will be required to have a chest X-ray and a
medical examination by a physician prescribed by the civil service commission.



   (D)   The department head and the personnel director will determine
from the medical report if the appointee's physical condition is satisfactory
to carry out the duties required of the position.



('66 Code, Appendix V, § 3)



§ 31.18  CONTROL.



   All payroll notifications for new employees shall carry the signatures
of the department head, the director of finance and the personnel director.



('66 Code, Appendix V, § 4)



RETIREMENT PLAN



§ 31.30  DEFINITIONS.



   "ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS." The sum of a member's contributions to the
plan plus interest credited as provided in § 31.34 (C).



   "ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT." A benefit calculated to be of equal value to
the standard form of benefit otherwise payable, computed using a 7% interest
rate and the 1983 Group annuity mortality table weighted 50% male and 50%
female.



   "ANNUITY STARTING DATE."



      (1)   The first day of the first month for which a retirement
benefit is paid to a member under the plan, provided that on that date the
member must:



         (a)   Be eligible for retirement benefits from this plan
and have actually retired; and



         (b)   Have filed a completed application for benefits
with the Retirement Board.



      (2)   The annuity starting date shall not be later than the
later of:



         (a)   The April 1 following the calendar year in which
the member reaches age 70-1/2, or;



         (b)   The April 1 following the calendar year in which
the member retires or otherwise terminates employment.



   "APPLICATION FOR BENEFITS." The form provided by the Retirement Board,
which shall have been completed by the member or his/her beneficiary or
spouse and filed with the Retirement Board in advance of the first month for
which benefits are payable. An application for benefits shall contain such
information as the Retirement Board shall require to establish the member's
rights and benefits under the plan.



   "APPROVED LEAVE OF ABSENCE."



      (1)   Periods of absence during which the member is not
receiving pay from the town. An approved leave of absence shall not
constitute a termination of employment of a member. However, an approved
leave of absence in excess of 90 days shall constitute an interruption in the
credited service of such member, unless such member repays the contributions
and interest for such period upon his/her return to employment in accordance
with § 31.33(E). Periods of absence within the meaning of this definition
are:



         (a)   Approved leave, including leave under the Family
and Medical Leave Act;



         (b)   Temporary illness or temporary disability;



         (c)   Worker's compensation;



         (d)   Voluntary or involuntary service in the armed
forces of the United States while any law requiring military service is in
effect.



      (2)   If any member fails to return to work on the date fixed
by the Retirement Board or Personnel Department with respect to any leave,
his/her credited service shall be determined to have ended on the date next
preceding the first day of such absence.



   "AVERAGE ANNUAL COMPENSATION."



      (1)   Service employees. Shall mean the average compensation
received by the member for the most recent 24-month period immediately prior
to termination or, if greater, the average of the highest two consecutive
plan years of annual compensation paid to a member by the town out of the
last ten years of credited service. For periods prior to June 1, 1999,
average annual compensation means the average of the highest three
consecutive plan years out of the last ten years that produce the highest
annual compensation.



      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean compensation received by
the member for the most recent 12-consecutive-month period immediately prior
to termination or, if greater, the highest one plan year of annual
compensation paid to a member by the town out of the last ten years of
credited service.



   "BENEFICIARY."



      (1)   Any individual (other than a pensioner), estate or other
recipient designated by an employee to receive a death benefit payable under
this plan as set forth in § 31.39(D). Such designation must be filed with
the Retirement Board on a form provided by the Retirement Board. Any such
designation or change of designation of beneficiary shall take effect as of
the date of execution of such notice whether or not the member is living at
the time of such filing, provided there has not been an unreasonable delay in
the filing of such designation.



      (2)   A member's spouse is automatically designated as the
beneficiary as of the date of the marriage, unless a member subsequently
files a new designation of beneficiary. However, the designation of a spouse
as beneficiary is revoked upon a divorce absolute from such spouse, except as
otherwise provided by any valid terms of an outstanding approved Domestic
Relations Order received by the plan prior to any payment. The member must
expressly notify the plan in writing of such a divorce. The plan shall not be
liable for any payments made in accordance with the designation of
beneficiary on file if it had no prior written notice of such a divorce.



   "BREAK IN SERVICE." A one-year non-paid period of absence beginning on
the date a member leaves employment with the town and no longer contributes
to the plan.



   "CODE." The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or replaced from
time to time.



   "COMPENSATION."



      (1)   Service employees. Compensation shall mean the regular
basic salary paid to an employee for services rendered to the town each year.
Compensation shall exclude bonuses, special pay, pay for overtime or premium
pay and the town's cost for any public or private employee benefit plan
including this plan. Compensation shall include longevity payments and
workers' compensation payments. Compensation in respect of any town clerk who
elects to receive credited service in accordance with the provisions of §
31.33(D), shall mean the regular basic salary paid to the town clerk.



      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean the regular basic salary
paid to an employee for services rendered to the town each year. Compensation
shall exclude bonuses, special pay, pay for overtime or premium pay and the
town's cost for any public or private employee benefit plan including this
plan. Compensation shall include longevity payments, worker's compensation
payments and holiday pay.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, effective
July 1, 1996, the amount of annual compensation used to determine the
retirement benefit of an employee who becomes a member in the plan on or
after July 1, 1996 shall be limited to $150,000, as indexed, in accordance
with Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code.



   "CREDITED SERVICE." A member's service with the town as an eligible
employee for purposes of determining the amount of his/her benefits hereunder
and determining eligibility for a pension. The calculation of credited
service shall begin on the member's date of hire and shall end on the
member's date of termination and shall not include periods during which a
member incurs a break in service or does not make the required contributions.
Credited service shall also include the purchase of military service as
provided in § 31.33(B) and (D), and sick leave buy-out as applicable to
police guardian employees in accordance with the provisions of § 31.33(C).
Credited service shall also include any credited service which an employee
elects to receive for service as town clerk in accordance with the provisions
of § 31.33(D).



   "DATE OF ADOPTION." The date upon which this revised plan is adopted by
the Legislative Council of the town.



   "DEPENDENT CHILD." A biological or legally adopted child of a member
who has survived the member and has not attained the age of 18 years.



   "DISABILITY PENSION." Payments under the plan as provided in § 31.35
(D) and (E) or § 31.36 (D) and (E).



   "DOMESTIC RELATIONS ORDER." Any judgment, decree, order or approval of
a property settlement agreement relating to child support, alimony payments
or marital property rights to an alternate payee and made pursuant to a state
domestic relations law, including a community property law.



   "EARLY RETIREMENT DATE."



      (1)   Service employees. Shall mean the first day of any
calendar month elected at the option of the member as his/her annuity
starting date, provided that the member has reached age 55 and has at least
ten years of credited service. The benefits for which the member is eligible
for under this section shall be actuarially reduced to take into account such
early retirement.



      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean the first day of any
calendar month elected at the option of the member as his/her annuity
starting date, provided that the member has at least 15 years of credited
service and is within five years of his/her normal retirement date. The
benefits for which the member otherwise would be eligible under this section
shall not be actuarially reduced to take into account such early retirement.



   "EFFECTIVE DATE." The original effective date of this plan is October
3, 1949. The effective date of this amended and restated plan shall be July
1, 2015 except as otherwise specifically provided in §§ 31.30 through 31.47
.



   "ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE OR EMPLOYEE."



      (1)   "Employee" means any person who is employed by the town.



      (2)   "Eligible employee" means any individual who is an
employee of the town, also known as either a service employee or a guardian
employee, who meets the following requirements:



         (a)   Employee is regularly scheduled to work more than
20 hours per week; and



         (b)   Employee makes the mandatory employee
contributions.



      (3)   Eligible employee shall not include the following types
of employees:



         (a)   Seasonal or temporary employee;



         (b)   Employees that participate in any other plan that
the town is required to contribute to;



         (c)   An employee who participates in the Connecticut
State Teacher's Retirement System;



         (d)   An officer of the town elected by popular vote
except for an employee who elects to receive for service as town clerk in
accordance with the provisions of § 31.33(D).



         (e)   A person receiving a pension or annuity benefit
from the town or receiving severance pay, retainer or fee under contract;



         (f)   A guardian employee hired by the town after July
1, 2006 who has been accepted to participate in the Connecticut Municipal
Employee Retirement System "CMERS", other that any of the three police
guardian employees hired by the town between July 1, 2006 and January 24,
2007 who have elected to participate in the plan prior to April 1, 2007;



         (g)   "Floater" custodians hired by the Board of
Education;



         (h)   Part-time employees working more than 20 hours per
week on a cumulative basis;



         (i)   Employees who are crossing guards; and



         (j)   Effective July 1, 2007, a service employee hired
by the town after July 1, 2007 who has been accepted to participate in the
Connecticut Municipal Employee Retirement System ("CMERS").



      (4)   The term "employee" or "eligible employee" shall not
include a leased employee of an employer, within the meaning of Section
414(n) of the Internal Revenue Code, who otherwise meets the conditions for
participation, vesting and/or benefit accrual under the plan.



   "GUARDIAN EMPLOYEE." Any employee of the town who is duly sworn in,
affirmed or otherwise authenticated and employed by the Town of Hamden as a
police officer in the Police Department or a firefighter in the Fire
Department and the executive officers of both such departments such as the
Police and Fire Chiefs and their respective deputies.



   "MEMBER." Any person included in the membership of the plan as provided
in § 31.32 .



For purposes of the plan, the following definitions shall apply:



      (1)   "ACTIVE MEMBER." A member who is an eligible employee
and is participating in the plan;



      (2)   "RETIRED MEMBER." A member who is no longer an eligible
employee and has begun receiving a retirement pension from the plan; and



      (3)   "TERMINATED VESTED MEMBER." A member who has a vested
interest in the plan but who is no longer an employee of the town.



   "NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE."



      (1)   Service employees. Shall mean age 65, or the completion
of 30 years of credited service, or age 55 and the completion of 20 years of
credited service, whichever is earlier. A member's annuity starting date
shall be the first day of the month following attainment of his/her normal
retirement date and completion and receipt of an application for benefits.



      (2)   Guardian employees. Shall mean age 60, or the completion
of 20 years of credited service, whichever is earlier. A member's annuity
starting date shall be the first day of the month following attainment of
his/her normal retirement date and completion and receipt of an application
for benefits.



   "PLAN." The employees' retirement plan of the Town of Hamden as
described in §§ 31.30 through 31.47 as they may be amended from time to
time.



   "PLAN YEAR." A period of 12 consecutive months commencing each July 1
or any anniversary thereof, and the basis on which the records of the plan
are kept.



   "RETIREMENT BOARD." The Retirement Board which shall manage and
administer the plan, as provided for in § 31.44 .



   "RETIREMENT PENSION." Payments under the plan payable as provided in
§§ 31.37 or 31.38 .



   "SERVICE EMPLOYEE." Any employee of the town that is not a guardian
employee.



   "TOWN." The Town of Hamden, Connecticut.



   "TRUST AGREEMENT." The Trust Agreement between the town and the
Retirement Board of the employees retirement plan of the town effective July
1, 1997 adopted pursuant to Ord. 399.



   "VESTED STATUS." A member's right to a non-forfeitable benefit under
the plan.



   "VESTING SERVICE." Service as an eligible employee that qualifies
him/her for a retirement pension under the plan. Vesting service shall be
equal to years of credited service earned by the member, plus periods of
non-service required to be credited for vesting purposes in accordance with
the Uniformed Services Employment and Re-employment Rights Act and the Family
and Medical Leave Act.



   "YEAR." A year as used in calculating credited service and vesting
service shall mean a period of 12 consecutive calendar months, and shall
include a fractional part of a year based upon completed calendar months. A
fraction of a month in excess of 15 days is to be counted as a completed
month.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 551, passed 6-5-07; Am. Ord. 557, passed
3-3-08; Am. Ord. 575, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7- 15; Am. Ord.
692, passed 11-20-17)



§ 31.31  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Number. Words used in the singular or plural shall be
construed as if plural or singular, respectively, where they would so apply.



   (B)   Titles. Titles of articles and section headings are inserted
for convenience and shall not affect the meaning or construction of the plan.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.32  PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   Participation. Each employee shall become a member in the plan
effective as of the first day of the month following completion of 12 months
of credited service, provided he/she is an eligible employee. All eligible
employees shall participate in the plan as a condition of employment with the
town, and shall make any mandatory employee contributions so required for
non-bargaining unit employees or by the applicable collective bargaining
agreement.



   (B)   Termination of participation.



      (1)   A member's membership in the plan shall terminate under
the following conditions:



         (a)   Termination of employment with the town other than
by reason of the member's death, retirement or disability, provided such
member was not entitled to a vested pension under the plan.



         (b)   Withdrawal of the member's accumulated
contributions.



      (2)   Membership shall be continued during an approved leave
of absence from service without pay or for periods when the member is not an
eligible employee as herein defined, but is in the employ of the town in
another capacity. However, such member shall not receive credited service for
any period in excess of 90 days in which no contributions were made.



   (C)   Reinstatement of participation.



      (1)   An employee who has lost his/her status as a member in
accordance with division (B) of this section shall again become a member,
effective the first day of the month following his/her return to employment
as an eligible employee, provided the member was previously employed for more
than one year and he/she did not incur a permanent break in service.



      (2)   In the event such employee had previously received a
return of his/her accumulated contributions, he/she shall be considered a new
employee for all plan purposes, unless the employee returns his/her
accumulated contributions in accordance with § 31.34(E).



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.33  CREDITED SERVICE; BREAK IN SERVICE.



   (A)   Credited service.



      (1)   A member shall receive credited service for each year
and completed months of service (a fraction of a month in excess of 15 days
shall count as a full month) from the date he/she became an eligible employee
to his/her date of termination, death or retirement, provided that such
employment was continuous. Employment is continuous if service is not
interrupted by a termination of employment or a non-paid approved leave of
absence in excess of 90 days. Except as provided in division (E) of this §
31.33, in no event may a member receive credited service for any period
longer than 90 days during which he/she was required to make member
contributions and failed to do so.



      (2)   The accrual of credited service shall be limited to a
maximum of 35 years for members who were first employed by the town on or
after July 1, 1978. For members hired before July 1, 1978, the maximum
retirement pension may exceed 35 years of credited service, provided however,
that the member retires prior to June 30, 2008. A member with more than 35
years of credited service as of June 30, 2008 who continues to work shall not
accrue additional years of credited service on and after such date.



      (3)   The credited service of a member who has been employed
by the town as both a service employee and a guardian employee shall be
considered separate and distinct periods of credited service for benefit
accrual purposes, but shall be combined for vesting purposes.



      (4)   Guardian employees first employed after January 1, 1989
shall be credited with past service employee service, if applicable, but
shall receive guardian employee credited service equal to one year of
guardian employee credited service for each two years of service employee
credited service, prorated proportionately as appropriate.



   (B)   Military service purchase prior to employment with the town.



      (1)   A member shall be allowed to purchase credited service
for active military duty prior to employment with the town. A member may
purchase a minimum of six months, up to a maximum of four years. A member
must provide documentation of military service in the form of a D.D.214, and
must have been honorably discharged.



      (2)   The cost to purchase such military service shall be
calculated as follows:



         (a)   For members hired prior to April 1, 1992, the cost
to purchase military service shall be equal to 5% of the compensation of the
member on the effective date of employment, multiplied by the number of years
and/or months in active military duty as specified on the member's D.D.214,
plus 5% interest compounded annually from initial date of employment through
March 31, 1992.



         (b)   For members hired on or after April 1, 1992, the
cost to purchase military service shall be equal to 5% of the compensation of
the member on the effective date of employment, multiplied by the number of
years and/or months in active military duty as specified on the member's
D.D.214, plus 5% interest compounded annually from initial date of employment
through the date the member elects to purchase such service and begins
repayment.



      (3)   Any new employee shall have a period of 36 months from
the date of hire to buy back said military time, and can pay by voluntary
payroll deduction on a post-tax basis, in an approved equal payment plan, or
other arrangement agreed to by the Retirement Board.



   (C)   Non-work periods credited. Except as provided in this division
(C), a member shall not receive credited service for periods of absence from
employment with the town in excess of 90 days.



      (1)   Military service. The plan shall grant credited service
and years of vesting service in accordance with the Uniformed Services
Employment and Re-employment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA) for a member who was
an eligible employee immediately prior to the commencement of military
service as defined in USERRA, provided such member returns to employment with
the town within the required period of time set forth in divisions (2)(a)l.
through 4., below. Credited service shall only be granted if the member
fulfills the requirements of division (C)(3). Effective January 1, 2007, if a
member dies while performing qualified military service (as defined in
Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code), the member's beneficiaries are
entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals related to
the period of qualified military service) provided under the plan had the
member resumed and then terminated employment with the town on account of
death. Effective for plan years commencing after December 31, 2008,
"compensation" for purposes of determining benefits and/or member
contributions shall include "differential wage payments" as that term is
defined in Section 414(u)(12) of the Internal Revenue Code that a member
receives from the town while on active duty and performing services for the
U.S. uniformed services.



      (2)   (a)   Under USERRA, the required period depends on
the length of military service. In general, the required period is:



            1.   One day after a member's military service
ends (if such service was less than 31 days);



            2.   Fourteen days after a member's military
service ends (if such service was more than 30, but less than 181 days); and



            3.   Ninety days after a member's military service
ends (if such service was more than 180 days).



            4.   If a member is hospitalized for or recovering
from an illness or injury which was incurred or aggravated during military
service, USERRA requires that such member register for re-employment with the
town as soon as he/she has recovered. Except as otherwise provided by USERRA,
this recovery period cannot exceed two years.



         (b)   A member who enters the Armed Forces of the United
States for a period of not more than five years (consecutive or individual
years), is separated from active duty under conditions other than a
dishonorable discharge, and returns to or is available for work within the
period specified in division (2)(a)l. through 4. above shall be granted not
to exceed one year of credited service or years of vesting service in any one
calendar year, up to a maximum of five years of credited service or years of
vesting service, for such active duty in the Armed Forces.



      (3)   A member returning from military service who meets the
requirements of division (C)(1) and (2) shall have the right to make up
his/her member contributions and thereby receive credited service equal to
his/her period of military service, to a maximum of five years of credited
service. Such member must notify the Retirement Board upon re-employment of
his/her desire to repay his/her member contributions. Such contributions
shall be made either in a lump sum payment or on a pre-tax basis over a
period equal to the lesser of three times his/her military service or five
years. The amount of member contributions owed to the plan shall be equal to
a percentage of the member's earnings (determined in accordance with the
member's contribution rate in effect at the time the member entered military
service) for the preceding 12-month period prior to his/her military service,
multiplied by the number of years and months of military service, to a
maximum of five years; plus compounded interest at the rate of 5% annually.



      (4)   To the extent required by USERRA, a member must inform
the town in writing before entering military service in order to be eligible
for years of vesting service as described above.



   (D)   Break in service.



      (1)   If a member has a break in service before attaining
vested status, it has the effect of canceling the member's standing under
this plan; that is, the forfeiture of his/her participation, his/her
previously accrued years of vesting service and years of credited service.
However, a break in service may be temporary, subject to repair by a return
to employment with the town.



      (2)   A break in service is repairable, in the sense that its
effects are eliminated if, before incurring a permanent break in service, the
member subsequently returns to employment with the town. Previously earned
vesting service and credited service shall be restored, provided previously
refunded contributions are returned in accordance with division (D)(4).
However, nothing in this division (D)(2) shall change the effect of a
permanent break in service.



      (3)   Permanent break in service. A break in service for a
period longer than the member's years of credited service will result in a
permanent break in service and the cancellation of credited service and
vesting service. A break in service will be considered a permanent break in
service and all previously accrued years of vesting service and years of
credited service will be canceled if the member does not return to employment
with the town as of the last day of the plan year in which the number of
one-year breaks in service equals or exceeds the number of previously earned
credited service or years of vesting service, whichever is greater.



      (4)   Effect of a permanent break in service. If a member who
has not achieved vested status has a permanent break in service:



         (a)   Previous years of credited service and vesting
service are canceled; and



         (b)   Participation is canceled and new participation is
subject to the provisions of § 31.32(A).



      (5)   A member who returns to employment with the town before
incurring a permanent break in service may have previous credited service and
vesting service restored upon returning his/her accumulated contributions
plus interest within 60 days of his/her re-employment, in accordance with the
provisions of § 31.34(E). If such member fails to return his/her accumulated
contributions, the member shall be considered a new member for all purposes
of the plan and forfeit previously earned credited service and vesting
service with the town.



      (6)   In no event shall a member who is inducted into the
armed services of the United States incur a break in service if the member
returns to employment with the town in accordance with the provisions of
division (C)(2) of this section.



      (7)   In no event shall a member who is on an approved leave
of absence incur a break in service, unless such member does not return to
employment on the date specified by the Retirement Board.



      (8)   If a member is laid off and is called back to active
service within two years, no permanent break in service shall occur, subject
to the return of contributions in accordance with division (D)(4) of this
section.



   (E)   Service as town clerk. Subject to the conditions hereafter set
forth, the plan shall grant credited service and years of vesting service for
service as town clerk for a member who was an eligible employee immediately
prior to the commencement of service as town clerk. Such grant of credited
service and years of vesting service for any active continuous service as
town clerk shall be conditioned upon the member informing the town in writing
within 60 days of becoming town clerk (or within 60 days of the effective
date of this amendment, if later) of his/her desire to receive credited
service and vesting service credit during his/her service as town clerk and
his/her election to make contributions on a regular periodic basis during the
term of his/her service as town clerk calculated upon such member's
compensation during his/her service as town clerk. If, when such election is
made, there are periods of service as town clerk for which contributions were
not made because the election was not available for such earlier period(s),
then the contributions attributable to such prior period of time, together
with accumulated interest at the rate of 5% per annum, shall be made in a
lump sum payment at the time of the election or over a period of the lesser
of (i) three years or (ii) the period of such service during which
contributions were not made.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 551, passed 6-5-07; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15; Am. Ord. 692, passed 11-20-17)



§ 31.34  MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Required contributions.



      (1)   Service employees. As a condition of employment,
eligible employees are required to make mandatory employee contributions to
the plan. Contributions shall be based on a percentage of an employee's
compensation for service and shall be equal to the following:



               Contribution



   Effective Date         Rate



   July 1, 2007         5.5%



   July 1, 2008         5.5%



   July 1, 2009         5.5%



   July 1, 2010         6.0%



   July 1, 2011         6.0%



   July 1, 2012         6.5%



   July 1, 2013         7.0%



   July 1, 2014         7.5%



   July 1, 2015         7.75%



   July 1, 2016         8.0%



      (2)   Guardian employees. Effective January 1, 2000, as a
condition of employment, eligible employees are required to make mandatory
employee contributions to the plan. Contributions shall be based on an
employee's compensation, but shall exclude holiday pay, for service on and
after January 1, 2000, and shall be equal to the following:



         (a)   For guardian employees who were members of the
plan on July 1, 1998:



               Contribution



   Effective Date         Rate



   July 1, 2001         5%



   July 1, 2000         4%



   January 1, 2000      3%



         (b)   For guardian employees who first become members of
the plan on or after January 1, 2000, the contribution rate shall equal 5% of
compensation.



         (c)   For all guardian employees who are eligible
employees, regardless of when they became members of the plan, the
contribution rate shall be equal to the following:



               Contribution



   Effective Date         Rate



   July 1, 2006         5%



   July 1, 2007         6%



   July 1, 2008         6.5%



   July 1, 2009         7%



   July 1, 2010         7.5%



   July 1, 2011         8%



   July 1, 2012         8.%



   July 1, 2013         8.5%



   July 1, 2014         8.5%



         (d)   Employees who became members prior to July 1, 1986
were required to make member contributions under the terms of the plan and
the collective bargaining agreement in existence prior to that date. From
July 1, 1986 through December 31, 1999, member contributions were neither
required nor permitted.



      (3)   Service employees who continue to work beyond July 1,
2008 and have reached the cap on credited service shall not be required to
make the above referenced contributions. Guardian employees who continue to
work beyond June 30, 2006 and have reached the cap on credited service shall
not be required to make the above referenced contributions.



   (B)   Employer pick-up contributions.



      (1)   Effective January 1, 2000, pursuant to Section 414(h)(2)
of the Internal Revenue Code, the town shall pick up and pay the
contributions that otherwise would be payable by each member. The
contributions so picked-up shall be treated as employer contributions for
purposes of determining the amounts of federal income taxes to withhold from
each member's earnings.



      (2)   Member contributions picked up by the town shall be paid
from the same source of funds used for the payment of salaries to employees.
A deduction shall be made from each member's compensation equal to the amount
of the member contributions picked up by the town, provided that such
deduction shall not reduce the member's compensation for purposes of
computing benefits under this plan.



      (3)   Member contributions picked-up by the town shall be
credited to a separate account for each member, so that member contributions
made prior to January 1, 2000 may be distinguished from the member
contributions picked-up by the town on and after January 1, 2000.



   (C)   Interest on member contributions. Member contributions shall
be credited with interest compounded annually as follows:



   Interest Rate         Effective Date



   2%            Prior to May 29, 1969



   4%            June 1, 1969 - June 30, 1981



   5%            July 1, 1981



   (D)   Return of member contributions. Any person ceasing to be a
member for any cause other than death, retirement under the plan, or under
circumstances which entitle the member to a vested pension, shall be paid in
one lump sum his/her accumulated contributions within six months after
termination of participation in the plan.



   (E)   Repayment of member contributions upon re-employment.



      (1)   A non-vested member with a minimum of one year of
credited service with the town who terminates employment, receives a
distribution of accumulated contributions and again becomes re-employed by
the town may have his/her previous service with the town restored, provided
the member returns to employment with the town within five years of his/her
termination date and upon repaying the amount of his/her accumulated
contributions, plus interest at the rate of 5% calculated from the date of
distribution to the date of re-employment. Payment must be made in one lump
sum payment within 60 days of the member's date of reemployment.



      (2)   In no event may a member's credited service and vesting
service be restored if he/she has incurred a permanent break in service under
the provisions of § 31.33(D).



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 551, passed 6-5-07; Am. Ord. 575, passed
6-1-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.35  SERVICE EMPLOYEES; ELIGIBILITY FOR PENSION.



   (A)   Regular pension. A service employee member may retire on a
regular pension upon attaining his/her normal retirement date and submitting
an application for benefits for approval by the Retirement Board.



   (B)   Early retirement pension. A service employee member may retire
on an early retirement pension upon attaining age 55 and if he/she has
accumulated at least ten years of credited service.



   (C)   Vested pension. Any service employee member who ceases to be
an employee of the town for any cause other than his/her death or retirement,
and has accumulated at least ten years of credited service with the town,
shall be entitled to receive a vested pension commencing at normal retirement
age (the date he/she would have been entitled to submit an application for
benefits for approval by the Retirement Board for a regular pension under
division (A) if he/she had remained in employment with the town through
his/her normal retirement date).



   (D)   Service related disability pension.



      (1)   Any service employee member who is found by the
Retirement Board to have become totally and permanently disabled from
engaging in any and every duty of his/her or her occupation with the town
during the first 24 months of continuous disability or, after the first 24
months of disability, from engaging for profit in any occupation or
employment reasonably comparable in nature with that in which the member has
engaged at the time such disability occurred, shall be entitled, upon
approval of his/her written application for benefits filed with the
Retirement Board, to retire and receive a service related disability pension.
No member may make more than one application to the Retirement Board per
12-month period for a disability retirement, unless such subsequent request
is based upon a separate injury or illness.



      (2)   The right of such service employee member to receive and
to continue to receive a service related disability pension shall be subject
to the member becoming totally and permanently disabled as a result of
injuries arising out of and in the course of his/her employment by the town
within the meaning of the workers' compensation laws of the State of
Connecticut.



      (3)   The Retirement Board may inquire from time to time into
the continued disability of any service employee member receiving a
disability pension and may terminate such disability pension at any time if:



         (a)   The Retirement Board finds that the member is no
longer totally and permanently disabled; or



         (b)   The member refuses to comply with any reasonable
request of the Retirement Board for a medical examination of the member or
for requests for other evidence as to his/her condition.



   (E)   Non-service related disability pension. Any service employee
member who is found by the Retirement Board to have become totally and
permanently disabled due to an injury or illness not arising out of the
course of a member's employment with the town shall be entitled to retire on
a non-service related disability pension, following the completion of at
least ten years of credited service. For service employees hired on or after
July 1, 1991, such service employee member shall be entitled to retire on a
non-service related disability pension, following the completion of at least
15 years of credited service.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.36  GUARDIAN EMPLOYEES; ELIGIBILITY FOR PENSION.



   (A)   Regular pension. A guardian employee member may retire on a
regular pension upon attaining his/her normal retirement date and submitting
an application for benefits for approval by the Retirement Board.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a guardian employee who has not previously
retired shall be retired effective the first of the month following his 65th
birthday.



   (B)   Early retirement pension. A guardian employee member may
retire on an early retirement pension if he/she is within five years of age
60 and has accumulated at least 15 years of credited service.



   (C)   Vested pension.



      (1)   Any guardian employee member who ceases to be an
employee of the town for any cause other than his/her death or retirement and
has accumulated at least ten years of credited service with the town shall be
entitled to receive a vested pension according to the following schedule:



Years of Credited Service   Percent of Vested Pension



   1-9            0%



   10            50%



   11            60%



   12            70%



   13            80%



   14            90%



   15 or more         100%



      (2)   A guardian employee member who is entitled to receive a
vested pension may begin commencement of such benefit on the earlier of the
first full month following:



         (a)   The month that the guardian employee member would
have completed 20 years of credited service had he/she remained in service
for the town; or



         (b)   The month the guardian employee member attains
his/her normal retirement date (the date he/she would have been entitled to
submit an application for benefits for approval by the Retirement Board for a
regular pension under division (A) if he/she had remained in employment with
the town through his/her normal retirement date).



   (D)   Service related disability pension.



      (1)   Any guardian employee member who is found by the
Retirement Board to have become totally and permanently disabled from
engaging for profit in any occupation or employment reasonably comparable in
nature with that in which the guardian employee member has engaged at the
time such disability occurred shall be entitled, upon approval of his/her
written application for benefits filed with the Retirement Board, to retire
and receive a service related disability pension. No guardian employee member
may make more than one application to the Retirement Board during a 12-month
period for a disability retirement unless such subsequent request is based
upon a separate injury or illness.



      (2)   The right of such guardian employee member to receive
and to continue to receive a service related disability pension shall be
subject to the guardian employee member becoming totally and permanently
disabled as a result of injuries arising out of and in the course of his/her
employment with the town within the meaning of the workers' compensation laws
of the State of Connecticut.



      (3)   The Retirement Board may inquire from time to time into
the continued disability of any guardian employee member receiving a
disability pension and may terminate such disability pension at any time if:



         (a)   The Retirement Board finds that the guardian
employee member is no longer totally and permanently disabled; or



         (b)   The guardian employee member refuses to comply
with any reasonable request of the Retirement Board for a medical examination
of the guardian employee member or for requests for other evidence as to
his/her condition.



   (E)   Non-service related disability pension. Any guardian employee
member who is found by the Retirement Board to have become totally and
permanently disabled due to an injury or illness not arising out of the
course of a guardian employee member's employment with the town shall be
entitled to retire on a non-service related disability pension following the
completion of at least ten years of credited service.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.37  SERVICE EMPLOYEES; AMOUNT OF BENEFITS.



   (A)   Amount of regular pension.



      (1)   The monthly regular pension for a service employee
member employed by the town as an eligible employee on and after July 1, 1999
shall, except as otherwise provided in division (A)(5) of this section, be
equal to the following:



         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2.5% of a service employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the service employee
member's years of credited service to a maximum of 20 years; plus



         (b)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a service employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the service employee
member's years of credited service in excess of 20, to a maximum of 35 years.



         (c)   A service employee member's retirement pension
shall not exceed 80% of his/her average annual compensation, subject to the
provisions of division (A)(2).



      (2)   The maximum retirement pension for service employee
members hired on or after July 1, 1978 shall be limited to 35 years of
credited service. For service employee members hired before July 1, 1978, the
maximum retirement pension payable may exceed 35 years of credited service,
provided that a service employee member with more than 35 years of credited
service as of June 30, 2008, who continues to work shall have his/her benefit
frozen as of June 30, 2008, based on the service employee member's average
annual compensation on such date. In no event shall it exceed 85% of average
annual compensation.



      (3)   The monthly regular pension for a service employee
member who terminated service or retired prior to July 1, 1999 shall be equal
to the following, unless the provisions of the plan in effect when the
service employee member terminated set forth a different pension benefit:



         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a service employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the number of years of
credited service, up to a maximum of 25 years; plus



         (b)   An additional one-twelfth (1/12) of 3% of a
service employee member's average annual compensation multiplied by the
number of years of credited service rendered in excess of 25.



      (4)   For service employee members who terminated employment
prior to July 1, 1995, the amount of the service employee member's regular
pension calculated in accordance with division (A)(3) of this section shall
be offset by a percentage of the service employee member's social security
determined as follows:



         (a)   A service employee member's regular pension shall
be offset by the lesser of the set social security offset percent in division
(A)(4)(b) or the formulated social security offset in division (A)(4)(c),
based upon the service employee member's primary amount of social security at
age 65 under the Federal Social Security Act; such amount to be determined
based on the level of compensation received by the service employee member at
the date of termination of employment with the town.



         (b)   The "set social security offset percent" is as
follows for each of the plan years:



Retirement Date On or After      Social SecurityOffset



   January 1, 1986         58%



   January 1, 1987         56%



   January 1, 1988         54%



   January 1, 1989         52%



   January 1, 1990         50%



   January 1, 1991         48%



   January 1, 1992         40%



   January 1, 1993         30%



   January 1, 1994         20%



   January 1, 1995         10%



   July 1, 1995            0%



         (c)   The "formulated social security offset percent" is
calculated as follows: divide the service employee member's number of years
of credited service with the town by 30 and multiply by 60%.



         (d)   Any service employee member who retired between
July 1, 1991, and February 1, 1992, had their social security offset reduced
to 30%, provided that they applied for a retirement and completed the
appropriate application forms between July 1, 1991 and February 1, 1992.



      (5)   In the event a service employee member has service as
both a service employee and a guardian employee, his/her regular pension
attributable to his/her service as a guardian employee shall be calculated
separately, in accordance with the provisions of § 31.38 and based upon
his/her compensation and years of  credited service accrued while as a
guardian employee.



   (B)   Minimum retirement benefit.



      (1)   For service employee members who terminate employment on
or after July 1, 1985, the monthly regular pension benefit under division (A)
of this section shall not be less than sixty hundredths (60/100) of 1% of the
service employee member's average annual compensation, divided by 12, for
each year of credited service, or $3.25, whichever is greater.



      (2)   For service employee members who terminated with a
vested benefit before July 1, 1985, their minimum benefit shall be calculated
using the applicable provisions of the plan in effect prior to July 1, 2000.



   (C)   Amount of disability pension.



      (1)   A service employee member retiring on a service related
or non-service related disability pension as defined in § 31.35(D) shall
receive a monthly benefit equal to the greater of:



         (a)   50% of the service employee member's average
annual compensation; or



         (b)   The service employee member's monthly regular
pension calculated in accordance with division (A) of this section as of
his/her date of disability.



      (2)   A service employee member who is eligible for a regular
pension pursuant to § 31.35(A) shall have a non-service related disability
pension calculated as if the service employee member was retiring on a
regular pension.



   (D)   Amount of early retirement pension benefit. The amount of the
early retirement pension benefit shall be calculated in the same manner as
the monthly regular pension in division (A) of this section, but shall be
reduced to take into account such early retirement as follows:



      (1)   From age 60 to age 65, 0.6% for each month early
retirement precedes age 65; and



      (2)   From age 55 to age 60, 0.3% for each month early
retirement precedes age 60.



   (E)   Vested pension.



      (1)   A service employee member shall be entitled to a vested
pension after completion of at least ten years of credited service or ten
years of vesting service. The amount of the vested pension shall be
calculated in the same manner as a regular pension, in accordance with the
provisions of the plan and benefit formula in effect on the date the service
employee member terminated employment.



      (2)   The vested pension benefits provided by this division
(E) shall be in lieu of all other benefits provided by the plan for such
service employee member, his/her spouse and his/her dependent children,
except for the return of the service employee member's accumulated
contributions.



   (F)   Maximum benefit limitation.



      (1)   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to
the contrary, for plan years beginning on or after June 30, 2002 and prior to
July 1, 2007 the annual benefit of a service employee member hereunder
(adjusted to an actuarially equivalent straight life annuity based upon the
interest rate as determined by the PBGC on January 1 each year) shall not at
any time within the limitation year exceed the lesser of $140,000 (the
"dollar limitation") or 100% of the member's average compensation for his/her
high three years.



         (b)   For plan years beginning on or after July 1, 2007
in no event shall the maximum annual retirement benefit attributable to town
contributions and payable to a service employee member who has not yet
retired under the term of the plan, exceed $160,000 (the defined benefit
dollar limitation).



      (2)   The annual retirement benefit payable to a service
employee member under the plan shall be deemed not to exceed the applicable
maximum limitation of division (F)(l) if:



         (a)   The annual retirement benefit payable with respect
to such service employee member under the plan and under all defined benefit
plans of the town does not exceed $10,000 for the limitation year, or for any
prior limitation year; and



         (b)   The town has not at any time maintained a defined
contribution plan in which the service employee member participated.



      (3)   In the event that a service employee member has been a
member in the plan less than ten years, the dollar limitation and the defined
benefit dollar limitation, as applicable, shall be multiplied by a fraction,
the numerator of which is his years of participation in the plan (or part
thereof) and the denominator of which is ten. In the event that a member has
less than ten years of vesting service, the $10,000 benefit above, shall be
reduced by multiplication by a fraction, the numerator of which is his years
of service (or part thereof) and the denominator of which is ten.



   (G)   Maximum benefit limitation definitions. For purposes of
divisions (F) through (K) of this section:



      (1)   The term "ANNUAL BENEFIT" shall mean the benefit the
service employee member would be entitled to at his/her or her normal
retirement date, assuming he or she continues employment until such date, and
that all other relevant facts used to determine benefits under the plan
remain constant as of the current limitation year for all future limitation
years.



      (2)   "ANNUAL RETIREMENT BENEFIT" means a benefit payable
annually in the form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits)
under a plan to which employees do not contribute and under which no rollover
contributions (as defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4), and 408(d)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code) are made. A benefit payable in any other form
shall be converted to the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity for
purposes of applying these limits based on a 5% interest assumption. Other
required adjustments are provided for in this division. In the event that a
service employee member's annual retirement benefit is payable in a form
other than a straight life annuity, or if the members contribute to the plan
or make rollover contributions (as defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4),
and 408(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code), the determinations as to whether
the limitation described in division (F)(1) has been satisfied shall be made,
in accordance with the regulations prescribed by the Secretary, by adjusting
such benefit so that it is the actuarial equivalent of a straight life
annuity (with no ancillary benefits). For purposes of this division (G)(2),
any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income
benefits shall not be taken into account; and that portion of any joint and
survivor annuity which constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as
defined in Section 417 of the Internal Revenue Code) shall not be taken into
account. For purposes of adjusting any benefit, the interest rate assumption
shall not be less than the greater of 5% or the rate specified for an
actuarial equivalent benefit.



      (3)   "COMPENSATION" for purposes of the maximum benefit
limitations under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, shall mean any
and all earnings reported on W-2 forms completed by the town in respect to
the plan year specified. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for
plan years commencing after December 31, 1997, "Compensation" for this
section shall include (1) any elective deferral (as defined in Section
402(g)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code), (2) any amount which is contributed
or deferred by the town at the election of the member and which is not
includable in the gross income of the member by reason of Sections 125
(cafeteria plan) or 457 (non-qualified deferred compensation plan) of the
Internal Revenue Code. For plan years commencing on and after January 1,
2001, "Compensation" shall also include elective amounts that are not
includable in the gross income of the participant by reason of Section
132(f)(4) (qualified transportation fringes) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Effective for plan years commencing on or after July 1, 2007, "Compensation"
under this section for any plan year shall not be greater than the limit
under Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code that applies for that
year.



      (4)   "LIMITATION YEAR" shall mean a plan year.



   (H)   Adjustment for early or late commencement of benefits.



      (1)   (a)   For plan years commencing prior to July 1,
2007, if the annual pension benefit of a member begins before age 62, as
described in Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code, the $140,000
limitation set forth in division (F)(1)(a) of this section shall be reduced
so that it is equivalent to such a benefit beginning at the Social Security
retirement age as described in Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal Revenue
Code. The reduction of this division shall not reduce the limitation of
division (F)(1) of this section below $75,000 if the benefit begins at or
after age 55, or, if the benefit begins before age 55, the equivalent of the
$75,000 limitation for age 55.



         (b)   Effective for plan years commencing after June 30,
2007, if the annual benefit of a service employee member begins prior to age
62, the defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to the service employee
member at such earlier age is an annual benefit payable in the form of a
straight life annuity beginning at the earlier age that is the actuarial
equivalent of the defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to the service
employee member at age 62 (adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if
required). The defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior
to age 62 is determined as the lesser of (i) the actuarial equivalent (at
such age) of the defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a 5%
interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality table and expressing
the service employee member age based on completed calendar months as of the
annuity starting date; or (ii) the product of the defined benefit dollar
limitation multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately
commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the service employee
member's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the immediately
commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 62, both determined
without applying the limitations of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (2)   In the event that a service employee member's annual
benefit commences after age 65, the dollar limitation or defined benefit
dollar limitation, as applicable, shall be increased for the service employee
member's age such that it is the actuarial equivalent of the defined benefit
dollar limitation (adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if required)
commencing at age 65. For purposes of adjusting the dollar Limitation or the
defined benefit dollar limitation, the interest rate assumption shall not be
greater than the lesser of 5% or the rate specified for an actuarial
equivalent benefit.



      (3)   Actuarial equivalence under this division (H) shall be
determined using a 5% interest assumption. The defined benefit dollar
limitation shall be adjusted annually as provided in Section 415(d) of the
Internal Revenue Code pursuant to the regulations prescribed by the Secretary
of the Treasury. The adjusted limitation is effective as of January 1st of
each calendar year and is applicable to "limitation years" ending with or
within that calendar year. The dollar limitation shall not be adjusted except
as provided in this division (H).



      (4)   In the case of disability or survivor benefits provided
under the plan, the limitations of division (F)(3), (H)(1)(a) and (b) of this
section shall not apply to:



         (a)   Income received from the plan as a pension,
annuity, or similar pension as the result of the recipient becoming disabled
by reason of personal injuries or sickness; or



         (b)   Amounts received from a governmental plan by the
beneficiaries, survivors or the estate of a service employee member as the
result of the death of the service employee member.



      (5)   For purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation no
adjustment for cost of living increases shall be taken into account before
the year for which such adjustment first takes place.



   (I)   Protection of prior benefits. For any year before 1986, the
limitations prescribed by Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code as in
effect before enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and all subsequent
legislation shall apply, and no pension earned under this plan prior to 1986
shall be reduced on account of the provisions of divisions (F) through (K) of
this section if it would have satisfied those limitations under that prior
law.



   (J)   Application of maximum limitations.



      (1)   The benefit paid under this plan shall not exceed the
limitations set forth in division (F) of this section.



      (2)   If a member on the annuity starting date is not eligible
for full monthly benefits under this plan because of the operation of
division (F) of this section, the monthly benefit shall thereafter be
recalculated annually until the member is receiving a full monthly benefit
under the plan's terms without the operation of this division (J). Each such
recalculation shall be based on this division, with any applicable adjustment
to reflect cost of living increases as permitted by the Treasury Regulations.



   (K)   For plan benefits subject to Section 417(e)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, the actuarial equivalent of the annual retirement benefit is
equal to the greater of actuarial equivalent for the particular form of
benefit payable and the equivalent annual benefit computed using the
applicable interest rate and applicable mortality table described below,
determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.



      (1)   The applicable mortality table means the table
prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury. Such table shall be based on the
prevailing Commissioner's standard table (described in Section 807(d)(5)(A)
of the Internal Revenue Code) used to determine reserves for group annuity
contracts issued on the date as of which present value is being determined
(without regard to any other subparagraph of Section 807(d)(5)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code). The prevailing Commissioner's standard table for
these purposes currently is the GAM '83 Mortality Table, blended equally
between male and female mortality rates. Effective for distributions
occurring after December 31, 2002 the applicable mortality table shall be the
table prescribed in Rev. Rul. 2001-62. Effective for plan years commencing on
or after January 1, 2008, the applicable mortality table shall mean the
applicable Section 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code mortality table as
adjusted in accordance with the provisions of Rev. Rul. 2007-67.



      (2)   The applicable interest rate is the rate of interest set
forth in § 31.37(H)(3).



   (L)   For purposes of applying the foregoing limitations of
divisions (F) through (K):



      (1)   All defined benefit plans of the town, whether or not
terminated, are to be treated as one defined benefit plan and all defined
contribution plans of the town, whether or not terminated, are to be treated
as one defined contribution plan;



      (2)   For purposes of divisions (F) through (K), the term
"town" shall include all departments and agencies of the Town of Hamden,
Connecticut.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 571, passed 3-2-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15)



§ 31.38  GUARDIAN EMPLOYEES; AMOUNT OF BENEFITS.



   (A)   Amount of regular pension.



      (1)   The monthly regular pension for guardian employee
members employed by the town as an eligible employee on and after July 1,
1998 shall, except as otherwise provided in division (A)(4), be equal to the
following:



         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2.5% of a guardian employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the guardian employee
member's years of credited service to a maximum of 20 years; plus



         (b)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 3% of a guardian employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the guardian employee
member's years of credited service from 21 to 25 years; plus



         (c)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a guardian employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the guardian employee
member's years of credited service in excess of 25, to a maximum of 35 years.



         (d)   A guardian employee member's retirement pension
shall not exceed 80% of his/her average annual compensation, subject to the
provisions of division (A)(2), below.



      (2)   The maximum retirement pension for guardian employee
members hired on or after July 1, 1981 shall be limited to 80% of his/her
average annual compensation. For guardian employee members hired before July
1, 1981, the maximum retirement pension payable may exceed 80% of average
annual compensation, provided that a guardian employee member with more than
80% of average annual compensation as of June 30, 2006 who continues to work
shall have his/her benefit frozen as of June 30, 2006, based on the guardian
employee member's average annual compensation on such date and benefit
accrued as of such date.



      (3)   The monthly regular pension for a guardian employee
member who terminated service or retired prior to July 1, 1998 shall be equal
to the following, unless the provisions of the plan in effect when the
guardian employee member terminated set forth a different pension benefit:



         (a)   One-twelfth (1/12) of 2% of a guardian employee
member's average annual compensation multiplied by the number of years of
credited service up to a maximum of 25 years; plus



         (b)   An additional one-twelfth (1/12) of 3% of a
guardian employee member's average annual compensation multiplied by the
number of years of credited service rendered in excess of 25.



         (c)   For guardian employees first hired after July 1,
1981, not more than a total of 35 years of credited service shall be counted.



      (4)   In the event a guardian employee member has service as
both a guardian employee and a service employee, his/her regular pension
attributable to his/her service as a service employee shall be calculated
separately, in accordance with the provisions of § 31.37, and based upon
his/her compensation and years of credited service accrued while as a service
employee.



   (B)   Minimum retirement benefit.



      (1)   For guardian employee members who terminate employment
on or after July 1, 1985, the monthly regular pension benefit under division
(A) of this section shall not be less than sixty-hundredths (60/100) of 1% of
the guardian employee member's average annual compensation, divided by 12,
for each year of credited service, or $3.25, whichever is greater.



      (2)   For guardian employee members who terminated with a
vested benefit before July 1, 1985, their minimum benefit shall be calculated
using the applicable provisions of the plan in effect prior to July 1, 2000.



   (C)   Amount of disability pension.



      (1)   Service related disability pension. A guardian employee
member retiring on a service related disability pension as defined in §
31.36(D) shall receive a monthly benefit equal to the greater of:



         (a)   50% of the guardian employee member's average
annual compensation; or



         (b)   The guardian employee member's monthly regular
pension calculated in accordance with division (A) of this section as of
his/her date of disability.



      (2)   Non-service related disability pension. A guardian
employee member retiring on a non-service related disability pension as
defined in § 31.36(E) shall receive a non-service related disability pension
equal to the greater of:



         (a)   For guardian employee employees hired on and after
July 1, 1981, 30% of the guardian employee member's average annual
compensation determined as of the date of disability. For guardian employee
members hired on or after July 1, 1987, 25% of the guardian employee member's
average annual compensation determined as of the date of disability; or



         (b)   The guardian employee member's monthly regular
pension calculated in accordance with division (A) of this section as of
his/her date of disability.



   (D)   Amount of early retirement pension benefit. The amount of the
early retirement pension benefit shall be calculated in the same manner as
the monthly regular pension in division (A) of this section. The early
retirement pension shall not be actuarially reduced to take into account such
early retirement.



   (E)   Vested pension.



      (1)   A guardian employee member shall be entitled to a vested
pension after completion of at least ten years of credited service or ten
years of vesting service. The amount of the vested pension shall be
calculated in the same manner as a regular pension, in accordance with the
provisions of the plan and benefit formula in effect on the date the guardian
employee member terminated employment. The amount of a vested pension shall
then be multiplied by the following percentages if the guardian employee
member has less than 15 years of credited service or vesting service:



Years of Credited Service   Percent of Vested Pension



   1-9            0%



   10            50%



   11            60%



   12            70%



   13            80%



   14            90%



   15            100%



      (2)   Entitlement to a vested pension provided by this
division (E) shall be in lieu of all other benefits provided by the plan for
such guardian employee member, his/her spouse and his/her dependent children,
except for the return of the guardian employee member's accumulated
contributions.



   (F)   Maximum benefit limitation.



      (1)   (a)   Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to
the contrary, for plan years beginning prior to July 1, 2007, the annual
benefit of a guardian employee member hereunder (adjusted to an actuarially
equivalent straight life annuity based upon the interest rate as determined
by the PBGC on January 1 each year) shall not at any time within the
limitation year exceed the lesser of $140,000 (the "dollar limitation") or
100% of the guardian employee member's average compensation for his/her high
three years.



         (b)   For plan years beginning on or after July 1, 2007,
notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary, in no event shall
the maximum annual retirement benefit attributable to town contributions and
payable to a guardian employee member who has not yet retired under the terms
of the plan, exceed $160,000 (the "defined benefit dollar limitation").



      (2)   The annual retirement benefit payable to a guardian
employee member under the plan shall be deemed not to exceed the applicable
maximum limitation of division (F)(l) if:



         (a)   The annual retirement benefit payable with respect
to such guardian employee member under the plan and under all defined benefit
plans of the town does not exceed $10,000 for the limitation year, or for any
prior limitation year; and



         (b)   The town has not at any time maintained a defined
contribution plan in which the guardian employee member participated.



      (3)   In the event that a guardian employee member has been a
member in the plan less than ten years, the dollar limitation and the defined
benefit dollar limitation, as applicable, shall be multiplied by a fraction,
the numerator of which is his years of participation in the plan (or part
thereof) and the denominator of which is ten. In the event that a member has
less than ten years of vesting service, the $10,000 benefit above, shall be
reduced by multiplication by a fraction, the numerator of which is his years
of service (or part thereof) and the denominator of which is ten.



   (G)   Maximum benefit limitation definitions. For purposes of
divisions (F) through (K) of this section:



      (1)   The term "ANNUAL BENEFIT" shall mean the benefit the
guardian employee member would be entitled to at his/her or her normal
retirement date, assuming he or she continues employment until such date, and
that all other relevant facts used to determine benefits under the plan
remain constant as of the current limitation year for all future limitation
years.



      (2)   "ANNUAL RETIREMENT BENEFIT" means a benefit payable
annually in the form of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits)
under a plan to which employees do not contribute and under which no rollover
contributions (as defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4), and 408(d)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code) are made. A benefit payable in any other form
shall be converted to the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity for
purposes of applying these limits, based on a 5% interest assumption. Other
required adjustments are provided for in this division. In the event that a
guardian employee member's annual retirement benefit is payable in a form
other than a straight life annuity, or if the member's contribute to the plan
or make rollover contributions (as defined in Sections 402(a)(5), 403(a)(4),
and 408(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code), the determinations as to whether
the limitation described in division (F)(1) has been satisfied shall be made,
in accordance with the regulations prescribed by the Secretary, by adjusting
such benefit so that it is the actuarial equivalent of a straight life
annuity (with no ancillary benefits). For purposes of this division (G)(2),
any ancillary benefit which is not directly related to retirement income
benefits shall not be taken into account; and that portion of any joint and
survivor annuity which constitutes a qualified joint and survivor annuity (as
defined in Code Section 417) shall not be taken into account. For purposes of
adjusting any benefit, the interest rate assumption shall not be less than
the greater of 5% or the rate specified for an actuarial equivalent benefit.



      (3)   "COMPENSATION" for purposes of the maximum benefit
limitations under Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, shall mean any
and all earnings reported on W-2 forms completed by the town in respect to
the plan year specified. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for
plan years commencing after December 31, 1997, "Compensation" for this
section shall include (1) any elective deferral (as defined in Section
402(g)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code), (2) any amount which is contributed
or deferred by the town at the election of the member and which is not
includable in the gross income of the member by reason of Sections 125
(cafeteria plan) or 457 (nonqualified deferred compensation plan) of the
Internal Revenue Code. For plan years commencing on and after January 1,
2001, "Compensation" shall also include elective amounts that are not
includable in the gross income of the participant by reason of Section
132(f)(4) (qualified transportation fringes) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Effective for plan years commencing on or after July 1, 2007, "Compensation"
under this code section for any plan year shall not be greater than the limit
under Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code that applies for that
year.



      (4)   "LIMITATION YEAR" shall mean a plan year.



   (H)   Adjustment for early or late commencement of benefits.



      (1)   (a)   For plan years commencing on or after July 1,
2002 and prior to July 1, 2007, if the annual pension benefit of a member
begins before age 62, as described in Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code, the $140,000 limitation set forth in division (F)(1)(a) of this
section shall be reduced so that it is equivalent to such benefit beginning
at the Social Security retirement age as described in Section 415(b)(8) of
the Internal Revenue Code, the $140,000 limitation set forth in division
(F)(1)(a) of this section shall be reduced so that it is equivalent to such a
benefit beginning at the Social Security retirement age as described in
Section 415(b)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code. The reduction of this
division shall not reduce the limitation of division (F) of this section
below $75,000 if the benefit begins at or after age 55, or, if the benefit
begins before age 55, the equivalent of the $75,000 limitation for age 55.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective for plan years commencing on July 1,
1997 any guardian employee member who has been a full time employee of the
Town Police or Fire Department for at least 15 years shall not have his or
her retirement benefit adjusted under this division (H)(1)(a).



         (b)   Effective for plan years commencing after June 30,
2007, if the annual benefit of a guardian employee member begins prior to age
62, the defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to the guardian employee
member at such earlier age is an annual benefit payable in the form of a
straight life annuity beginning at the earlier age that is the actuarial
equivalent of the defined benefit dollar limitation applicable to the
guardian employee member at age 62 (adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if
required). The defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age prior
to age 62 is determined as the lesser of (i) the actuarial equivalent (at
such age) of the defined benefit dollar limitation computed using a 5%
interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality table and expressing
the guardian employee member's age based on completed calendar months as of
the annuity starting date; or (ii) the product of the defined benefit dollar
limitation multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately
commencing straight life annuity under the plan at the guardian employee
member's annuity starting date to the annual amount of the immediately
commencing straight life annuity under the plan at age 62, both determined
without applying the limitations of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any guardian employee member with at least 15
years of Guardian as a full time employee of the Police or Fire Department
shall not have their retirement benefit adjusted under this division
(H)(1)(b).



      (2)   In the event that a guardian employee member's annual
benefit commences after age 65, the dollar limitation and defined benefit
dollar limitation, as applicable, shall be increased for the guardian
employee member's age such that it is the actuarial equivalent of defined
benefit dollar limitation commencing at age 65. For purposes of adjusting the
defined benefit dollar Limitation (adjusted under division (H)(3) below, if
required), the interest rate assumption shall not be greater than the lesser
of 5% or the rate specified for an actuarial equivalent benefit.



      (3)   Actuarial equivalence under this division (H) shall be
determined using a 5% interest assumption. The defined benefit dollar
Limitation shall be adjusted annually as provided in Section 415(d) of the
Internal Revenue Code pursuant to the regulations prescribed by the Secretary
of the Treasury. The adjusted limitation is effective as of January 1st of
each calendar year and is applicable to "limitation years" ending with or
within that calendar year. The dollar limitation shall not be adjusted except
as provided in this division (H).



      (4)   In the case of disability or survivor benefits provided
under the plan, the limitations of division (F)(3) and (H)(1)(a) and (b) of
this section shall not apply to:



         (a)   Income received from the plan as a pension,
annuity, or similar pension as the result of the recipient becoming disabled
by reason of personal injuries or sickness; or



         (b)   Amounts received from a governmental plan by the
beneficiaries, survivors or the estate of a guardian employee member as the
result of the death of the guardian employee Member.



      (5)   For purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation no
adjustment for cost of living increases shall be taken into account before
the year for which such adjustment first takes place.



   (I)   Protection of prior benefits. For any year before 1986, the
limitations prescribed by Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code as in
effect before enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 and all subsequent
legislation shall apply, and no pension earned under this plan prior to 1986
shall be reduced on account of the provisions of divisions (F) through (K) of
this section if it would have satisfied those limitations under that prior
law.



   (J)   Application of maximum limitations.



      (1)   The benefit paid under this plan shall not exceed the
limitations set forth in division (F) of this section.



      (2)   If a member on the annuity starting date is not eligible
for full monthly benefits under this plan because of the operation of
division (F) of this section, the monthly benefit shall thereafter be
recalculated annually until the member is receiving a full monthly benefit
under the plan's terms without the operation of this division (J). Each such
recalculation shall be based on this division, with any applicable adjustment
to reflect cost of living increases as permitted by the Treasury Regulations.



   (K)   For plan benefits subject to Section 417(e)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code, the actuarial equivalent of the annual retirement benefit is
equal to the greater of actuarial equivalent for the particular form of
benefit payable and the equivalent annual benefit computed using the
applicable interest rate and applicable mortality table described below,
determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.



      (1)   The applicable mortality table means the table
prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury. Such table shall be based on the
prevailing Commissioner's standard table (described in Section 807(d)(5)(A)
of the Internal Revenue Code) used to determine reserves for group annuity
contracts issued on the date as of which present value is being determined
(without regard to any other subparagraph of Section 807(d)(5)(A) of the
Internal Revenue Code). The prevailing Commissioner's standard table for
these purposes currently is the GAM '83 mortality table, blended equally
between male and female mortality rates. Effective for distributions
occurring after December 31, 2002 the applicable mortality table shall be the
table prescribed in Rev. Rul. 2001-62. Effective for plan years commencing on
or after January 1, 2008, the applicable mortality table shall mean the
applicable Section 417(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code mortality table as
adjusted in accordance with the provisions of Rev. Rul. 2007-67.



      (2)   The applicable interest rate is the rate of interest set
forth in § 31.38(H)((3).



   (L)   For purposes of applying the foregoing limitations of
divisions (F) through (K):



      (1)   All defined benefit plans of the town, whether or not
terminated, are to be treated as one defined benefit plan and all defined
contribution plans of the town, whether or not terminated, are to be treated
as one defined contribution plan;



      (2)   For purposes of divisions (F) through (K), the term
"town" shall include all departments and agencies of the Town of Hamden,
Connecticut.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 571, passed 3-2-09; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15)



§ 31.39  FORM AND COMMENCEMENT OF BENEFITS.



   (A)   Lifetime benefit. The normal form of retirement pension
whether regular, early, disability or vested pension is the lifetime benefit
with a modified cash refund as set forth in §§ 31.40(F) or 31.41(E).
Payments shall be made in monthly installments, commencing on the date of
retirement and ceasing with the last monthly payment prior to death. In any
case, upon direction of the Retirement Board, an actuarial equivalent
lump-sum payment shall be made in lieu of all benefits if any retirement
pension is less than $120 per annum or has a present value of $5,000 or less.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective March 28, 2005, the member's written
consent shall be required for distributions with a present value of $1,000 or
more.



   (B)   Husband and wife benefit. At or before retirement, a member or
terminated vested member may elect to convert his or her lifetime benefit to
an actuarial equivalent husband and wife benefit, which will pay a reduced
retirement amount during the pensioner's life, with the provision that after
his or her death either 100%, 66-2/3% or 50% of his or her retirement pension
will be paid to the person designated by him, by written designation and duly
acknowledged by the Retirement Board. Should both husband and wife die before
the member's accumulated contributions have been paid out, then §§ 31.40(F)
or 31.41(E) shall apply.



   (C)   Ten-year certain and life benefit. At or before retirement, a
member may elect to convert his or her life benefit into an actuarial
equivalent ten-year certain and life benefit, which will pay a reduced
retirement amount during the pensioner's life, with a guarantee of 120
payments. Should a member die prior to receiving 120 payments, the payments
shall continue to his or her designated beneficiary until a combined total of
120 payments have been made. Should both the member and designated
beneficiary die before the member's accumulated contributions have been paid
out, then §§ 31.40(F) or 31.41(E) shall apply.



   (D)   Beneficiary election. A member's beneficiary must have been
designated by the member by written designation received by the Retirement
Board prior to the member's death. A member may change his or her beneficiary
by similar written designation received by the Retirement Board prior to
receipt of written notification of the member's death.



   (E)   Required minimum distributions.



      (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions in this plan to the
contrary, a member's benefits shall not commence later than the member's
required beginning date which is April 1 of the calendar year following the
later of:



         (a)   The calendar year in which the member attains age
70-1/2; or



         (b)   The calendar year in which the member terminates
employment. In any case where a lump sum death benefit is payable to a
deceased member's beneficiary, such benefit shall be paid no later than 60
days following the member's date of death.



         (c)   Requirements of Treasury Regulations Incorporated.
All distributions required under this division will be determined and made in
accordance with the Treasury regulations under Section 401(a)(9) of the
Internal Revenue Code.



      (2)   The member's entire interest in the plan must be
distributed over the life of the member or the lives of the member and a
designated beneficiary, over a period not extending beyond the life
expectancy of the member or the life expectancy of the member and designated
beneficiary.



      (3)   When a member dies after distribution of benefits has
begun, the remaining portion of the member's interest shall be distributed at
least as rapidly as under the method of distribution prior to the member's
death.



      (4)   When a member dies before distribution of benefits has
begun, the entire interest of the member shall be distributed within five
years of the member's death. The five-year payment rule does not apply to any
portion of the member's interest which is payable to a surviving spouse
payable over the life or life expectancy of the spouse, and which begins no
later than the date the member would have reached 70-1/2.



      (5)   The benefits payable must meet the minimum distribution
incidental benefit requirements of Section 401(a)(9)(G) of the Internal
Revenue Code.



      (6)   If there is no designated beneficiary as of September 30
of the year following the year of the member's death, the member's entire
interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar year containing
the fifth anniversary of the member's death.



      (7)   If the member's surviving spouse is the member's sole
designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after the member but
before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this division other than
division (E)(1) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member.



      (8)   Form of distribution. Unless the member's interest is
distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company or
in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first
distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with
divisions (E)(9), (E)(10) and (E)(ll). If the member's interest is
distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company,
distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of
Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code and the Treasury regulations.
Any part of the member's interest which is in the form of an individual
account described in Section 414(k) of the Internal Revenue Code will be
distributed in a manner satisfying the requirements of Section 401(a)(9) of
the Internal Revenue Code and the Treasury regulations that apply to
individual accounts.



      (9)   Determination of amount to be distributed each year.



         (a)   General annuity requirements. If the member's
interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the plan,
payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements:



            1.   The annuity distributions will be paid in
periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year;



            2.   The distribution period will be over a life
(or lives) or over a period certain not longer than the period described in
division (E)(10) or (E)(11).



            3.   Once payments have begun over a period
certain, the period certain will not be changed even if the period certain is
shorter than the maximum permitted;



            4.   Payments will either be non-increasing or
increase only as follows:



               a.   By an annual percentage increase that
does not exceed the annual percentage increase in a cost-of-living index that
is based on prices of all items and issued by the Bureau of Labor Statistics;



               b.   To the extent of the reduction in the
amount of the member's payments to provide for a survivor benefit upon death,
but only if the beneficiary whose life was being used to determine the
distribution period described in division (E)(10) dies or is no longer the
member's beneficiary pursuant to a qualified Domestic Relations Order within
the meaning of Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code;



               c.   To provide cash refunds of employee
contributions upon the member's death; or



               d.   To pay increased benefits that result
from a plan amendment.



         (b)   Amount required to be distributed by required
beginning date. The amount that must be distributed on or before the member's
required beginning date (or, if the member dies before distributions begin,
the date distributions are required to begin under divisions (E)(1) or (E)(4)
is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment
need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that
payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are the
periods for which payments are received, e.g., bimonthly, monthly,
semi-annually, or annually. All of the member's benefit accruals as of the
last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the
calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals
ending on or after the member's required beginning date.



         (c)   Additional accruals after first distribution
calendar year. Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar
year after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning
with the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately
following the calendar year in which such amount accrues.



      (10)   Requirements for annuity distributions that commence
during member lifetime.



         (a)   Joint life annuities where the beneficiary is not
the member's spouse. If the member's interest is being distributed in the
form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the member and a
non-spouse beneficiary, annuity payments to be made on or after the member's
required beginning date to the designated beneficiary after the member's
death must not at any time exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity
payment for such period that would have been payable to the member using the
table set forth in Q&A-2 of Section 1.401(a)(9)-6 of the Treasury
regulations. If the form of distribution combines a joint and survivor
annuity for the joint lives of the member and a non-spouse beneficiary and a
period certain annuity, the requirement in the preceding sentence will apply
to annuity payments to be made to the designated beneficiary after the
expiration of the period certain.



         (b)   Period certain annuities. Unless the member's
spouse is the sole designated beneficiary and the form of distribution is a
period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity
distribution commencing during the member's lifetime may not exceed the
applicable distribution period for the member under the uniform lifetime
table set forth in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury regulations for the
calendar year that contains the annuity starting date if the annuity starting
date precedes the member is the distribution period for age 70 under the
uniform lifetime table set forth in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury
regulations plus the excess of 70 over the age of the member as of the
member's birthday in the year that contains the annuity starting date if the
member's spouse is the member's sole designated beneficiary and the form of
distribution is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain may
not exceed the longer of the member's applicable distribution period, as
determined under this division (E)(10)(b), or the joint life and last
survivor expectancy of the member and the member's spouse as determined under
the joint and last survivor table set forth in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the
Treasury regulations, using the member's and spouse's attained ages as of the
member's and spouse's birthdays in the calendar year that contains the
annuity starting date.



      (11)   Requirements for minimum distributions where member
dies before date distributions begin.



         (a)   Member survived by designated beneficiary. If the
member dies before the date distribution of his or her interest begins and
there is a designated beneficiary, the member's entire interest will be
distributed, beginning no later than the time described in divisions (E)(1)
or (E)(4) and except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) over the life
of the designated beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding:



            1.   Unless the annuity starting date is before
the first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated
beneficiary determined using the beneficiary age as of the beneficiary
birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the
member's death; or



            2.   If the annuity starting date is before the
first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated
beneficiary determined using the beneficiary's age as of the beneficiary's
birthday in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date.



         (b)   No designated beneficiary. If the member dies
before the date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as
of September 30 of the year following the year of the member's death,
distribution of the member's entire interest will be completed by December 31
of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member's death.



         (c)   Death of surviving spouse before distributions to
surviving spouse begin. If the member dies before the date distribution of
his or her interest begins, the member's surviving spouse is the member's
sole designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before
distributions to the surviving spouse begin, division (E)(ll) will apply as
if the surviving spouse were the member, except that the time by which
distributions must begin will be determined without regard to division (E)(1).



      (12)   Definitions.



         (a)   Designated Beneficiary. The individual who is
designated as the beneficiary under § 31.39(D) and is the designated
beneficiary under Section 401(a)(9)  of the Internal Revenue Code and
Section 1.401 (a)(9)-1, Q&A-4, of the Treasury regulations.



         (b)   Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for
which a minimum distribution is required. For distributions beginning before
the member's death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year
immediately preceding the calendar year which contains the member's required
beginning date. For distributions beginning after the member's death, the
first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which distributions
are required to begin pursuant to division (E)(4).



         (c)   Life expectancy. Life expectancy as computed by
use of the single life table in Section 1.401(a)(9)-9 of the Treasury
regulations.



   (F)   Return to employment after commencement of benefits.



      (1)   A retired member who returns to employment with the town
after benefits have commenced shall have his or her benefit suspended for
each month he or she is in the employ of the town, unless the member meets
the following conditions:



         (a)   The member's application for active employment is
approved by the Retirement Board; or



         (b)   In the case of a service employee, the member is
regularly scheduled to work less than 20 hours per week; or



         (c)   The member is a guardian employee who is rehired
as a service employee or the member is a service employee who is rehired as a
guardian employee.



      (2)   A retired member whose benefits are suspended in
accordance with this division shall have his or her pension amount
recalculated to recognize the additional credited service earned during his
or her period of re-employment.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 458, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 538, passed
7-5-06; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.40  SERVICE EMPLOYEES; DEATH BENEFITS.



   (A)   Lump sum death benefit.



      (1)   A lump sum death benefit of $5,000 shall be payable to
the surviving spouse of a service employee member, or if there is no
surviving spouse, to the surviving dependent child(ren) in equal shares, upon
the death of such service employee member; provided, however that the service
employee member's death:



         (a)   Occurs due to bodily injury arising out of the
course of the service employee member's employment with the town within the
meaning of the worker's compensation laws of the State of Connecticut; and



         (b)   Was sustained by an injury solely through
external, violent or accidental means; and



         (c)   Occurs within one year of the date injury was
sustained and such death is the direct result of such injury.



      (2)   The Retirement Board shall maintain sole discretion in
the determination of eligibility for a lump sum death benefit. The lump sum
death benefit described herein shall be in addition to all other benefits
provided under this section.



   (B)   Pre-retirement surviving spouse pension.



      (1)   Effective on and after July 1, 1991, the surviving
spouse of an active service employee member who has earned at least five
years of credited service, and who dies prior to retirement shall receive a
monthly surviving spouse pension equal to the greater of:



         (a)   50% of the service employee member's accrued
monthly benefit calculated as if the service employee member retired with a
regular pension and died the next day; or



         (b)   50% of the service employee member's compensation
at the time of death and divided by 12.



      (2)   For periods prior to July 1, 1991, the monthly surviving
spouse pension payable to the surviving spouse of a service employee member
was equal to 25% of the average annual compensation of the service employee
member, divided by 12 and determined in accordance with the provisions of the
plan in effect at the time the service employee member died.



      (3)   The surviving spouse of a terminated, vested service
employee member who dies prior to retirement shall not be entitled to receive
a monthly surviving spouse pension but shall receive a return of the service
employee member's accumulated contributions in accordance with division (F)
of this section.



      (4)   The former spouse of an active service employee member
shall not be entitled to a pre-retirement surviving spouse pension unless a
Domestic Relations Order determined to be approved by the Retirement Board
requires the payment of such a benefit.



      (5)   The pre-retirement surviving spouse pension shall be
payable until the death or remarriage of the surviving spouse. In the event
the surviving spouse does not notify the Retirement Board within 30 days of
her remarriage, the Retirement Board shall have the right to seek a return of
the benefits paid to her in error after the date of her remarriage.



   (C)   Post-retirement surviving spouse pension.



      (1)   The surviving spouse of any service employee member who
retires on or after July 1, 1991 with a life annuity shall receive, until
his/her death or remarriage, a monthly benefit equal to 50% of the monthly
benefit that the retired service employee member was receiving at the time of
death.



      (2)   In the event the service employee member elected a
husband and wife benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit, death
benefits shall not be payable under this division (C) but shall be payable in
accordance with the terms of the form of benefit elected by the member.



   (D)   Surviving children's pension.



      (1)   Upon the death of an active service employee member, a
monthly benefit shall be payable to the surviving dependent child(ren) of the
service employee member in an amount equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of 25% of
the service employee member's average annual compensation in addition to all
other benefits hereunder. Such monthly benefit shall be divided equally in
the case of more than one dependent child and shall be payable until the
dependent child attains age 18. In the event the benefit is divided between
multiple dependent children, the monthly benefit to such dependent children
shall be increased proportionately to each remaining dependent child when the
payment to a child who has reached the age of 18 ceases.



      (2)   The Retirement Board shall direct payment of this
benefit on behalf of the dependent child(ren) at its discretion, to the
surviving spouse of the service employee member or to the guardian of the
person of such surviving dependent child(ren) or to the person with whom such
child or children reside. In no event shall the benefit be paid to a state or
governmental agency with custody of the dependent child(ren) unless the
benefits shall be held in trust for the child until the child reaches the age
of 18.



      (3)   The benefit provided under this division shall terminate
upon the attainment of age 18 by the last dependent child.



   (E)   Social security offset. The death benefits provided for in
divisions (B) through (D) of this section shall be offset by a percentage of
social security, if applicable, determined pursuant to § 31.37(A)(4).



   (F)   Modified cash refund. If a service employee member dies and
the death benefits and/or pension payments payable do not exceed the service
employee member's accumulated contributions, then the amount by which the
accumulated contributions exceed the death benefits and/or pension payments
payable shall be paid to the member's surviving spouse, surviving dependent
children equally, duly designated beneficiary, or other executor or
administrator of the service employee member's estate as designated by the
Retirement Board.



   (G)   Non-duplication of benefits. If a service employee member has
elected a husband and wife benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit and
has retired, the election of such benefit shall be in lieu of any
post-retirement survivor amounts as described in division (C) of this section.



   (H)   Burial allowance. Upon the death of an active or retired
service employee member, whether before or after retirement, there shall be
paid a burial allowance of $5,000, to be paid to the service employee
member's executors or administrators, if any, or, if none, to such person or
persons as the Retirement Board may find to have paid or assumed financial
responsibility for such expenses.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.41  GUARDIAN EMPLOYEES; DEATH BENEFITS.



   (A)   Lump sum death benefit.



      (1)   A lump sum death benefit of $5,000 shall be payable to
the surviving spouse of a guardian employee member, or if there is no
surviving spouse, to the surviving dependent child(ren) in equal shares, upon
the death of such guardian employee member; provided, however that the
guardian employee member's death:



         (a)   Occurs due to bodily injury arising out of the
course of the guardian employee member's employment with the town within the
meaning of the worker's compensation laws of the State of Connecticut; and



         (b)   Was sustained by an injury solely through
external, violent or accidental means; and



         (c)   Occurs within one year of the date injury was
sustained and such death is the direct result of such injury.



      (2)   The Retirement Board shall maintain sole discretion in
the determination of eligibility for a lump sum death benefit. The lump sum
death benefit described herein shall be in addition to all other benefits
provided under this section.



   (B)   Pre-retirement surviving spouse pension.



      (1)   Effective on and after July 1, 1991, the surviving
spouse of an active guardian employee member who dies prior to retirement
shall receive a monthly surviving spouse pension equal to the greater of the
following:



         (a)   Fifty percent of the guardian employee member's
accrued monthly benefit calculated as if the guardian employee member retired
with a regular pension and died the next day; or



         (b)   Fifty percent of the guardian employee member's
compensation at the time of death and divided by 12.



      (2)   For periods prior to July 1, 1991, the monthly surviving
spouse pension payable to the surviving spouse of a guardian employee member
was equal to 25% of the average annual compensation of the guardian employee
member, divided by 12 and determined in accordance with the provisions of the
plan in effect at the time the guardian employee member died.



      (3)   The surviving spouse of a terminated vested guardian
employee member who dies prior to retirement shall not be entitled to receive
a monthly surviving spouse pension but shall receive a return of the guardian
employee member's accumulated contributions in accordance with division (E)
of this section.



      (4)   The former spouse of an active guardian employee member
shall not be entitled to a pre-retirement surviving spouse pension unless a
Domestic Relations Order determined to be approved by the Retirement Board
requires the payment of such a benefit.



      (5)   The pre-retirement surviving spouse pension shall be
payable until the death or remarriage of the surviving spouse. In the event
the surviving spouse does not notify the Retirement Board within 30 days of
her remarriage, the Retirement Board shall have the right to seek a return of
the benefits paid to her in error after the date of her remarriage.



   (C)   Post-retirement surviving spouse pension.



      (1)   The surviving spouse of any active guardian employee
member who retires on or after July 1, 1991 with a life annuity shall
receive, until her death or remarriage, a monthly benefit equal to 50% of the
monthly benefit that the retired guardian employee member was receiving at
the time of death. The spouse of a terminated vested guardian employee member
shall not be eligible for a benefit under this division (C).



      (2)   In the event the guardian employee member elected a
husband and wife benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit, death
benefits shall not be payable under this division but shall be payable in
accordance with the terms of the form of benefit elected by the guardian
employee member.



   (D)   Surviving children's pension.



      (1)   Upon the death of an active guardian employee member, a
monthly benefit shall be payable to the surviving dependent child(ren) of the
guardian employee member in an amount equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of 25% of
the guardian employee member's average annual compensation in addition to all
other benefits hereunder. Such monthly benefit shall be divided equally in
the case of more than one dependent child and shall be payable until the
dependent child attains age 18. In the event the benefit is divided between
multiple dependent children, the monthly benefit to such dependent children
shall be increased proportionately to each remaining dependent child when the
payment to a child who has reached the age of 18 ceases.



      (2)   The Retirement Board shall direct payment of this
benefit on behalf of the dependent child(ren) at its discretion, to the
surviving spouse of the guardian employee member or to the guardian of the
person of such surviving dependent child(ren) or to the person with whom such
child or children reside. In no event shall the benefit be paid to a state or
governmental agency with custody of the dependent child(ren) unless the
benefits shall be held in trust for the child until the child reaches the age
of 18.



      (3)   The benefit provided under this division shall terminate
upon the attainment of age 18 by the last dependent child.



   (E)   Modified cash refund. If a guardian employee member dies and
the death benefits and/or pension payments payable do not exceed the guardian
employee member's accumulated contributions, then the amount by which the
accumulated contributions exceed the death benefits and/or pension payments
payable shall be paid to the guardian employee member's surviving spouse,
surviving dependent children equally, duly designated beneficiary, or other
executor or administrator of the guardian employee member's estate as
designated by the Retirement Board.



   (F)   Non-duplication of benefits. If a guardian employee member has
elected a husband and wife benefit or a ten-year certain and life benefit and
has retired, the election of such benefit shall be in lieu of any
post-retirement survivor amounts as described in division (C) of this section.



   (G)   Burial allowance. Upon the death of an active or retired
guardian employee member, whether before or after retirement, there shall be
paid a burial allowance of $5,000, to be paid to the guardian employee
member's executors or administrators, if any, or, if none, to such person or
persons as the Retirement Board may find to have paid or assumed financial
responsibility for such expenses.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.42  COST OF LIVING BENEFIT.



   (A)   Cost of living benefit. On each May 1, subsequent to the date
retirement benefits become payable to any pensioner or beneficiary, an
adjustment shall be made in the yearly amount of the benefit payable to the
retired member, as described in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Determination of cost of living adjustment.



      (1)   For the purposes of determining the cost of living
benefit, the following terms are defined:



         (a)   "ANNUITANT." Each pensioner, contingent annuitant
or beneficiary who is receiving retirement benefits under this plan.



         (b)   "BASE INDEX."



            1.   Shall mean the Consumer Price Index for the
month of January in the calendar year in which the pensioner or beneficiary's
benefit first became payable.



            2.   If the Bureau of Labor Statistics
subsequently adjusts the basis upon which the Consumer Price Index is
determined, then the base index will be adjusted, as of the next January, by
multiplying the base index by the ratio of that Consumer Price Index for said
January on the new basis bears to the Consumer Price Index for the said
January on the prior January.



         (c)   "BASE PENSION." The monthly pension benefit which
first became payable to the pensioner or Beneficiary, whichever is applicable.



         (d)   "CONSUMER PRICE INDEX." The Consumer Price Index
(U.S. All Items Index) published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics.



      (2)   On each May 1, the cost of living benefit shall be
determined. The adjustment with respect to each pensioner or beneficiary
shall be equal to the excess of (a) over (b) below, if any, where:



         (a)   Is equal to the amount obtained by dividing the
Consumer Price Index, as of the immediately preceding January, by the
pensioner's base index. This quotient shall be multiplied by the pensioner's
base pension. In no event may the amount determined in this division be
greater than 3% of the last amount determined in accordance with this
division (B)(2)(a); and



         (b)   Is equal to the annuitant's base pension.



      (3)   Such cost of living benefit will be applicable to such
annuitant only if division (B)(2)(a) above exceeds division (B)(2)(b). Any
excesses over 3% described in division (B)(2)(a) will be carried over to
succeeding years, to be utilized in the event that the maximum rate is not
achieved in succeeding years.



      (4)   On the May 1 on which a cost of living benefit is first
applicable to an annuitant and on the first day of each month thereafter on
which such individual continues to receive retirement benefits under this
plan, he/she will be eligible for a cost of living benefit in an amount equal
to one-twelfth (1/12) of the yearly cost of living benefit most recently
determined for him, if applicable, in accordance with this division (B).



   (C)   Adjustment for former retired members. A member who retired
prior to July 1, 1986 shall be entitled to an increase in his/her retirement
benefit as effective July 1, 1986, of 1% of his/her retirement benefit for
each full year from his/her annuity starting date to the effective date of
this provision.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.43  FUNDING.



   (A)   Member contributions.



      (1)   As a condition of employment, a member shall make member
contributions to the plan in accordance with the provisions of the plan or
such other previous or subsequent agreement that sets forth the requirement
of member contributions to the plan.



      (2)   A member shall be 100% vested in his/her member
contributions at all times.



   (B)   Contributions by the town. It is the intention of the town to
continue the plan and to make regular contributions thereto each year.



      (1)   The contributions of the town shall consist of the
following:



         (a)   A normal contribution each year equal to the
percentage of the compensation of all members computed to be required to
cover the cost of benefits currently accruing under the plan not provided by
member contributions and the administrative expenses of the plan.



         (b)   Until the cost (not covered by normal
contributions) of the credits of members for service prior to the date of
adoption of the plan with regular interest on any unpaid amounts of such cost
has been liquidated, the contribution of the town each year shall include a
prior service contribution towards the payment thereof, in such amount, as
determined by the actuary, as shall be sufficient to liquidate such prior
service cost (including regular interest on the unpaid portion thereof) in
full within 40 years from the date of adoption of plan changes.



         (c)   The full amount of all accidental death benefits
payable under the plan, to be paid to the trustee within 90 days after the
payment of such benefit from the fund.



      (2)   The percentage normal contribution rate shall be
computed at the time of each actuarial valuation as the percent of the
compensation of all members required each year to cover the cost of all
benefits to be provided by contributions of the town not covered by the sum
of the funds in hand held therefor plus any prior service contributions
remaining to be paid. Following each actuarial valuation, the actuary shall
certify to the Retirement Board his/her recommendation as to the percentage
normal contribution rate.



      (3)   As of the date of the effective date of the plan, the
actuary shall determine the present value of all benefits to be provided by
contributions of the town on account of members as of said date, and shall
subtract therefrom the sum of the funds in hand as of the date of adoption
held therefor and the present value of future normal contributions on account
of such members at the rate required to provide the membership service
benefits under the plan to be provided by contributions of the town for the
average member. The difference shall be known as the "initial prior service
cost."



   (C)   Forfeitures. No part of any forfeitures resulting from the
application of any provision of this plan shall be applied to increase the
benefits any member would otherwise receive under this plan. Forfeitures
shall be used to reduce contributions of the town.



   (D)   Management of assets.



      (1)   Until and unless otherwise determined by the Retirement
Board, all the funds of the plan shall be held by a trustee, which shall be
the Retirement Board itself, for use in providing the benefits of the plan
and paying the expenses of the plan.



      (2)   The Retirement Board, with the prior approval of the
Mayor of the town, may at any time and to any extent use the funds of the
plan in whole or in part to fund the retirement pensions and other benefits
provided by the plan by means of one or more annuity or life insurance
contracts issued by any insurer selected by the Retirement Board.



      (3)   No part of the corpus or income of the trust shall be
used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of
members or their beneficiaries and contingent annuitants under the plan,
prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to them; and no
person shall have any interest in or right to any part of the earnings of the
trust, or any rights in, or to, or under the trust or any part of the assets
thereof, except as and to the extent expressly provided for in the plan and
in the trust instrument. The town shall have no liability for the payment of
benefits under the plan nor for the administration of the funds paid over to
the trustee.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.44  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Retirement Board. The general administration of the plan and
the responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the plan shall be
placed in a Board of 11 persons consisting of the following:



      (1)   Two guardian employee members of the plan who are
members of a guardian bargaining unit who shall be elected by guardian
employee members of the plan of the same category, as of July 1 each year for
a term of two years, but in 1982 one shall be appointed for a one-year term,
so that one membership of this category shall thereafter become vacant each
year;



      (2)   Two service employee members of the plan who are members
of a service bargaining unit, who shall be elected by service employee
members of the plan of the same category as of July 1 of each year for a term
of two years, whose terms shall expire in rotation as of June 30 so that one
new member of this category is elected each year;



      (3)   One member of the plan, who is not a member of a
bargaining unit, who shall be elected by the members of the plan of the same
category, as of July 1 for a term of two years;



      (4)   Four persons who are not members of the plan, whose
terms and manner of appointment shall be such as provided for by legislative
action of the town;



      (5)   The Mayor; and



      (6)   The Finance Director.



   (B)   Resignation. Any member of the Retirement Board may resign by
delivering his/her written resignation to the Mayor of the town, who shall
have the power to fill for the unexpired term any vacancy occurring by
resignation or death.



   (C)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The members of the Retirement Board shall have the power
to:



         (a)   Elect a Secretary who may be but need not be one
of the members of the Retirement Board;



         (b)   Appoint from its members such Boards with such
powers as it shall determine;



         (c)   Authorize one or more of its members or any agent
to execute or deliver any instrument or make a payment on its behalf; and



         (d)   Retain counsel, employ agents and provide for such
clerical, accounting and actuarial services as it may require in carrying out
the provisions of the plan.



      (2)   The Retirement Board shall hold meetings upon such
notice, at such place or places, and at such time or times as it may
determine.



      (3)   Any act which the plan authorizes or requires the
Retirement Board to do may be done by a majority of its members. The action
of such majority expressed from time to time by a vote at a meeting or in
writing without a meeting, provided that reasonable notice thereof is given
to the entire Retirement Board, shall constitute the action of the Retirement
Board and shall have the same effect for all purposes as if assented to by
all members of the Retirement Board at the time in office.



      (4)   No member of the Retirement Board who is an employee of
the town shall receive any compensation for his/her services as such, and no
bond or other security shall be required of him/her in such capacity in any
jurisdiction.



      (5)   Subject to the limitations of the plan, the Retirement
Board from time to time may establish rules for the administration of the
plan and the transaction of its business. The determination of the Retirement
Board shall be conclusive as to any disputed question within its jurisdiction.



      (6)   The Retirement Board shall adopt from time-to-time
tables and the rate of regular interest, compounded annually, which shall be
used in all actuarial calculations required in connection with the plan. As
an aid to the Retirement Board in adopting tables and in fixing the rates of
contributions payable by the town to the plan, the actuary designated by the
Retirement Board shall make annual actuarial valuations of the contingent
assets and liabilities of the plan and shall recommend to the Retirement
Board tables and rates of contribution for use by the Retirement Board. The
Retirement Board shall maintain accounts showing the fiscal transactions of
the plan, and shall keep in convenient form such data as may be necessary for
actuarial valuations of the plan. The Retirement Board shall submit a report
each year to the Mayor of the town giving a brief account of the operation of
the plan during the past year, a copy of which shall be filed in the office
of the Mayor, where it shall be open to inspection by any member of the plan.



      (7)   The Retirement Board shall prepare and submit to the
Director of Finance of the town on or before July 15 of each year a budget of
the estimated receipts and expenses of the plan for the following fiscal year
of the town.



      (8)   The members of the Retirement Board shall use ordinary
care and diligence in the performance of their duties, but no member thereof
shall be personally liable by virtue of any contract, agreement, bond, or
other instrument made or executed by him/her or on his/her behalf as a member
of the Retirement Board, nor for any loss unless resulting from his/her own
bad faith or willful misconduct.



   (D)   Trust agreement for the plan. The town employees' retirement
plan shall utilize the separate trust agreement ("Trust Agreement") between
the town and the Retirement Board of the employees retirement plan of the
town adopted by Ord. 399, setting forth the duties and responsibility of said
Retirement Board in connection with the management of assets of the employees
retirement plan.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.45  AMENDMENTS AND TERMINATIONS.



   (A)   Amendments. This plan may be discontinued or amended in any
respect at any time by action of the Legislative Council of the town, subject
to applicable general laws and special acts of the State of Connecticut,
provided that no such discontinuance or amendment shall adversely affect the
rights of members or their beneficiaries which had become fully vested at the
date of discontinuance or amendment, nor to make it possible for any part of
the funds of the plan to be used for or diverted to purposes other than for
the exclusive benefit of members and their beneficiaries or contingent
annuitants under the plan, prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities under
the plan with respect to them.



   (B)   Termination. The town, by action of its Legislative Council,
may terminate the plan for any reason at any time. In case of termination of
the plan, the funds of the plan on the date of termination shall be used for
the exclusive benefit of members or their beneficiaries and contingent
annuitants as of the last date of payment of any contributions hereunder,
except that any funds not required to satisfy all liabilities of the plan for
benefits because of erroneous actuarial calculations shall be returned to the
town. Each member not yet retired shall be entitled to a share equal to
his/her accumulated contributions, and each retired member or his/her
contingent annuitant in receipt of a retirement pension shall be entitled to
a share equal to any excess of the accumulated contributions at retirement
over the amount of benefits received. Each such member, retired member or
contingent annuitant shall then be entitled to the additional share required
to provide a total share equal to such proportionate part of the funds of the
plan as the reserve computed to be required for his/her credits bears to the
total of all such reserves required under the plan, as determined by the
Retirement Board on the basis of actuarial valuation; provided that if the
funds remaining are insufficient to provide in full for such additional
shares, the additional shares shall be reduced proportionately. The
Retirement Board may require that any such share be withdrawn in cash, or in
immediate or deferred annuities or other periodic payments, as it may
determine.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.46  CERTAIN RIGHTS AND LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Minors and incompetents. If any person to whom a benefit is
payable from the plan is a minor, or if the Retirement Board determines that
any person to whom such benefit is payable is incompetent by reason of age,
physical or mental disability, any payment due (unless a proper claim
therefor shall have been made by a duly appointed guardian, conservator or
legal representative) may be made to the spouse, a child, a parent or a
brother or sister of such person, or to any person deemed by the Retirement
Board to have incurred expenses for such person otherwise entitled to
payment. Any such payment shall be a complete discharge of any liability for
such payment under the plan.



   (B)   Non-alienation of benefits.



      (1)   No benefit under the plan shall be subject at any time,
in any manner to alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, attachment,
or encumbrances of any kind. Any attempt to alienate, sell, transfer, assign,
pledge or otherwise encumber any such benefits, whether presently or
thereafter payable, shall be void. No retirement benefit nor the trust fund
shall in any manner be liable for or subject to the debts or liability of any
employee, terminated vested member, member, beneficiary or pensioner entitled
to any retirement benefit. If the employee, member, former member,
beneficiary or pensioner shall attempt to alienate, sell, transfer, assign,
pledge or otherwise encumber the member benefit under the plan or any part
thereof, or if by reason of the member's bankruptcy or other event happening
at any time, such benefits would devolve upon anyone else or would not be
enjoyed by him, then the town, in its discretion, may terminate the member's
interest in any such benefit, and hold or apply it to or for the benefit of
such person, the member's spouse, children, or other dependent or any of
them, in such manner as the town may deem proper.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) shall not apply to the creation,
assignment or recognition of a right to any benefit payable with respect to a
member pursuant to a Domestic Relations Order that is approved by the
Retirement Board in accordance with the provisions of the plan and the
approved domestic relations order policies and procedures which are made a
part of the plan by reference.



   (C)   Tenure of employment. Neither the action of the town in the
establishment of this plan nor any action taken by it or by the Retirement
Board hereunder shall be construed as giving any employee or member the right
to be retained in the employ of the town or any other right whatsoever,
except to the extent of the benefits provided by the plan to be paid or made
available from the fund.



   (D)   Non-liability of town. All benefits under the plan shall be
paid or provided for solely from the trust fund and the town assumes no
liabilities or responsibilities therefor.



   (E)   Unclaimed benefits. Whenever reasonable efforts fail to locate
any member or beneficiary entitled to benefits under the plan within seven
years from the time the notice is first received that he/she is not to be
found at the address in the records of the town, or the trustee, the
Retirement Board may direct that any benefits to which the member may be
entitled shall thereupon be canceled and no payment shall be made thereafter
to anyone with respect to the benefits so canceled.



   (F)   Applicable law. The validity of the provisions of this plan
shall be determined and construed according to the laws of the State of
Connecticut and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.



   (G)   Claims procedure. Any denial of a claim for benefits under the
plan shall be stated in writing by the Retirement Board and delivered or
mailed to the member or beneficiary whose claim for benefits has been denied,
and shall set forth specific reasons for such denial, written in a manner
calculated to be understood by such member or beneficiary. Within 60 days
after receiving the notification of such denial, any such member or
beneficiary may notify the Retirement Board in writing of the member's desire
for a review of such decision. Upon such notification, the Retirement Board
shall schedule a review proceeding at which the member shall restate the
member's arguments for such claim to a representative of the Retirement
Board. The Retirement Board's decision following such hearing shall be made
within 30 days, and shall be communicated in writing to the member.



   (H)   Qualified plan. The plan is intended to be a governmental plan
under Section 414(d) of the Internal Revenue Code, and "qualified" as such
under Section 401 (a) of the Internal Revenue Code.



   (I)   Return of town contributions under special circumstances. Any
town contribution made under a mistake of fact or law may be returned to the
town within one year following the date the town became aware of such mistake.



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 666, passed 12-7-15)



§ 31.47  ROLLOVER PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Direct rollovers. Notwithstanding any provisions of the plan
to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under
this division a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner
prescribed by the Retirement Board in accordance with applicable regulations,
to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an
eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover.



      (1)   A distributee who is entitled to elect a direct rollover
with respect to all or any portion of a distribution but who does not make
any election shall be deemed to have rejected the direct rollover option.



      (2)   A distributee who elects a direct rollover with respect
to any eligible rollover distribution that is one in a series of installment
payments made at least annually over a period of less than ten years shall be
deemed to have made the same election with respect to all subsequent eligible
rollover distributions in the series unless and until the distributee changes
the election. A change of election shall be accomplished by notifying the
Retirement Board of the change in the form and manner prescribed by the
Retirement Board.



      (3)   Within a reasonable period of time before an eligible
rollover distribution is to be made, the Retirement Board shall provide to
the distributee an explanation of the right to elect a direct rollover and
the federal tax withholding consequences of failing to elect a direct
rollover. A distributee who elects a direct rollover must provide all
information that the Retirement Board may require to complete the direct
rollover.



      (4)   For the purposes of this division, the following
definitions will apply:



         (a)   A "DIRECT ROLLOVER" is a payment by the plan to
the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee.



         (b)   Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or
former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving
spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is
the alternate payee under a qualified Domestic Relations Order, as defined in
Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code, are distributees with regard to
the interest of the spouse or former spouse. A distributee also includes the
member's nonspouse designated beneficiary under § 31.39(D). In the case of a
non-spouse beneficiary, the direct rollover may be made only to an individual
retirement account or annuity described in Section 408(a) or Section 408(b)
("IRA") of the Internal Revenue Code that is established on behalf of the
designated beneficiary and that will be treated as an inherited IRA pursuant
to the provisions of Section 402(c)(ll) of the Internal Revenue Code. Also,
in this case, the determination of any required minimum distribution under
Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code that is ineligible for
rollover shall be made in accordance with Notice 2007-7, Q&A 17 and 18,
2007-5 I.R.B. 395.



         (c)   Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement
plan is an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section
408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in Section
403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in
Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's
eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover
distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an
individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. For plan
years commencing after December 31, 2001, an eligible retirement plan shall
also mean an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b) and an
eligible plan under Code Section 457(b) which is maintained by a state,
political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state
or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account
for amounts transferred into such plan from this plan. The definition of
eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a
surviving spouse, or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee
under a qualified domestic relation order, as defined in Section 414(p) of
the Internal Revenue Code. For distributions made after December 31, 2007, a
participant or beneficiary may elect to roll over directly an "eligible
rollover distribution" to a Roth IRA described in Section 408A(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code.



         (d)   Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible
rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the
balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover
distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of
substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually)
made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives
(or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's
designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any
distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section
401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution
that is not includable in gross income (determined without regard to the
exclusion for net unrealized appreciation with respect to employer
securities), any hardship distribution described in Section
401(k)(2)(B)(i)(IV) of the Internal Revenue Code received after December 31,
1998 and effective for plan years commencing after December 31, 2001, any
amount that is distributed on account of hardship. For plan years commencing
after December 31, 2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an
eligible rollover distribution merely because the portion consists of
after-tax employee contributions that are not includable in gross income.
However, such portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement
account or annuity described in Sections 408(a) or (b) of the Internal
Revenue Code, or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in
Sections 401(a) or 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that agrees to
separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately
accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includable in gross
income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includable.



      (5)   A distribution of less than $200 that would otherwise be
an eligible rollover distribution as defined above shall not be an eligible
rollover distribution if it is reasonable to expect that all such
distributions to the distributee from the plan during the same calendar year
will total less than $200.



   (B)   Rollovers to the plan. In no event shall the plan accept
eligible rollovers from any source unless a re-employed member is making a
repayment of his/her member contributions in accordance with the provisions
of § 31.34(E).



(Ord. 435, passed 3-12-01; Am. Ord. 458, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 666, passed
12-7-15)



RETIREE HEALTH CARE PLAN



§ 31.50  RETIREE HEALTH CARE TRUST.



   (A)   Establishment.  In accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., §
7-450(a), the town shall establish a trust fund (“Trust”) with Wells
Fargo Bank, N.A., or such other qualified financial institution approved by
the Legislative Council, to hold and invest all contributions and assets of
the town’s retiree health care plan (“Plan”). The Legislative Council
shall have the authority to amend or terminate the Trust.



   (B)   Purpose.  The Trust shall be for the purpose of funding
current and future postemployment health care benefits for eligible retired
employees of the town in accordance with the Plan. The Trust may also be used
for the purpose of funding any other postemployment health and life plans as
the town may establish.



   (C)   Trustees.  The Mayor and the President of the Legislative
Council shall serve as the trustees (“Trustees”) of the Trust. The
Trustees shall have such powers and duties as set forth in the terms of the
Trust, including, but not limited to, making payments or other disbursements
in accordance with the Plan and the terms of the Trust and directing the
investment of the assets of the Trust. The approval of both Trustees shall be
required for the transaction of all business pertaining to the Trust.



   (D)   Administration.  The Trustees shall serve as the Plan
Administrator of the Plan and shall have such powers and duties as set forth
in the Plan and the Trust with respect to the administration of the Plan,
including, but not limited to, providing all proper instructions and
directions to the Trustee regarding the investment of moneys on deposit in
the Trust and disbursements from the Trust. The Trustees shall provide a
report to the Legislative Council, including deposits, disbursements and
assets held in the Trust, and such other information as shall be requested by
the Legislative Council, on at least an annual basis, or more frequently as
requested by the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 642, passed 10-8-13)



CHAPTER 32:  REGIONAL AUTHORITIES AND COUNCILS



Section



Regional Planning Authority



   32.01   Purpose



   32.02   Adoption



   32.03   Representation



   32.04   Appropriations



Regional Council of Elected Officials



   32.10   Creation



   32.11   Representation



   32.12   Powers and duties



South Central Council of Governments



   32.20   Purpose



   32.21   Adoption



   32.22   Powers and duties



   32.23   Representation



   32.24   Existing ordinances



REGIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY



§ 32.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose is to join the Regional Planning Authority of the South
Central Connecticut, hereinafter referred to as planning authority.



('66 Code, § 52-1)



§ 32.02  ADOPTION.



   The town joins the Regional Planning Authority of South Central
Connecticut in accordance with and subject to Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 8-31A to
8-37A, inclusive.



('66 Code, § 52-2)



§ 32.03  REPRESENTATION.



   The town shall have representatives on the planning authority in the
number permitted by law, who shall hold office for the terms, and shall be
appointed in the manner, prescribed below:



   (A)   Upon the passage hereof, the town plan and zoning commission
shall appoint one member of the planning authority to serve until September
1, 1961, and upon the expiration of the term and every 3 years thereafter,
the member or his successors shall be appointed by the commission to serve
for a term of 3 years.



   (B)   Upon the passage hereof, and subsequent to the appointment by
the town plan and zoning commission as set forth in paragraph (A) of this
section, the legislative council shall appoint 2 members of the planning
authority, one to serve until September 1, 1962 and the other to serve until
September 1, 1963, and upon the expiration of each of the terms and every 3
years thereafter, the respective member or his successors shall be appointed
by the council for a term of 3 years, and in the event that the town shall be
entitled to more than 3 representatives at any time in the future, then the
additional representatives shall be appointed for 3 year terms.



   (C)   All appointments to the planning authority shall be made in
accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 9-167A.



   (D)   Every member of the planning authority appointed under §§
32.01 to 32.04, inclusive, shall be an elector of the town, and any member
who ceases to be an elector of the town shall, by operation of law, vacate
his position as a member of the authority.



   (E)   Whenever any position on the planning authority is vacant, for
whatever reason, then the commission or the council responsible to appoint
the member who last served in the vacant position shall fill the vacancy for
the unexpired portion of the term.



('66 Code, § 52-3)



§ 32.04  APPROPRIATIONS.



   The members of the planning authority appointed underto 32.04,
inclusive, may, acting as a committee, submit and prosecute budget requests
for funds to be contributed to the authority, in the same manner as the town
planning commission. Sections 32.01 to 32.04, inclusive, shall not be
construed to permit the members, or any of them, to expend, or to commit the
town to expend, any sums of money without prior legal appropriations.



('66 Code, § 52-4)



REGIONAL COUNCIL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS



§ 32.10  CREATION.



   The town joins with the towns and cities within the South Central
Connecticut Planning Region as defined by the Connecticut Development
Commission, as may enact a similar ordinance, to create a Regional Council of
Elected Officials of South Central Connecticut, as the council is defined by
state law.



(Adopted 3-4-68)



§ 32.11  REPRESENTATION.



   The representative to the regional council shall be the mayor, or his
designate.



(Adopted 3-4-68)



§ 32.12  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The regional council shall have such powers, purposes, responsibilities
and duties as stated by state law.



(Adopted 3-4-68)



SOUTH CENTRAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS



§ 32.20  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to help establish, and to
authorize the participation of the town in, the South Central Council of
Governments.



(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)



§ 32.21  ADOPTION.



   The town hereby adopts the provisions of Sections 4-124i to 124p,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes concerning regional councils
of government.



(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)



§ 32.22  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The South Central Council of Governments shall be entitled to
exercise all the rights and authority and shall be subject to all the
responsibilities and duties provided for in the General Statutes; said powers
and duties shall consist of consideration of such matters of a public nature
common to two or more members of the council as it deems appropriate,
including matters affecting the health, safety, welfare, education, and
economic conditions of the area comprised of its members.



   (B)   The council shall promote cooperative arrangements and
coordinate action among its members and make recommendations therefore to the
members and such other public and private agencies as exist or perform
functions within the region.



   (C)   The planning duties and responsibilities of the council of
governments shall be carried out exclusively by a regional planning
commission in accordance with Section 4-124o of the General Statutes.



(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)



§ 32.23  REPRESENTATION.



   (A)   The town planning commission shall appoint one of its members
to be its representative to the regional planning commission, said
appointment subject to the concurrence of the mayor.



   (B)   The mayor, or the mayor's designee, is hereby authorized to
represent the town in the deliberations of the council of governments.



(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)



§ 32.24  EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   Upon the creation of the council of governments, all ordinances, or
sections thereof, pertaining to membership in the Regional Planning Authority
(Agency) and/or the Regional Council of Elected Officials shall be repealed.



(Ord. 232, adopted 6-4-84)



CHAPTER 33:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Community Development Advisory Committee



   33.01   Establishment



   33.02   Organization



   33.03   Powers and duties



   33.04   Limitations



Parking Division



   33.10   Created; membership



   33.11   Terms of office



   33.12   Authorization; powers of division



   33.13   Power to adopt parking regulations



   33.14   Publication of regulations; enforcement



   33.15   Violation prohibited



Natural Resources and Open Space Commission



   33.25   Establishment



   33.26   [Reserved]



   33.27   Membership; compensation; vacancies



   33.28   Terms of office; removal



   33.29   Organization: records and annual report



   33.30   Subcommittees



Economic Development Commission



   33.35   Created



   33.36   Terms of office



   33.37   Additional members



   33.38   Statutory authority; powers of commission



   33.39   Amended powers



Youth Advisory Board



   33.45   Establishment of Board



   33.46   Board's Organization



   33.47   Purpose



   33.48   Duties and responsibilities



Plan and Zoning Commission



   33.55   Establishment; powers



   33.56   Appointment and membership



   33.57   Reserved



   33.58   Division of Commission



   33.59   Public hearings on zoning regulations



   33.60   Reserved



   33.61   Disqualifications of members



   33.62   Zoning board of appeals



   33.63   Prior acts validated



   33.64   Adoption of street maps or plans validated



   33.65   Fee schedule



   33.66   Fees for processing applications by Zoning Board of Appeals



   33.66A   Fees for Inland-Wetlands Commission



   33.67   Designating Commission as Aquifer Protection Agency



   33.67A   Fee schedule for aquifer protection area registration of
activities, permits and various types of review



Fair Rent Commission



   33.70   Creation; purpose



   33.71   Definitions



   33.72   Membership



   33.73   Terms of office



   33.74   Powers



   33.75   Organization; procedures



   33.76   By-laws



   33.77   Hearings on a complaint



   33.78   Orders of the commission



   33.79   Excessive charge standards



   33.80   Rent reduction not retroactive



   33.81   Escrow account



   33.82   Commission's decision



   33.83   Complaints regarding retaliatory evictions



   33.84   Continuation of proceedings



   33.85   Notice



   33.86   Enforcement



   33.87   Appeal



   33.88   Other remedies



Arts Commission



   33.90   Creation; purpose



   33.91   Appointment; terms and vacancies



   33.92   Organization



   33.93   Duties and responsibilities



   33.94   Financial and contractual responsibilities



   33.95   Expenditures and employment rights



   33.96   Arts auxiliary



Human Services Commission



   33.97   Creation; purpose



Solid Waste And Recycling Commission



   33.100   Establishment



   33.101   Organization



   33.102   Powers and duties



   33.103   Limitations



Technology Commission



   33.107   Establishment



   33.108   Organization



   33.109   Powers and duties



   33.110   Limitations



Clean and Green Commission



   33.115   Establishment



   33.116   Organization



   33.117   Powers and duties



   33.118   Limitations



Veterans' Commission



   33.125   Establishment



   33.126   Organization



   33.127   Purposes



   33.128   Duties and responsibilities



Commission on Human Rights and Relations



   33.135   Establishment



   33.136   Purpose



   33.137   Limitations



Tree Commission



   33.140   Establishment



   33.141   Duties and responsibilities



   33.142   Tree Fund



   33.143   Rules and regulations



Flood and Erosion Control Board



   33.150   Establishment



   33.151   Composition; appointment, terms compensation of members;
vacancies



   33.152   Powers and duties



Energy Use and Climate Change Commission



   33.160   Establishment



   33.161   Organization



   33.162   Powers and duties



   33.163   Limitations



 



   33.999   Penalty



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Community Development Advisory Commission shall consist of nine
electors who shall be residents of the town and shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members
shall serve without compensation. Membership shall include:



   (A)   No more than five members from one political party.



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of nine electors, appointed by
the Mayor and subject to the approval of the Legislative Council, each to
serve a term of three years.  The Commission shall consist of the nine
current members of the Community Development Advisory Commission. Upon the
expiration of the terms of the current members, three members shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council to
serve a one-year term; three members appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council, shall serve two-year terms; and three
members appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Legislative
Council shall serve three-year terms. Thereafter all members appointed shall
be appointed for three-year terms. A vacancy on the Commission shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Legislative Council, for the unexpired portion of the term of the vacating
member. Any member may be removed by the Mayor for cause, which shall include
failure to attend three meetings of the Commission, without reasonable
excuse, within a calendar year.



(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00; Am. Ord. 497, passed 2- 2-04)



§ 33.02  ORGANIZATION.



   The Commission shall annually select a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson,
and such other officers as it deems necessary from its membership. The
Commission may adopt such rules or bylaws to govern its operation as it
considers necessary to effectuate its purpose. A majority of all members of
the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting the Commission's
business.



(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall continue all the duties and responsibilities of
the Community Development Advisory Council. Specifically, the Commission
shall make recommendations to and advise the Economic and Community
Development Director with regard to the operation and funding of the
Community Development Block Grant program.



(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.04  LIMITATIONS OF THE COMMISSION.



   Nothing in § 33.03 shall be construed as conferring any administrative
authority over the staff or operations of the Economic and Community
Development Department. The Commission shall have no authority to incur any
expenses without the prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 405, passed 5-1-00)



PARKING DIVISION



§ 33.10  CREATED; MEMBERSHIP.



   There is created a parking division of the police commission for the
purpose of creating and establishing off-street parking facilities pursuant
to Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 100, as amended.  The members of the parking
division shall be the members of the police commission.



(‘66 Code, § 45-1;  Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)



§ 33.11  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The terms of office for the parking division will be concurrent with
those of the police commission as provided by the town charter, § 10-3.



(‘66 Code, § 45-2; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)



§ 33.12  AUTHORIZATION; POWERS OF DIVISION.



   Sections 33.10  through 33.15 are adopted under the authority of Conn.
Gen. Stat., Ch. 100, as amended, and the parking division shall have all
powers as are vested in municipal parking authorities under the provisions of
Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 100, as amended.



(‘66 Code, § 45-3; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)



§ 33.13  POWER TO ADOPT PARKING REGULATIONS.



   The parking division may adopt regulations governing use of any parking
facility which it may operate, which regulations may include a system of
notices of violation permitting payments in lieu of prosecution, and may
include provisions for removal of vehicles parked in violation of any
regulations in accordance with state statutes.



(‘66 Code, § 45-5; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-71; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)



§ 33.14  PUBLICATION OF REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.



   Any regulation adopted by the parking division shall be published one
time in a newspaper having a circulation within the town and a copy filed
with the town clerk and with the chief of police.  Any regulation adopted by
the parking division shall be enforced by the police department.



(‘66 Code, § 45-6; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-71; Am. Ord. 169, passed 5-1-78)



§ 33.15  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any regulation adopted
by the parking division.  Any violation shall be deemed an infraction as
provided by state statutes. 



(‘66 Code, § 45-7; Am. Ord.  passed 2-1-71; Am. Ord. 169, passed
5-1-78)  Penalty, see § 33.999(A)



NATURAL RESOURCES AND OPEN SPACE COMMISSION



§ 33.25  ESTABLISHMENT.



   This Commission is established pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-131a
which permits the establishment of a Conservation Commission.



   (A)   The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports, make
recommendations to the Mayor, Legislative Council and the Planning and Zoning
Commission and other appropriate authorities, and perform all other duties as
may be assigned or requested by the Mayor and/or the Legislative Council in
connection with the development, conservation, supervision and regulation of
natural resources, including water resources.



   (B)   Its powers shall be derived from or granted by state statutes
and local ordinances and regulations as the same may be amended from time to
time.



   (C)   The Commission shall be subject to all restrictions relating
to appropriations and expenditures as specified in the Town Charter.



   (D)   The Commission shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly
or privately-owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, for
the purpose of obtaining information on the proper use of such areas.



   (E)   The Commission may recommend to the Mayor, Legislative Council
and the Planning and Zoning Commission and other appropriate authorities
plans and programs for the development and use of open areas.



   (F)   The Commission may propose a greenways plan for inclusion in
the conservation and development plan of the town, pursuant to state statutes.



   (G)   The Commission may inventory natural resources and formulate
watershed management and drought management plans consistent with water
supply management plans prepared pursuant to state statutes.



   (H)   The Commission may make recommendations to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, Inland Wetland Commission, and other town agencies on
proposed land use changes.



   (I)   It may, with the approval of the Legislative Council, acquire
land and easements in the name of the town and promulgate rules and
regulations, including but not limited to the establishment of reasonable
charges for the use of land and easements, for any of its purposes set out in
this section.



   (J)   It may supervise and manage town-owned open space or park
property upon delegation of such authority by the entity which has
supervisory or management responsi-bilities for such space or property.



   (K)   The Commission may receive gifts in the name of the town for
any of its purposes, and shall administer the same for such purposes subject
to the terms of the gift.



   (L)   The Commission may exchange information with the Department of
Environmental Protection, and said department may, on request, assign
technical personnel to the Commission for assistance in planning its overall
program and for coordinating state and local conservation activities.



(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.26  [RESERVED].



§ 33.27  MEMBERSHIP: COMPENSATION: VACANCIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of no more than 11 members, all
electors of the town to be appointed by the Mayor. At least two members shall
be qualified in the field of conservation or environmental protection. At
least three members shall be qualified in the area of land use or land
management. The remaining six members shall form a diversified representation
of the people of the town. The Mayor, Town Planner and a member of the
Legislative Council shall be ex officio members of the Commission, without a
vote. Not more than six voting members of the Commission shall be of the same
political party.



   (B)   The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



   (C)   Vacancies may be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term of
the vacating member and in the same manner as the original appointment.



   (D)   The Commission shall have no fiscal authority, unless
specifically authorized by the Mayor and the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.28  TERMS OF OFFICE: REMOVAL.



   The members of the Commission shall serve for terms of three years.
Initially, four members shall be appointed for one year, three members shall
be appointed for two years, and four members shall be appointed for three
years. The terms shall commence February 1, 2000. The Mayor may remove any
member for cause, which shall include failure to attend, without reasonable
excuse, three meetings during any calendar year.



(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.29  ORGANIZATION: RECORDS AND ANNUAL REPORT.



   The members of the Commission shall choose a Chairman, Vice-Chairman
and Secretary from its members, shall keep records of its meetings and
activities, and shall submit an annual report to the Mayor and Legislative
Council. A majority of all the members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.30  SUBCOMMITTEES.



   The Commission may establish subcommittees made up of electors of the
town to study and report on any areas within the Commission's jurisdiction.



(Ord. 407, passed 5-1-00)



ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 33.35  CREATED.



   There is created an Economic Development Commission for the promotion
and development of the economic resources of the town, consisting of 11
electors of the town, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the
Legislative Council, no more than seven of whom shall be of one political
party. The Mayor may remove any member for cause, which shall include failure
to attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings during any calendar
year, and the Mayor may fill any vacancy resulting from such removal. 



('66 Code, § 19-1; Am. Ord. passed 3-2-70; Am. Ord. 408, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.36  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   Those members first appointed shall be designated to serve for 1, 2, 3,
4, and 5 years respectively from February 1, 1965, and thereafter a member
shall be appointed annually to serve for 5 years, except that any vacancies
shall be filled by the chief executive authority for the unexpired portion of
the term. 



('66 Code, § 19-2)



§ 33.37  ADDITIONAL MEMBERS.



   Upon the effective date of this section, the Mayor shall appoint,
subject to the approval of the Legislative Council, one additional
Commissioner for a period of one year, one additional Commissioner for a
period of two years, one additional Commissioner for a period of three years,
and one additional Commissioner for a period of four years, in addition to
the terms of the Commissioners presently serving. In the event of a vacancy
in the Commissioners membership, the successor shall be appointed to serve
the unexpired term of the vacating member.



('66 Code, § 19-3, added 1-6-67)  (Am. Ord. 408, passed 5-1-00)



§ 33.38  STATUTORY AUTHORITY; POWERS OF COMMISSION.



   Sections 33.35 through 33.39 are adopted under the authority of Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 7-136, and the economic development commission shall have the
powers as are provided by Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-136, as amended.



('66 Code, § 19-4)



§ 33.39  AMENDED POWERS.



   Powers provided to Commissioners pursuant to this section shall remain
in effect in accordance with provision of state statutes. 



('66 Code, § 19-5, added 6-5-67)  (Am. Ord. 408, passed 5-1-00)



YOUTH ADVISORY BOARD



§ 33.45  ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Youth Advisory Board consisting
of 12 members appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the Legislative
Council. Board members shall serve without compensation. Board members may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred. Membership on the Board shall
include:



      (1)   At least one representative under the age of 21 years of
age;



      (2)   At least one representative from the Hamden Public
Schools;



      (3)   At least one representative from the Hamden Department
of Police Services;



      (4)   At least one representative of a private youth serving
agency; and



      (5)   At least one representative from a Town Department not
listed above.



   (B)   Of the 12 members appointed, at least one-third of the total
membership on the Board shall qualify as service consumers.



   (C)   Of the 12 members first appointed, four Board members shall be
appointed for a term of three years; four Board members shall be appointed
for a term of two years, and four Board members shall be appointed for a term
of one year. Thereafter, Board members shall serve a three year term. In the
event of a vacancy in the Board's membership, the successor shall be
appointed to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member.



   (D)   In addition to the 12 appointed members, the Youth Services
Coordinator shall be an ex-officio member of the Board, without vote.



(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)



§ 33.46  BOARD ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary
from its membership. The Board may also organize itself in whatever other
manner it deems  appropriate. The Board may adopt such rules and regulations
as it considers necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article.



   (B)   A majority of all members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Board's business.



(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)



§ 33.47  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Youth Advisory Board shall be to advise and make
recommendations to the Youth Services Coordinator regarding planning,
development and implementation of youth programs.



(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)



§ 33.48  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Board shall perform all duties necessary to effectuate the
purpose of the article; and



   (B)   The Board shall have no financial powers and duties other than
to make recommendations to the Youth Services Coordinator concerning
expenditures.



(Ord. 369, passed 2-3-97)



PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION



§ 33.55  ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES .



   There shall be a Planning and Zoning Commission to exercise the powers
and duties set forth in the general statutes.



(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)



§ 33.56  APPOINTMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.



   In accordance with § 7-2:F(2) of the Charter, the Planning and Zoning
Commission ("the Commission") shall consist of nine members and three
alternate members, all electors of the town appointed as set forth in §
7-l:B of the charter. The Commission shall choose a chair and such other
officers as it may desire.



   (A)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for term of three years,
for a term commencing on the first day of February of the year of the
appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the
original appointments.



   (B)   Term of alternate members. The Mayor shall appoint alternate
members for a term of three years on the first day of February of the year of
the appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the start
of the original appointments.



   (C)   Assignment of the alternate members. When a regular member of
the Planning and Zoning Commission is absent, the chair of the Commission
shall designate an alternate, choosing alternates in rotation so that they
shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is
not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded
in the minutes of the meeting.



(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)



§ 33.57  RESERVED.



§ 33.58  DIVISION OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   Division of Commission. In accordance with § 7-2:F(3) of the
Charter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may be divided into a zoning
section and a planning section, each to consist of four members and the chair.



   (B)   Each section shall be subject to the provisions of § 7-l:F of
the charter. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission is divided, the
powers and duties of the separate sections shall be in accordance with the
Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. In the
event the Planning and Zoning Commission is divided, the chair shall select
four members to serve on the zoning section and four other members to serve
on the planning section.



   (C)   Three members of the planning section and three members of the
zoning section shall constitute a quorum for each section.



(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)



§ 33.59  PUBLIC HEARINGS ON ZONING REGULATIONS.



   Public hearings on zoning regulations shall be held in accordance with
the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)



§ 33.60  RESERVED.



§ 33.61  DISQUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   No member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall appear
for or represent any person, firm or corporation or other entity in any
manner pending before the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Board of
Appeals or agency exercising the powers of any such Commission or board in
the same municipality, whether or not he is a member of the Commission
hearing such matter.



   (B)   No member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
participate in the hearing or decision of the Commission of which he or she
is a member on any matter in which he or she is directly or indirectly
interested in a personal or financial sense.



   (C)   In the event of the disqualification of any member of the
Commission, such fact shall be entered on the records of the Commission and,
unless otherwise provided by law, such replacement shall be made from
alternate members pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 8-19a,
as maybe amended from time to time, of an alternate to act as a member of
such Commission in the hearing and determination of the particular matter or
matters in which the disqualification arose.



(Ord. 623, adopted 9-4-12)



§ 33.62  ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Establishment. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals to
exercise the following powers and duties as more explicitly set forth in the
general statutes:



      (1)   To hear and decide zoning appeals;



      (2)   To hear and decide all land use matters as may be
permitted by law; and



      (3)   To determine and vary the application of the zoning
bylaws, ordinances or regulations in cases of exceptional difficulty or
unusual hardship. The ability to hear cases shall be limited as set forth in
the general statutes. The validity and effect of variances shall be governed
by the General Statutes.



   (B)   Appointment and membership. The Board (comprised of five
regular members and three members of a "panel of alternates") shall consist
of eight electors of the Town of Hamden appointed as set forth in § 7-1:B of
the charter. The Board shall choose a chair and such other officers as it may
desire. The Board shall follow the requirements of the general statutes
pertaining to the call of public meetings, the administration of oaths,
compelling of attendance of witnesses, preparation of meeting minutes and the
filing of rules, regulations and requirements (and the amendment or repeal
thereof) and decisions as public records.



      (1)   (a)   Term. The Mayor shall appoint members for term
of five years, for a term commencing on the first day of February of the year
of the appointment, which terms shall be staggered as established at the date
of the original appointments.



         (B)   Terms of the panel of alternates. The Mayor shall
appoint members to the panel of alternates for a term of five years, for a
term commencing on the first day of February of the year of the appointment,
which terms shall be staggered as established at the date of the original
appointments.



      (2)   Assignment of the panel of alternates. Members of the
panel of alternates shall be designated to act in the place of a member as
set forth in the general statutes.



      (3)   Restrictions. The regular members and panel of
alternates shall not be members of the  body acting as the zoning commission.



      (4)   Vacancy. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 7-1:C of
the charter, any vacancy in the regular members of the Board or panel of
alternates shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by the Mayor.



(Ord. 622, adopted 8-6-12)



§ 33.63  PRIOR ACTS VALIDATED.



   All acts of the town plan and zoning commission, the town zoning
commission, the town planning commission and the town zoning board of appeals
taken prior to the effective date of this act shall remain in full force and
effect subject to change as provided herein. 



('66 Code, § 90-9)



§ 33.64  ADOPTION OF STREET MAPS OR PLANS VALIDATED.



   The approval and adoption of any and all maps or plans of any highway,
street, sidewalk or parkway by the town plan commission or by the town plan
and zoning commission, the layout thereof, and the assessment of benefits
accruing to and damages sustained by any person owning land included in the
maps or plans, is validated, notwithstanding that the maps or plans were
filed in the engineering department of the town instead of the town clerk's
office, and notwithstanding that public notice of hearings which were held by
the town plan commission or the town plan and zoning commission stated that
the maps were on file in the town engineer's office. 



('66 Code, § 90-10)



§ 33.65  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The Legislative Council of the town has established the following fee
schedule to be charged by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the town:



 




I.  (A) Administrative Internal Fees



Certified copies
 


  First page
 
$ 1.00


  Each additional page
 
  .50


Photocopies, each page
 
  .50


Over-sized plans
 
Paid to Engineering Dept.


Zoning map

   8-1/2 x 11 color copy

   Full size color
 
Paid to Engineering Dept. (also available free online)

30.00

Paid to Engineering Dept.


Inland wetland map

   8-1/2 x 11 color copy

   Full size color
 
 

  30.00

Paid to Engineering Dept.


Inland wetland regulations
 
  30.00 (also available free online)


Subdivision regulations
 
125.00 (also available free online)


Aquifer protection regulations
 
21.00 (also available free online


Map of town aquifers

   8-1/2 x 11 color copy

   Full size color
 
Available free online

30.00

Paid to Engineering Dept.


Agenda mailing
 
100.00/year (also emailed at no charge)


Minutes mailing
 
250.00/year (also emailed at no charge)


Specific project mailing
 
200.00/year (also emailed at no charge)


Fax
 


  Local, per sheet
 
    .50


  203 area, per sheet
 
  2.00


  Long distance, per sheet
 
  2.00


Town Plan of Conservation & Development
 
  70.00 (also available free online)


Postponement fee upon applicant’s request to postpone after project has
been advertised
 
175.00


West Rock Ridge application
 
40.00


Plot plan and aerial 8-1/2 x 11
 
No charge




 



 


I.  (B)  Land Use Recording Fees



(payable to Hamden Town Clerk)



Subdivision/resubdivision

(including subdivision agreement)
 
Paid to Town Clerk


Lot line revision
 
Paid to Town Clerk


Simple split
 
Paid to Town Clerk


Special permit
 
Paid to Town Clerk



 



 




II.  (A)  Planning and Zoning Applications



(Including $60 required for the State)



Special permit application
 
$310.00


Site plan application
 
260.00


Zone change/regulation amendment
 
460.00


Coastal area management application (CAM)
 
155.00


Subdivision/resubdivision application
 
275.00 + 130.00 per lot; $725 minimum


Motor vehicle location approval
 
250.00


Lot line revision
 
200.00


Simple split
 
200.00


Combined special permit and/or site plan when cut and/or fill is equal to or
in excess of 1,000 cubic yards
 
500.00




 



 


II.  (B)  Revisions



Minor amendment to approved site plan
 
$160.00


Major amendment to approved site plan
 
210.00


Minor amendment to approved special permit
 
160.00


Major amendment to approved special permit
 
310.00


Map or text amendment
 
460.00



 



 




III.  (A) Zoning Permits



(Including $60 for the State)



Fee double as penalty for all zoning permits requested after construction 
or use begins


Residential:
 


One-family dwelling (new construction)
 
300.00


Two-family dwelling (new construction)
 
350.00


Three-family dwelling (new construction)
 
400.00


Accessory structures and other new construction
 
100.00 - structures under 250 sf.;

200.00 - structures over 250 sf.


Additions
 
150.00 - structures under 250 sf.;

250.00 - structures over 250 sf.



Commercial Zoning Permits



(including $60.00 for the State)



Continuation of use
 
100.00


Change of use
 
160.00


Commercial (new construction)
 
100.00 plus 20.00 per 1,000 square feet


Mixed use (office, residential, lodging and/or retail)(new construction)
 
50.00 plus 5.00 per dwelling unit plus 15.00 per 1,000 square feet


Manufacturing (new construction)
 
100.00 plus 20.00 per 1,000 square feet


Multi-family dwellings (new construction)
 
100.00 plus 20.00 per 1,000 square feet


Parking lots
 
160.00 per 0.25 acres plus 2.00 per parking space for impervious area; 100.00
per 0.25 acres plus 2.00 per parking space for pervious area




 



 


III.  (B) Signage



Signs
 


   4 sq. ft. or less
 
$180.00


   Between 4 sq. ft and 16 sq. ft.
 
240.00


   Over 16 sq.ft.
 
310.00


   Refacing existing sign
 
½ of cost for new sign


   Residential signs
 
130.00



 



 


IV.  Certificates of Zoning Compliance



(Including $60 required for the State)



Residential (1-3) family dwelling

  units - 1st inspection for CZC and bond release/reduction
 
$90.00 plus

10.00 per unit


Multi-family dwellings (4 or more dwelling units ) - 1st inspection for CZC
and bond release/reduction
 
200.00 plus 5.00 per impervious parking space plus 2.00 per pervious parking
space


Non-residential - 1st inspection for CZC and bond release/reduction
 
200.00 plus 5.00 per impervious parking space plus

2.00 per  pervious  parking space


Mixed-use - 1st inspection for CZC and bond release/reduction
 
200.00 plus 10.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable space plus 5.00 per
impervious parking space plus 2.00 per pervious parking space



 



 


V.  Bond Reduction/Release Requests and Other Inspections



First inspection for bond reduction/release
 
No additional charge if done at the same time as the inspection for CZC
(otherwise $100.00)


First inspection
 
100.00


Second request
 
150.00


Each additional  inspection
 
200.00 per inspection



 



 


VI.  Road Acceptance Requests



First request
 
$100.00


Each additional request
 
500.00



 



 


VII.  Inspections



Inspections for certificate of zoning compliance for refinancing &/or purchase
 
$150.00


CZC as of approval date - administrative
 
250.00


Letter of zoning review
 
100.00



 



 


VIII.  Student Housing



Single family dwelling
 
$300.00


Two+ family dwelling
 
500.00


Annual renewal
 
  150.00 per dwelling unit



 



 


IX.  Other



Signs for public hearing notice
 
$100.00 for each sign not returned; zoning permit will not be issued until
payment is made or sign is returned



 



(Ord. 261a, passed 5-4-87; Am. Ord. 308, passed 5-7-90; Am. Ord. 331, passed
5-3-93; Am. Ord. 467, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 541, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord.
582, passed 11-24-09; Am. Ord. 615, passed 4-2-12))



§ 33.66  FEES FOR PROCESSING APPLICATIONS BY ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   The following fees, including $60.00 for the State, are hereby created
for the processing of applications by the Zoning Board of Appeals:



 

Services
 
Fees


Residential (1 - 3 family dwelling)
 
$160.00


Commercial/industrial/multi-family
 
300.00


Appeal of ZEO decision
 
250.00


Readvertising fee upon applicant’s request for postponement after project
has been advertised, unless there are fewer than five members of the Board
presen
 
½ of the original application fee



 



(Ord. 464, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 539, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord. 582, passed
11-24-09; Am. Ord. 603, passed 3-7-11; Am. Ord. 615, passed 4-2-12)



§ 33.66A  FEES FOR INLAND-WETLANDS COMMISSION.



   The following fee schedule is to be charged by the Inland Wetland
Commission of the town:



 


Applications (including $60 required by the State)



Residential subdivisions
 
$100.00 per lot proposed for entire subdivision with a minimum of $400.00


Residential (1-3 family)
 
310.00


Commercial/industrial/multi- family/other
 
310.00 plus 50.00/acre or part thereof


Map or text amendment
 
460.00


Medallions
 
3.00 each



 



(Ord. 464, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 539, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord. 582, passed
11-24-09)



§ 33.67  DESIGNATING COMMISSION AS AQUIFER PROTECTION AGENCY.



   (A)   Designation and membership.



      (1)   In accordance with the provisions of Section 22a-354 et
seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Planning and Zoning Commission
is hereby designated as the Aquifer Protection Agency (hereinafter APA) of
the town.  The staff of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as
the staff of the APA.



      (2)   Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
serve coexisting terms on the APA. The membership requirements of the APA
shall be the same as those of the Planning and Zoning Commission including,
but not limited to the number of members, terms, method of selection and
removal, and filling vacancies.



      (3)   At least one member of the APA or staff shall complete
the course in technical training formulated by the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection of the state, pursuant to Section 22a-354v of the
Connecticut General Statutes.



   (B)   Regulations to be adopted.



      (1)   The APA shall adopt regulations in accordance with
Section 22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes.



      (2)   Those regulations shall provide for:



         (a)   The manner in which boundaries of aquifer
protection areas shall be established and amended or changed.



         (b)   Procedures for the regulation of activity within
the area.



         (c)   The form for an application to conduct regulated
activities within the area.



         (d)   Notice and publication requirements.



         (e)   Criteria and procedures for the review of
applications.



         (f)   Administration and enforcement.



(Ord. 324, passed 9-8-92)



§ 33.67A  FEE SCHEDULE FOR AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA REGISTRATION OF
ACTIVITIES, PERMITS AND VARIOUS TYPES OF REVIEW.



 

FACILITY SIZE


 
Small (< acre)
 
Medium (1 - 5 acres)
 
Large (> 5 acres)




REGISTRATIONS
 
 
 


Industrial
 
$250
 
$400
 
$600


Commercial
 
$250
 
$400
 
$600


Other
 
$250
 
$400
 
$500


PERMITS
 
 
 


Industrial
 
$500
 
$750
 
$1,000


Commercial
 
$500
 
$750
 
$1,000


Other
 
$500
 
$750
 
$1,000


Materials Management Plan Reviews
 
$150


Stormwater Management Plan Reviews
 
$150




 



 

FACILITY SIZE


 
Small (< acre)


Public hearing
 
$250


Facility inspection/monitoring
 
$150


Regulation petition
 
$750


Transfer Fee
 
$50


Copy of regulations
 
$.50/page



 



(Ord. 564, passed 9-2-2008)



FAIR RENT COMMISSION



§ 33.70  CREATION; PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to and in conformity with Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 7-148b
through 7-148f there is hereby created a commission known as the Fair Rent
Commission for the purpose of controlling and eliminating excessive rental
charges on residential property within the town.  This subchapter is enacted
in recognition of the compelling need to control and eliminate excessive
rental charges in the town. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79)



§ 33.71  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "COMMISSION."  The Fair Rent Commission of the town.



   "HOUSING ACCOMMODATION."  Any building or structure containing living
quarters occupied, or intended for occupancy as a place of residence,
including any land or building appurtenant thereto, and mobile homes and
mobile home park lots, except the following.



      (1)   A hospital, convent, monastery, asylum, public
institution, college or school dormitory, or any institution operated
exclusively for charitable or educational purposes.



      (2)   Any housing accommodations owned and operated by the
United States, the State of Connecticut, the Town of Hamden, the Housing
Authority of the Town of Hamden, or by any agency or political subdivision of
the above.



      (3)   Accommodations rented on a seasonal basis.



   "LANDLORD."  The owner, lessor, or sub-lessor of any housing
accommodation, including a person who manages a housing accommodation owned
by someone else and including any person leasing or subleasing any housing
accommodation under any order of a state or federal court.



   "PERSON."  Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
other business entity, or other association or group, which provides housing
accommodations as defined herein.



   "RENTAL AGREEMENT."  All agreements, whether written or oral or both,
embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a
housing accommodation.



   "RENTAL CHARGES."  Any consideration, monetary or otherwise, including
any bonus, benefit, or gratuity, demanded or received, for the use or
occupancy of any housing accommodation.



   "SEASONAL BASIS."  Housing accommoda-tions rented for a period or
periods aggregating not more than 120 days in any one calendar year.



   "TENANT."  A natural person who leases or rents or in any other legal
way occupies any housing accommodation as a residence for himself or herself
or his or her immediate family. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79)



§ 33.72  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of five members, all of whom
shall be residents of the town, and shall be composed of one landlord member,
one tenant member, and three citizen members. Not more than three of the
members shall be registered members of the same political party.  All of the
members shall be appointed or reappointed by the mayor and subject to the
approval of the legislative council. Citizen member means a resident of the
town who is neither a tenant or a landlord.



   (B)   In addition, the mayor shall appoint two residents  to serve
as alternates, who shall be one landlord and one tenant, subject to approval
of the legislative council.  Either of the alternates shall act in the place
of a regular member who is either absent or disqualified from serving or when
otherwise required by the Commission in the exercise of its duties.  The
term of office of the alternates shall be for a period of three years, or
until their successors have been chosen and qualified. Not more than one of
the alternate members shall be registered members of the same political party.



   (C)   Any regular or alternate member of the Commission who fails to
maintain the status (either landlord, tenant, or citizen) that he or she had
upon appointment shall cease to be a member of the Commission.  The mayor,
subject to the approval of the legislative council, may remove any regular or
alternate member of the Commission for good cause, including the failure to
attend three consecutive meetings of the Commission.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.73  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The initial members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms
which shall commence as of the date of their appointment and end on the dates
set forth below.



 

Term
 
Members


Ending July 1, 1980
 
1


Ending July 1, 1981
 
2


Ending July 1, 1982
 
2



 



All such appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three years. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79)



§ 33.74  POWERS.



   The  Commission shall have the following powers, consistent with
budgetary limitations imposed by the legislative council.



   (A)   To make such studies and investigations either in conjunction
with complaints or own its own initiative and to conduct hearings into
rentals charged for housing accommodations within the town as it deems
appropriate to carry out the duties and responsibilities delegated hereunder,
and subject to the terms, limitations, and conditions set forth herein.



   (B)   To receive complaints, inquiries, and other communications
concerning alleged excessive rental charges in housing accommodations within
the town.



   (C)   To conduct hearings on complaints or requests for
investigations submitted to it by any person aggrieved by a violation of this
subchapter, subject to the terms, limitations, and conditions as set forth
herein.



   (D)   To determine, after a hearing as set forth herein, whether or
not the rent for any housing accommodation is so excessive as to be harsh and
unconscionable.



   (E)   To order a reduction of any excessive rent to an amount which
is fair and equitable, and to make such other orders as are authorized
herein. 



   (F)   To promulgate regulations governing the handling of complaints
and the procedure to be followed at hearings.  Said regulations shall
prescribe the manner and place for the filing of complaints and shall define
the effective date of complaints.



   (G)   To carry out the provisions of section 47a-20 and subsection
(b) of section 47a-23c of the Connecticut General Statutes and to exercise
all other powers now or hereafter granted to  Commissions by the Connecticut
General Statutes.



   (H)   To issue all orders authorized by this subchapter.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.75  ORGANIZATION; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   At its initial meeting, the Commission shall elect from its
own membership, officers as it deems appropriate.  In any event, it shall
elect a chairperson, who shall preside over its meetings and a
vice-chairperson who shall preside in the absence of the chairperson.



   (B)   A quorum for any meeting shall consist of at least three
members of the Commission or their alternates.  The Commission shall not
order any rent reduction or make any determination that a rent is too
excessive as to be harsh and unconscionable, except on the concurring vote of
a majority of the members present at the hearing.



   (C)   The Commission shall conduct regular meetings, open to the
public, to transact whatever business is properly before the Commission. 
The Commission shall determine the time, dates, and places of the meetings,
and shall announce the same in advance of the meetings.



   (D)   The Commission may employ a director and/or clerk to keep its
records, to handle its correspondence, to supervise and direct the
administration of this subchapter, and generally to perform such other
functions as may be assigned by the Commission. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.76  BY-LAWS.



   The  Commission shall be empowered to enact such by-laws and
regulations as are necessary for the conduct of its business, provided no
by-law or regulation shall be in conflict with any provision of this
subchapter as set forth herein.  Provided further, however, no by-laws or
regulations shall become effective unless published in advance.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79)



§ 33.77  HEARINGS ON A COMPLAINT.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint that a rental is excessive to the
point of being harsh and unconscionable, the Commission shall review the
complaint and determine whether the complaint presents a matter within its
jurisdiction.  The Commission may refer any complaint to the appropriate
town, state, or federal agency.  However, if the complaint is within the
jurisdiction of the Commission, the Commission shall concurrently exercise
its powers under this subchapter



   (B)   If the complaint is considered by the Commission, the
Commission shall, to the extent practicable encourage the parties to the
complaint to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution to the complaint.



   (C)   A hearing on the complaint shall be scheduled if the
Commission determines, after review of the complaint, that the parties are
unlikely to resolve the complaint informally.  Written notice of the date,
time, and place of the hearing shall be given by mailing a notice thereof, by
certified return-receipt-requested mail, postage prepaid, and by regular
first class mail, to the landlord and the tenant, at least seven days prior
to the hearing.  The persons entitled to receive the notice as set forth
herein are hereinafter designated as the parties to the complaint.



   (D)   At the hearing, each party shall have the right to offer such
testimony, exhibits, and witnesses as the party deems necessary or
appropriate.



   (E)   The testimony of all persons shall be under oath, and any
member of the Commission is hereby authorized to administer the oath to a
witness.



   (F)   The Commission shall have the power to subpoena any person to
appear before the Commission, and shall have the power to compel the
production of any books or documents relating to any matter before the
Commission.



   (G)   Any party shall have the right to be represented by any person
duly authorized by the party at any hearing.  In addition, any party shall
have the right, either himself or herself, or through his or her
representative, to cross-examine any witnesses produced at the hearing and to
examine all documents offered in evidence.



   (H)   The Commission shall have the right to request the assistance
of any department of the town government, including any available records,
information, or expert witnesses which the department may have in its employ.



   (I)   The Commission is empowered to hire or retain any expert real
estate appraisers or other competent experts to advise it.



   (J)   In the event that there is insufficient time to complete a
hearing, the Commission shall have the power to adjourn the hearing to
another time and date.  The Commission may impose costs upon any party found
to have caused an adjournment without good cause.



   (K)   After the completion of the public hearing and the receipt of
all evidence, testimony and exhibits to be submitted by the parties to it,
the Commission shall make such orders as are authorized herein.



   (L)   Hearings shall be tape recorded, and copies of the tape shall
be made available to the parties upon request.  Upon request by any party,
the Commission may cause the tape to be transcribed at the expense of the
requesting party.  In the event of an appeal to the superior court, the
Commission shall cause the tape to be transcribed and shall certify the
transcript to the court as part of the record.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am. Ord. 320, passed
10-7-91)



§ 33.78  ORDERS OF THE COMMISSION.



   Subsequent to the hearing the  Commission shall have the power to do
the following.



   (A)   Order a reduction for any housing accommodation, where the
rental charge is so excessive as to be harsh and unconscionable, to an amount
which is fair and equitable, subject to the standards set forth in this
subchapter.  The Commission shall direct that any order of rent reduction be
retroactive to the date of the filing of the complaint.  Any order of the
Commission shall remain in effect for one year unless the Commission orders a
different time or, upon its own motion or the request of any party, grants a
further hearing and enters a new order.



   (B)   Refer the matter to the appropriate town agency or the law
enforcement authorities for enforcement of the appropriate municipal
ordinance, Connecticut General Statute or state regulation, if the Commission
determines that the housing accommodation in question fails to comply with
any municipal ordinance or Connecticut General Statute or state regulation
relating to health and safety.



   (C)   Dismiss the complaint.



   (D)   Continue, review, terminate, or suspend all of its orders and
decision.



   (E)   Continue the complaint for final disposition if it finds that
the complaint involves a matter which can be corrected or adjusted between
the parties and it finds that such a continuance would be appropriate under
the circumstances.



   (F)   Order payments of the rent in escrow to the Commission with
the option to order temporary reduction or suspension of  the rent until the
landlord has corrected the situation.



   (G)    Order the posting of a sufficient performance bond by the
landlord until such time as the landlord has corrected any health and safety
violations which the appropriate authorities have investigated and have
certified to the Commission as existing code violations relating to health
and safety.



   (H)   Enter cease and desist orders to carry out the provisions of
section 47a-20 and subsection (b) of section 47a-23c of the Connecticut
General Statutes.



   (I)   Request the town attorney to institute, and the town attorney
may then institute, an action in the appropriate court for a temporary or
final injunction, restraining violation of or directing compliance with any
order made pursuant to this subchapter.  Such direction to the town attorney
shall be written by the chairperson of the Commission or by his or her
designee.



   Any order of the Commission shall include an advisement to the parties
of their right to appeal to the Superior Court.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am Ord. 320, passed
10-7-91)  Penalty, see § 33.999(B)



§ 33.79  EXCESSIVE CHARGE STANDARDS.



   In determining whether a rental charge is so excessive, with due regard
to all the circumstances, as to be harsh and unconscionable, the Commission
shall consider any of the following circumstances as are applicable to the
type of accommodation.



   (A)   The rents charged for the same number of rooms in other
housing accommodations in the same and in other comparable areas of the
municipality.



   (B)   The sanitary conditions existing in the housing accommodations
in question.



   (C)   The number of bathtubs or showers, flush water closets,
kitchen sinks, and lavatory basins available to the occupants thereof.



   (D)   Services, furniture, furnishings, and equipment supplied
therein.



   (E)   The size and number of bedrooms contained therein.



   (F)   Repairs necessary to make such accommodations reasonably
livable for the occupants accommodated therein.



   (G)   The amount of taxes and overhead expenses thereof.



   (H)   Whether the accommodations are in compliance with the
ordinances of the municipality and the General Statutes relating to health
and safety.



   (I)   The income of the complainant and the availability of
accommodations.



   (J)   The availability of utilities.



   (K)   Damages done to the premises by the tenant, caused by other
than ordinary wear and tear. 



   (L)   The amount and frequency of increases in rental charges.



   (M)   Whether, and to the extent to which, the income from an
increase in rental charges has been or will be reinvested in improvements to
the accommodations.



   In addition, the Commission may consider the following factors:



   (N)   Increases or decreases in the services provided or in the
amount of dwelling space.



   (O)   Substantial deterioration of the housing accommodations.



   (P)   The length of time that violations of municipal ordinances or
state laws have been permitted to exist and the responsiveness of the
landlord to complaints by enforcement agencies.



   (Q)   Increases or decreases in operating costs and the amortized
cost of capital improvements.



   (R)   The rate of return of the landlord's investment.



   (S)   Retaliation by the landlord against the tenant for complaining
to the landlord, the Commission, or to any other governmental agency.



   (T)   Damages caused by individuals on the premises with the
tenant's permission.



   (U)   An increase in the number of occupants of the premises.



   (V)   Such other factors as the Commission believes are relevant to
a determination as to whether a rental charge is so excessive, with due
regard to all the circumstances, as to be harsh and unconscionable.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am. Ord. 320, passed
10-7-91)



§ 33.80  RENT REDUCTION NOT RETROACTIVE.



   The  Commission shall not have the authority to make any order of rent
reduction retroactive prior to the effective date of the complaint.  Any
order of rent reduction shall become effective upon the filing of the
complaint.  Pending a determination by the Commission, the tenant shall
continue to pay the last agreed upon rent to the landlord unless, pursuant to
this subchapter, the Commission orders that the rent be paid into escrow.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 202, passed 4-6-81; Am. Ord. 320, passed
10-7-91)  Penalty, see § 33.999(B)



§ 33.81  ESCROW ACCOUNT.



   The Commission shall establish an escrow savings account with a local
bank or financial institution into which it shall deposit all rents or other
funds paid to it within five business days of receipt.  The funds shall be
held in the escrow savings account until such time as the order of the
Commission is complied with; or until the Commission acts on the complaint,
or makes other appropriate order; or until a further order is made by a court
of competent jurisdiction.  However, the Commission may provide for the
payment of the landlord's mortgage, taxes, and insurance and the cost of
heat, water, electricity, and other essential utilities when the expenses
become due and payable. In addition, at its discretion, the Commission may
order payment  of the full balance to the landlord in cases of unusual
hardship.  Any interest earned may be used as above provided and, upon
payment of the balance to the landlord, the interest shall be remitted to the
landlord.  Any funds or interest unclaimed by the landlord for more than 90
days after their release by the Commission shall become the property of the
town. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.82  COMMISSION'S DECISION.



   The  Commission shall render its decision on any complaint filed with
it by a tenant no later than 60 days after the date of the filing of the
complaint. However, the time limit for deciding any complaint may be extended
by the Commission in any case involving unusual hardship or administrative
difficulties. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79)



§ 33.83  COMPLAINTS REGARDING RETALIATORY EVICTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be retaliatory action for a landlord to refuse to
renew the lease or other rental agreement of any tenant, to bring an action
or proceeding against the tenant to recover possession of the dwelling unit,
to demand an increase in rent from the tenant, to decrease the services to
which the tenant has previously been entitled, or to verbally, physically or
sexually harass the tenant because the tenant has filed a complaint with the
Commission or has engaged in other protected activity as set forth in section
47a-20 of the Connecticut General Statutes.



   (B)   Any tenant who claims that his or her landlord has engaged in
retaliatory action may file a notice of said claim with the Commission.



   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense against a claim of
retaliatory action when the landlord seeks to recover possession of the
dwelling unit if:



      (1)   The tenant is using the dwelling for an illegal purpose.



      (2)   There is non-payment of rent by the tenant.



      (3)   The landlord in good faith seeks to recover the dwelling
unit for immediate use as his or her own abode.



      (4)   The conditions complained of were caused by the willful
actions of the tenant or another person in the tenant's household or a person
on the premises with the tenant's consent.



      (5)   The landlord seeks to recover possession of the dwelling
unit on the basis of a notice to terminate a periodic tenancy previous to the
tenant's complaint.



   (D)   It shall be an affirmative defense against a claim of
retaliatory action when the landlord seeks an increase in rent if:



      (1)   The conditions complained of were caused by the lack of
due care by the tenant or another person of his or her household or a person
on the premises with his or her consent; or



      (2)   The landlord has become liable for a substantial
increase in property taxes, or a substantial increase in other maintenance or
operating costs not associated with his or her compliance with the complaint,
not less than four months prior to the demand for an increase in rent, and
the increase in rent does not exceed the prorated portion of the net increase
in taxes or costs.



   (E)   Upon receipt of notice of a claim of retaliatory action, the
Commission shall inform the landlord and shall investigate the claim. 
Within 15 days, the Commission shall convene a hearing after due notice to
the tenant and the landlord for the purpose of determining whether the
landlord has engaged in retaliatory action.



   (F)   Pending determination by the Commission, the Commission may
order that the landlord maintain no action or proceeding against the tenant
to recover possession of the dwelling unit, the landlord restore those
services decreased by him or her to which the tenant was entitled, or the
tenant continue to pay the rent required prior to the retaliatory action
complained of.



   (G)   If, after a hearing, the Commission finds that the landlord
has engaged in retaliatory action, it shall order the landlord to cease and
desist from such actions.  This cease and desist order may include the
following provisions:



      (1)   That the landlord maintain no action against the tenant
to recover possession of the dwelling unit.



      (2)   That the landlord not increase the rent.



      (3)   That the rent be decreased or that it be increased in an
amount the Commission determines fair and equitable.



      (4)   That the landlord restore the services to which the
tenant was entitled.



      (5)   That the landlord cease and desist all verbal, physical
or sexual harassment of the tenant.



(Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.84  CONTINUATION OF PROCEEDINGS.



   All proceedings shall continue regardless of the fact that a tenant may
quit the housing accommodation in question. However, the Commission may
consider the complaint abandoned if the tenant, after receiving notice of a
hearing, fails without good cause to appear at the hearing.  No sale,
assignment, or transfer of the housing accommodation in question shall be
cause for discontinuing any pending proceeding, nor shall it affect the
rights, duties, and obligations of the Commission or the parties thereto.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.85  NOTICE.



   All notices with regard to any complaint shall be served by certified
mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, and by regular first class
mail, upon the landlord and the tenant.  If all notices to a party are
returned without having been delivered, the  Commission may arrange for
service by a deputy sheriff, constable of the town, or indifferent person in
the same manner as is provided in the Connecticut General Statutes for
service of process in an ordinary civil action. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.86  ENFORCEMENT.



   The  Commission is empowered to bring a civil action to any court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce any order of the Commission made pursuant
to this subchapter, or to enjoin a violation or threatened violation of any
order of the Commission, or to seek damages incurred as a result of the
violation of any order of the Commission made pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79)  Penalty, see § 33.999(B)



§ 33.87  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by any order of the  Commission may appeal to the
Housing Session of the Superior Court for the Judicial District of New Haven,
within 30 days after service of notice of the order of the Commission as
provided herein.  As provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, the
appeal shall be considered as a privileged matter with respect to assignment
for trial. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



§ 33.88  OTHER REMEDIES.



   Except as provided in § 33.87 above, the provisions of this subchapter
shall not affect or limit the right of the landlord to institute a summary
process action as provided by the Connecticut General Statutes, nor shall
this subchapter affect the right of the landlord, tenant, mortgagee, or
encumbrancer of record to institute any action authorized by law.



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



ARTS COMMISSION



§ 33.90  CREATION; PURPOSE.



   (A)   There is established a town commission to be known as the arts
commission.  The arts commission shall consist of 15 commissioners.



   (B)   The purpose of the arts commission shall be to stimulate,
facilitate, coordinate, and cooperate with existing organizations for the
development of the arts.  It shall serve as an information center and focal
point in the community for activities in the arts. 



(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)



§ 33.91  APPOINTMENT; TERMS AND VACANCIES.



   The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Legislative
Council, 15 Commissioners who have a broad interest, understanding, and
appreciation of artistic and cultural activities. The term of office of each
Commissioner shall be three years, with the terms of five Commissioners
expiring each year. A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by an
appointment by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council,
for the unexpired portion of the term of the vacating Commissioner. Any
Commissioner may be removed by the Mayor for cause, which shall include
failure to attend three meetings of the Commission, without reasonable
excuse, within a calendar year. 



(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81; Am. Ord. 414, passed 7-5-00)



§ 33.92  ORGANIZATION.



   The commission shall annually elect a chairman, vice-chairman and
secretary/treasurer.  The chairman shall be the chief executive of the arts
commission.



(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)



§ 33.93  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The arts commission shall have the following duties and
responsibilities.



   (A)   To make an initial survey of the cultural and artistic
resources of the town, including, but not limited to a survey of the arts by
each subject deemed to be of significance by the arts commission in carrying
out its duties.



   (B)   To make such additional surveys as may be deemed advisable
from time to time, of private and public institutions engaged within the town
in artistic and cultural activities.



   (C)   To stimulate and encourage both private and public study and
presentation of the performing and fine arts and public interest, support,
and participation.



   (D)   To encourage and assist freedom of artistic expression
essential to the arts.



   (E)   To stimulate cooperative and coordinated effort among cultural
organiz-ations actively engaged in a single art form.



   (F)   To advise and make recommendations to the mayor and the
legislative council on matters of cultural significance to the town at least
on an annual basis.



(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)



§ 33.94  FINANCIAL AND CONTRACTUAL RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The arts commission shall have the following financial powers and
duties.



   (A)   To submit a proposed budget to the mayor.



   (B)   To enter into contracts within the limit of funds available,
with individuals, organizations, and institutions for services which will
further the objectives of the arts commission.



   (C)   To enter into contracts within the limits of funds available
with local, regional, state, or federal associations for cooperative
endeavors.



   (D)   All contracts and agreements must have the prior approval of
the legislative council.



   (E)   To accept gifts, contributions, and bequests of funds from
individuals, foundations, corporations, and other organizations for the
purpose of furthering the objectives of the arts commission.



(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)



§ 33.95  EXPENDITURES AND EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS.



   The Arts Commission shall do the following:



   (A)   Make expenditures in accordance with the annual budget passed
by the town.



   (B)   Place all monies received in the manner referred to in §
33.94(E) in a separate gift account subject to an annual audit.  Those
monies may be expended subject to the majority approval of the arts
commission.



   (C)   Employ experts and others as may be needed, subject to
personnel regulations and limits of the annual town budget.



(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)



§ 33.96  ARTS AUXILIARY.



   (A)   The arts commission is hereby authorized to appoint town
residents who are known for their competency, understanding, and devotion to
cultural pursuits, to the arts auxiliary.



   (B)   The arts commission will define the function and duties of the
arts auxiliary significant to the purpose of the commission.



   (C)   The purpose of the arts auxiliary is to assist the
commissioners in the execution of their duties. 



(Ord. 204, passed 5-4-81)



HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION



§ 33.97  CREATED; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Establishment of the Commission. 



      (1)   The Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall
be residents of the town, and shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. Membership shall include:



         (a)   No more than five members from one political party.



         (b)   Seven members who are currently members of the
Commission for the remainder of their unexpired terms of three years each.



         (c)   One member for a one-year term.



         (d)   One member for a two-year term.



      (2)   The terms for new members of the Commission shall
commence on March 1, 2000, and each year thereafter, members shall be
appointed for a three-year term. However, in the event of a vacancy in the
Commission's membership, a succeeding member shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to approval by the Legislative Council, for the unexpired portion of
the term. Any member may be removed by the Mayor for cause, which shall
include failure to attend three meetings of the Commission, without
reasonable cause, within a calendar year.



   (B)   Commission's organization.



      (1)   The Commission shall annually select a Chair-person and
Vice-Chairperson from the membership. The Commission may adopt such rules or
bylaws to govern its operations as it considers necessary to effectuate its
purpose.



      (2)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



   (C)   Powers and duties.  The Commission shall advise and formulate
recommendations to the Human Services Director, including the Elderly
Services, Community Services, and Youth Services Divisions or Departments,
the Mayor, and the Legislative Council, in the following respects:



      (1)   The Commission shall seek to identify the human services
needs of the town.



      (2)   The Commission shall develop a recommended comprehensive
plan for the delivery of human services within the town.



      (3)   The Commission shall develop recommended policies for
the operation of the town's Human Services Department and programs.



      (4)   The Commission shall establish recommended yearly goals
and objectives for the town's Human Services Department and programs and
shall conduct and submit to the Mayor and the Legislative Council an annual
evaluation of such Department and programs.



      (5)   The Commission, whenever feasible, shall review and
assist in the preparation of grant applications pertaining to the Human
Services Department prior to their submission to the Mayor and the
Legislative Council.



   (D)   Limitations of the Commission.



      (1)   Nothing in division (C) shall be construed as conferring
any administrative authority over the staff or operations of the Human
Services Department or its programs.



      (2)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any
expenses without prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 363, passed 4-3-96; Am. Ord. 409, passed 5-1-00)



SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING COMMISSION



§ 33.100  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be
residents of the town and shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. Membership on the Commission shall include:



      (1)   No more than four members from any one political party;



      (2)   Two (2) members appointed for a one-year term;



      (3)   Two members appointed for a two-year term; and



      (4)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.



   (B)   Thereafter all members shall be appointed for three-year
terms. The terms shall commence on July 1, 1999. In the event of a vacancy in
the Commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to approval by the Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term
of the vacating member. Any member may be removed by the Mayor for  cause,
which shall include failure to attend three meetings of the Commission
without reasonable excuse within a calendar year.



   (C)   The Public Works Director and Recycling Coordinator shall
serve as an ex officio member of the Commission without power to vote.



(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99; amend Ord. 413, passed 6-5-00)



§ 33.101  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any
other officers as it shall deem necessary from its membership.



   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern
its operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.



   (C)   A majority of all voting members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99)



§ 33.102  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the Public
Works Director, the Recycling Coordinator, the Mayor and the Legislative
Council in the following respects:



   (A)   The Commission shall formulate recommendations concerning the
solid waste management and recycling needs of the town.



   (B)   The Commission shall develop a recommended comprehensive plan
for solid waste management and recycling for the town.



   (C)   The Commission shall develop recommended policies and
procedures with regard to solid waste management and recycling operations of
the town's Public Works Department.



   (D)   In conjunction with the Public Works Director and Recycling
Coordinator, the Commission shall establish recommended yearly goals and
objective for the town's solid waste management and recycling programs, and
the Commission shall annually submit an evaluation of the town's performance
with respect to such goals and objectives to the Public Works Director,
Recycling Coordinator, Mayor and the Legislative Council.



   (E)   The Commission shall seek out sources of grant money available
to the town and report such opportunities to the Public Works Director, the
Recycling Coordinator and the Mayor.



   (F)   The Commission shall review any grant applications pertaining
to solid waste management and recycling, and shall advise and make
recommendations to the Public Works Director, the Recycling Coordinator and
the Mayor with respect to such grant applications.



   (G)   The Commission shall formulate a recommended plan for and
promote the education of citizens, students, businesses and municipal
employees on solid waste management and recycling issues in conjunction with
the Public Works Director, the Recycling Coordinator, the Mayor's office and
the Education Department.



   (H)   The Commission shall review and recommend ordinances and
resolutions related to solid waste management and recycling to the Mayor's
office and the Legislative Council.



   (I)   The Commission shall participate in the evaluation of the
town's solid waste removal contract and report recommendations to the
Legislative Council for selection.



   (J)   The Commission shall prepare a comprehensive program of
recycling for town and Board of Education buildings, to be recommended to the
Legislative Council for approval by resolution.



(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99)



§ 33.103  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring
upon the Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the
operations of the Public Works Department.



   (B)   The Commission's authority is limited to advice and
recommendations to the Public Works Director, the Recycling Coordinator, the
Mayor, the Legislative Council and the Education Department.



   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses
without the prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The
Commission shall have no fiscal authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Commission shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who
shall be paid as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's professional
and technical services line item account.



(Ord. 389, passed 4-5-99)



TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION



§ 33.107  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of nine members, who shall be
residents of the town and shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without
compensation.



      (1)   Members on the Commission shall include:



         (a)   No more than six members from any one political
party;



         (b)   Three members appointed for a one-year term;



         (c)   Three members appointed for a two-year term; and



         (d)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.



      (2)   Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for
three-year terms. The terms shall commence on July 1, 2000. In the event of a
vacancy in the Commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council, to serve the
unexpired term of the vacating member. Any member may be removed by the Mayor
for cause, which shall include failure to attend three meetings of the
Commission without reasonable cause within a calendar year.



   (B)   The Technology Director shall serve as an ex officio member of
the Commission without power to vote.



(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)



§ 33.108  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any
other officers as it shall deem necessary from its membership.



   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern
its operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purpose.



   (C)   A majority of all voting members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)



§ 33.109  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the Mayor,
the Legislative Council, and the Technology Director in the following
respects:



   (A)   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations
concerning computerization, data processing, internet access, and
telecommunications needs of the town.



   (B)   The Commission shall seek out sources of grant money available
to the town and report such opportunities to the Technology Director and the
Mayor.



   (C)   The Commission shall review any grant applications pertaining
to technology matters and shall advise and make recommendations to the
Technology Director and the Mayor with respect to such grant application.



(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)



§ 33.110  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring
upon the Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the
operation of the Technology Director.



   (B)   The Commission's authority is limited to advice and
recommendations to the Technology Director, the Mayor, and the Legislative
Council.



   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses
without the prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The
Commission shall have no fiscal authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Commission shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who
shall be paid as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's Professional
and Technical Services line item account.



(Ord. 415, passed 7-5-00)



CLEAN AND GREEN COMMISSION



§ 33.115  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be
residents of the town, and shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve without
compensation.



      (1)   Of the seven members first appointed, membership on the
Commission shall include:



         (a)   No more than four members from any one political
party;



         (b)   Two members appointed for a one-year term;



         (c)   Two members appointed for a two-year term;



         (d)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.



      (2)   Thereafter all members shall be appointed for three-year
terms. The terms shall commence in November 2000. The Mayor may remove any
member for cause, which shall include failure to attend, without reasonable
cause, three meetings during any calendar year. In the event of a vacancy in
the Commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to approval by the Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term
of the vacating member.



      (3)   The Public Works Director and the Town Planner shall
serve as ex officio members of the Commission, without power to vote.



   (B)   Effective February 28, 2002, the Mayor shall appoint, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Commission, four additional members to the
Commission, for a total of 11 Commissioners, nor more than seven of whom
shall be from any one political party. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. The Mayor may remove any member for cause, which shall include
failure to attend, without reasonable cause, three meetings during any
calendar year.



      (1)   Of the four new members appointed, membership on the
Commission shall include:



         (a)   Two members for a one-year term;



         (b)   One member for a two-year term; and



         (c)   One member for a three-year term.



      (2)   Thereafter all members shall serve three-year terms. In
the event of a vacancy in the Commissions membership, the successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Legislative Council, to
serve the unexpired term of the vacating member.



(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 453, passed 2-4-02)



§ 33.116  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any
other officers as it shall deem necessary from its membership.



   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern
its operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.



   (C)   A majority of all voting members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00)



§ 33.117  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to the Public
Works Director, the Town Planner, the Mayor, and the Legislative Council in
the following respects:



   (A)   To promote and encourage actions and strategies designed to
improve the physical appearance of the town, including beautification, tree
planting, landscaping, and prevention of litter, blight, and improper
property maintenance, and the enforcement of ordinances pertaining to these
matters;



   (B)   To study conditions affecting the physical appearance of the
town, such as the need for tree planting, landscaping, and enforcement
mechanism to eradicate litter, blight, and improper property maintenance;



   (C)   To encourage improvements in the physical appearance of the
town and to involve local businesses, neighborhoods, community, civic groups,
churches, and individual volunteer citizens in planning and carrying out such
improvements;



   (D)   To make such recommendations to the Mayor and Legislative
Council on the methods of maintaining and improving the physical appearance
and aesthetic image of the town as it deems appropriate;



   (E)   To recommend the establishment of short and long-term goals
and objectives for the beautification needs of the town;



   (F)   To develop and recommend a strategic action plan for
accomplishing town beautification goals and objectives;



   (G)   To identify and seek, through the town's Grants Manager,
grants from public and private sources to be used in achieving any of its
purposes;



   (H)   To collect, compile, and disseminate information relative to
maintaining and improving the town's physical appearance;



   (I)   To make a full written report of all activities undertaken by
it, the status of existing town beautification programs and its short and
long-term recommendations to the Mayor and Legislative Council once a year.
The report shall be delivered on or before November 1 of each year and shall
detail activities carried out by the Commission during the preceding 12-month
period;



   (J)   To preview site plans as they come before the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and if it chooses to do so, make written recommendations
to the Planning and Zoning Commission on issues of beautification. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall at no time be required to postpone its
business, should the Commission not provide such written recommendations
regarding site plans.



(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00)



§ 33.118  LIMITATIONS OF THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring
upon the Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the
operations of any department.



   (B)   The Commission's authority is limited to advice and
recommendations to the Public Works Director, the Town Planner, the Mayor,
and the Legislative Council.



   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses
without the prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The
Commission shall have no fiscal authority. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Commission shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who
shall be paid as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's professional
and technical services line item account.



(Ord. 421, passed 10-2-00)



VETERANS COMMISSION



§ 33.125  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The Veterans Commission shall consist of 11 members, all
electors of the town to be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Legislative Council. Not more than seven members to the Commission shall
be of the same political party. Not less than eight members of the Commission
shall be veterans of the armed forces of the United States of America.
Commission members shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   Of the nine members first appointed, three Commissioners shall
be appointed for a term of three years; three Commissioners shall be
appointed for a term of two years; and three Commissioners shall be appointed
for a term of one year.  Thereafter, all Commissioners shall be appointed
for a term of three years. In the event of a vacancy in the Commission's
membership, the succeeding member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired
term of the vacating member. The Mayor may remove any member for cause, which
shall include failure to attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings
during any calendar year.



   (C)   Effective April 3, 2006, the Mayor shall appoint, subject to
the approval of the Council, one additional Commissioner, who shall be a
veteran, for a period of three years and one additional Commissioner, who
shall be a veteran, for a period of two years.  Thereafter, the
Commissioners shall serve three-year terms.  In the event of a vacancy in
the Commissioners' membership, the successor shall be appointed to serve the
unexpired term of the vacating member.



(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 533, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 580, passed
9-8-09)



§ 33.126  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson,
and a Secretary from its membership. The Commission may also organize itself
in whatever other manner it deems appropriate. The Commission may adopt such
rules and regulations as it considers necessary to effectuate the purpose of
this subchapter.



   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00)



§ 33.127  PURPOSES.



   (A)   The Commission shall advise the Mayor and town departments
regarding the service needs of veterans, public educational programs, and
events regarding the history and commemoration of veterans, as well as the
preservation of veteran's monuments and memorials.



   (B)   The Commission shall serve as the Local Veterans' Advisory
Committee and shall have the responsibilities of carrying out locally the
duties and purposes of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-135, including those of a
veteran's service contact person, who shall be designated as such by the
chairperson of the Commission.



(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 696, passed 2-5-18)



§ 33.128  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall perform all duties necessary to
effectuate the purposes of the Commission and any other duties and
responsibilities authorized by Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-135 as may be amended.



   (B)   The Commission shall receive, in writing, correspondence from
residents with concerns or specific needs.



   (C)   The Commission shall act as the coordinating agency in all
matters concerning veterans and their dependents, coordinating the activities
of public and private facilities concerned with veterans' reemployment
education, rehabilitation and adjustment to peacetime living.



   (D)   The Commission shall cooperate with all national, state and
local governmental and private agencies in securing services and benefits to
which a veteran or his/her dependents may be entitled.



   (E)   The Commission shall use the services and facilities of the
veterans' organizations so far as possible to carry out the purposes of this
section.



   (F)   The Commission shall encourage and coordinate vocational
training services for veterans.



   (G)   The Town of Hamden shall appropriate the necessary funds so
that the Commission can carry out its duties and responsibilities. Any such
expenditures shall comply with the rules, regulations, charter and ordinances
of the town. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 696, passed 2-5-18)



COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND RELATIONS



§ 33.135  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The Commission on Human Rights and Relations shall consist of
nine members, all electors of the town, to be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Council. Not more than six members of the
Commission shall be of the same political party. Commission members shall
serve without compensation.



   (B)   Of the nine Commissioners first appointed, three Commissioners
shall be appointed for a term of three years; three Commissioners shall be
appointed for a term of two years; and three Commissioners shall be appointed
for a term of one year. Thereafter, all Commissioners shall be appointed for
a term of three years. In the event of a vacancy in the Commission's
membership, the succeeding member shall be appointed to serve the unexpired
term of the vacating member. The Mayor may remove any member for cause, which
shall include failure to attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings
during any calendar year.



(Ord. 433, passed 3-12-01)



§ 33.136  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of the Commission shall be as follows:



   (A)   To foster mutual understanding and respect among all members
of the community;



   (B)   To encourage equality of treatment and respect among all
members of the community;



   (C)   To work with governmental and non-governmental organizations
charged with promoting an integrated and diverse community;



   (D)   To work with federal, state, and town departments, boards and
commissions, as well as with private, civic, religious, business, industrial,
labor, and other organizations, groups and persons to recommend to and advise
the Mayor regarding participation in programs, events, and projects which
reflect the diversity of the community and help all members of the community
enjoy equality of opportunity in all phases of community life;



   (E)   Working with town departments, boards and commissions to
provide outreach to and greater participation in all aspects of town
government and civic life for all members of the community;



   (F)   Promoting  educational activities and programs that further
the Commission's purposes, specifically those that further intergroup
understanding and acceptance;



   (G)   Promoting interracial dialogue and cultural diversity in
programs, events, and projects sponsored by the town and others;



   (H)   To perform independent research and investigation for the
purpose of making reports and recommendations to the Mayor with respect to
new or proposed programs or issues involving human and group rights and
relations.



   (I)   To advise and assist the town in eliminating all
discrimination against any individual or individuals because of race, color,
gender, age, religious creed, economic status; national origin or ancestry.



(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00)



§ 33.137  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring
upon the Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the
operations of any dept of the town.



   (B)   The Commission shall have no fiscal authority. The Commission
shall have no authority to incur any expenses without the prior approval of
the Mayor and the Legislative Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Commission shall be provided by the town with the services of a clerk, who
shall be paid as an independent contractor from the Town Clerk's professional
and technical services line item account.



(Ord. 422, passed 10-2-00)



TREE COMMISSION



§ 33.140  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There shall be established a Tree Commission to consist of
five members recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative
Council, who shall reside in the town. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee shall be a
non-voting ex officio member of the Commission.



   (B)   The initial terms of office shall be three years for two
members; two years for two members; and one year for one member. Thereafter,
at the expiration of the initial term of each member, a successor shall be
appointed for a term of three years. In the event of a vacancy, a successor
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the Legislative
Council to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any member may be
removed from the Commission as set forth in § 7-1:H of the Charter.



(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)



§ 33.141  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The responsibility of the Tree Commission shall pertain to
trees located on public property and in the public rights-of-way and not on
private property.



   (B)   The Tree Commission is charged with:



      (1)   Developing and from time to time updating an Urban
Forest Master Plan;



      (2)   Developing and maintaining a town tree inventory;



      (3)   Developing community educational programs regarding
trees and the understanding of the benefits of appropriate tree planting and
care;



      (4)   Developing polices, giving recommen-dations, and
providing advice to all concerned town departments and agencies as to species
selection, planting, spacing, fertilization, bracing, pruning, transplanting,
maintenance, preservation, protection or removal of trees on all public lands
and public rights-of-way; and



      (5)   Acting in an advisory capacity to the Planning and
Zoning Commission with respect to landscape design, and principles, locally
suitable botanic species and protection of natural resources.



(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)



§ 33.142  TREE FUND.



   There shall be established within the Finance Department a
“Commemorative Tree Fund,” comprised of contributions from interested
persons and other entities, for the purpose of maintaining the wooded
character of the streets and lands within the town. The Tree Commission may
recommend expenditures from the Commemorative Tree Fund to the Administration
but shall have no other fiscal authority.



(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)



§ 33.143  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Commission shall have the right to establish the rules and
regulations pertaining thereto with the consent and advice of the Mayor. It
is the responsibility of the Tree Warden and/or the Director of Public Works
or his/her designee to enforce the regulations of the Commission.



(Ord. 647, passed 6-4-14)



FLOOD AND EROSION CONTROL BOARD



§ 33.150  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 25-84 through 25.98, as amended, the
town hereby establishes a Flood and Erosion Control Board for the town to be
known as the Hamden Flood and Erosion Control Board.



(Ord. 452, passed 2-4-02)



§ 33.151  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS;
VACANCIES.



   (A)   The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be composed of seven
resident electors of the town appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
Legislative Council.



   (B)   Members of the Board first appointed shall be designated to
serve for the following terms: two members for one year, three members for
two years and two members for three years. Thereafter, such members shall be
appointed annually to serve for three years.



   (C)   The Mayor may remove a member for cause, which shall include
the failure to attend three meetings in any calendar year.



   (D)   Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
manner of the original appointment.



   (E)   Members shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 452, passed 2-4-02)



§ 33.152  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Flood and Erosion Control Board shall be vested with all the powers
and duties specified in Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 25-84 through 25-98.



(Ord. 452, passed 2-4-02)



ENERGY USE AND CLIMATE CHANGE COMMISSION



§ 33.160 ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby established an Energy Use and Climate Change
Commission consisting of nine members, who shall be residents of the town and
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval of the Legislative
Council. Commission members shall serve without compensation. Members of the
Commission shall include:



      (1)   Not more than five members from any one political party;



      (2)   Three members appointed for a one-year term;



      (3)   Three members appointed for a two-year term; and



      (4)   Three members appointed for a three-year term.



   Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for three-year terms. In the
event of a vacancy in the Commission’s membership, the successor shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative Council to
serve the unexpired portion of the vacating member. Any member may be removed
by the Mayor for cause, which shall include failure to attend three meetings
of the Commission without reasonable cause within a calendar year.



(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)



§ 33.161 ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect annually a Chairperson and any
other officers, as it shall deem necessary from its membership.



   (B)   The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to govern
its operations, as it considers necessary to effectuate its purpose.



   (C)   A majority of all voting members shall constitute a quorum for
conducting the Commission’s business.



(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)



§ 33.162 POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A) The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports, make
recommendations to the Mayor and the Legislative Council and advocate
publicly for the implementation of the greenhouse gas reduction measures
recommended in the local action plan by developing specific goals and plans
for achieving measurable, cost-effective reductions on a realistic timeline
that will provide energy efficiency, sustainability, improved health and a
more livable community.



   (B)   The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports, make
recommendations to the Mayor and the Legislative Council and advocate
publicly for implementation of measure contained in the local action plan in
the areas of energy use, purchasing, energy efficiency and conservation,
transportation, building design and other related areas as may be assigned or
required by the Mayor.



   (C)   The Commission shall conduct research, prepare reports and
make recommendations to the Mayor and the Legislative Council covering any
refinements or additions to the local action plan.



   (D)   The Commission will work in conjunction with and cooperation
with the Natural Resources and Open Space Commission, the Recycling and Solid
Waste Commission, the Clean and Green Commission and any other boards and
commissions on any common issues that may arise, when appropriate.



(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)



§ 33.163 LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as conferring on
the Commission any administrative authority over the staff or the operations
of any town department(s) or any portion of town government.



   (B)   The Commission’s authority is limited to advice and
recommendations to the Mayor and the Legislative Council.



   (C)   The Commission shall have no authority to incur any expenses
without the approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. The Commission
shall have no fiscal authority.



(Ord. 520, passed 4-4-05)



§ 33.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of § 33.15 shall be fined not
more than $100.



(‘66 Code, § 45-7)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any order of rent reduction or
rent suspension by demanding, accepting, or receiving an amount in excess
thereof while the order remains in effect, and no appeal is pending, or
violates any cease and desist order of the Fair Rent Commission, or violates
any other provision of §§ 33.70 through 33.88 or any person who shall
refuse to obey any subpoena, order, or decision of the Fair Rent Commission
pursuant thereto, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for
each such offense.  If the offense continues for more than five days, it
shall constitute a new offense for each day it continues to exist
thereafter.  No action shall be taken on any such violation by the
prosecuting authorities of the town except upon written complaint of the
chairperson of the Commission or his or her designee. 



(Ord. 187, passed 11-5-79; Am. Ord. 320, passed 10-7-91)



CHAPTER 34:  CIVIL PREPAREDNESS



Section



   34.01   Purpose



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Mayor's authority



   34.04   Orders, rules and regulations



   34.05   Responsibility of director of civil preparedness



   34.06   Duties of director



   34.07   Mayor's duties



   34.08   When state of civil preparedness ceases to exist



   34.09   Violation prohibited



 



   34.99   Penalty



§ 34.01  Purpose.



   The legislative council declares that the preparation of a plan and the
means for its implementation, for the protection of lives and property in the
town from enemy attack, natural disaster or any other cause, is immediately
essential. The legislative council further finds that in times of emergencies
which may imperil the safety of the inhabitants of the town, or their
property, it becomes necessary to effectuate and place into operation the
plans and preparations with a minimum of delay. The legislative council
finds, therefore, that preparation and adoption, of such plans, to be fully
publicized, are now imperative.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.02  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.



   (A)   "Civil emergency." Civil emergency and civil preparedness
shall be synonymous with the term "civil defense emergency" as used in any
ordinance, statute or law.



   (B)   "Civil preparedness." Shall be synonymous with the term "civil
defense" as used in any ordinance, statute or law.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.03  Mayor's authority.



   The mayor is directed, authorized and empowered to do any and all
things necessary to cooperate with the governor of the state, the state civil
preparedness director or his agents, the mayors, first selectmen, chief
executive officers or civil preparedness directors of other communities
within the state and with the government of the United States and of this
state in carrying out any and all orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated by the government of the United States or this state pursuant to
the provisions of federal or state civil preparedness acts.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.04  Orders, rules and regulations.



   (A)   The mayor, or his duly authorized representative or
representatives, are authorized to promulgate orders, rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter in the
furtherance of the civil preparedness plan and program and to protect life
and property. All orders, rules and regulations shall be in writing and shall
be available for public inspection at the place and during the hours
specified by the mayor.



   (B)   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supercede
all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.05  Responsibility of director of civil preparedness.



   The director of civil preparedness shall be responsible for the
organization, administration and operation of the civil preparedness
organization within the town, subject to the direction and control of the
mayor. The director shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor, and may
be removed by the state director of civil preparedness for cause.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.06  Duties of director.



   The director of civil preparedness shall have the following duties,
responsibilities and powers:



   (A)   He may, with the consent of the mayor, represent the town on
any regional or state organization for civil preparedness.



   (B)   He may make studies and surveys of the manpower, industries,
resources, and facilities of the town to ascertain the capabilities of the
town for civil preparedness and to plan for their most efficient use in time
of emergency.



   (C)   He shall prepare a comprehensive plan and program for the
civil preparedness of the town and shall present the plan and program to the
mayor for his approval. When the mayor shall approve the plan, it shall be
the duty of all municipal agencies and all civil preparedness forces in the
town to carry out the duties and functions assigned by the plan and program
as approved. The plan and program may, from time to time, be modified in like
manner.



   (D)   In accordance with the civil preparedness plan and program,
the director shall institute the training programs and public information
programs and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or
full mobilization of civil preparedness forces in advance of actual disaster,
as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the town civil
preparedness plan in time of emergency. He may, from time to time, conduct
practice (air-raid) alerts or other civil preparedness exercises as he may
deem necessary.



   (E)   The director may organize and recruit personnel and services
as are needed in carrying out the civil preparedness plans and programs of
the city, the state, and the United States, except where the responsibility
for recruiting and organizing specific personnel or services is lodged by law
in some other official or body.



   (F)   The director shall do all other acts not inconsistent with law
which may be required of him for the furtherance of civil preparedness
activities.



   (G)   The director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations
that may from time to time be issued by the state director of civil
preparedness, the federal government, or any of its agencies.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.07  Mayor's duties.



   The mayor shall have the following duties, responsibilities and powers:



   (A)   He may remove or suspend the director of civil preparedness or
any officer, member, employee or agent of the office of civil preparedness,
or of any emergency or volunteer service organized by the office, subject to
any applicable civil service laws or regulations.



   (B)   In the event of a major disaster caused by, among other
things, enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, storm, riot, fire,
flood or other causes or in the event of the imminence thereof, the mayor may
declare that a state of civil preparedness emergency exists, in which he may
personally, or through his duly authorized representative or representatives,
take direct operational control of any or all parts of the civil preparedness
forces and functions in the town.



   (C)   Upon the declaration, the provisions of this paragraph (C)
shall immediately become effective and shall continue in effect until the end
of the civil preparedness emergency has been declared:



      (1)   The mayor may order into action all or any part of the
civil preparedness forces of the town.



      (2)   The mayor may designate the vehicles and persons as
shall be permitted to move and the routes which they shall follow, or routes
which shall be closed to movement.



      (3)   The mayor shall take appropriate measures for the
protection of the health and safety of any and all persons including inmates
of any institutions within the town and children in the schools.



      (4)   The mayor may order the evacuation of all or part of the
population of stricken or threatened areas and may take these steps as are
necessary for the receipt and care of the evacuees and as are necessary to
protect life and property in or related to any stricken or threatened areas.



      (5)   The mayor may take other steps as are reasonably
necessary in the light of the emergency to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the people of the town, and to minimize the effects of actual or
imminent disasters, due to hostile action or natural causes.



   (D)   Upon declaration of a civil preparedness emergency, the mayor
is authorized to expend such monies as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. The mayor shall submit to the legislative
council, as soon as practical, a detailed report of amounts so expended.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.08  When state of civil preparedness ceases to exist.



   A state of civil preparedness emergency shall cease to exist upon
declaration by the mayor to that effect, or by vote of a 2/3 majority of the
entire legislative council, at a regular or special meeting of that body.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



§ 34.09  Violation prohibited.



   No person shall violate any provisions of this chapter or any order,
rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74) Penalty, see § 34.99



§ 34.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of § 34.09 shall be fined not more than
$100.



(Ord. 119, passed 6-3-74)



CHAPTER 35:  OTHER OFFICIALS



Section



Policemen: Liability of Town



   35.01   When town liable for acts of policemen



   35.02   When action may be instituted



   35.03   Time limitation on instituting; notice required



Sealer of Weights and Measures



   35.05   Appointed and duties



Justices of the Peace



   35.10   Number allowed



Constables



   35.15   Election; term of offices



Town Attorney



   35.20   Limitations on authority to compromise and settle claims
against the town



POLICEMEN:  LIABILITY OF TOWN



§ 35.01  WHEN TOWN LIABLE FOR ACTS OF POLICEMAN.



   The town, notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, general,
special or local, shall, upon the adoption of §§ 35.01 to 35.03, inclusive,
pay on behalf of any duly appointed policeman of the town all sums which the
duly appointed policeman shall become obligated to pay by reason of the
liability imposed upon the duly appointed policeman by law for damages to
person or property, provided the duly appointed policeman, at the time of the
occurrence, accident, injury or damage complained of, was acting in the
performance of his duties and within the scope of his employment in the
discharge  of a duty imposed by law upon the duly appointed policeman of the
town, and provided the occurrence, accident, injury or damage was not the
result of any willful or wanton act of the duly appointed policeman in the
discharge of his duty.



('66 Code, § 50-1)



Cross-reference:



   See Charter, Ch. X



§ 35.02  WHEN ACTION MAY BE INSTITUTED.



   No action or proceeding instituted pursuant to the provision of §
35.01 hereof shall be prosecuted or maintained against the town or duly
appointed policeman unless at least 30 days have elapsed since the demand,
claim or claim upon which the action or special proceedings is founded were
presented to the clerk of the legislative council.



('66 Code, § 50-2)



§ 35.03  TIME LIMITATION ON INSTITUTING; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   No action for personal injuries or damages to real or personal property
shall be maintained against the town or any duly appointed policeman thereof,
unless:



   (A)   The action is commenced within one year after the cause of
action therefor has arisen; or



   (B)   Notice of the intention to commence the action and of the time
when and the place where the damages were incurred or sustained has been
filed with the clerk of the legislative council and with the policeman
concerned within six months after the cause of action has accrued.



('66 Code, § 50-3)



SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES



§ 35.05  APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.



   There shall be appointed in the town a sealer of weights and measures
whose duty it shall be to conduct the affairs of his office in accordance
with the statutes in the case made and provided.



('66 Code, § 54-1)



Statutory-reference:



   Municipal sealer of weights and measures, Conn. Gen. Stat. Ch. 750 §
43-6



JUSTICES OF THE PEACE



§ 35.10  NUMBER ALLOWED.



   Until further action by the legislative authority of this town, the
number of justices of the peace for this town shall be and the same is fixed
at 81.



('66 Code, § 34-1) (Am. Ord. 365, passed 5-6-96; Am. Ord. 502, passed 4-7-04)



CONSTABLES



§ 35.15  ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The mayor shall appoint, and may remove, all constables for the town.
The appointments shall consist of 7 resident electors of the town, no more
than 4 of whom shall be from the same political party.  The appointments
shall be made after the town election of 1979, and biennially thereafter. The
terms of the appointed constables shall expire at 12 noon on the last Sunday
of November, 1981, and biennially thereafter.



(Ord. 173, passed 8-7-78)



TOWN ATTORNEY



§ 35.20  LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY TO COMPROMISE AND SETTLE CLAIMS AGAINST
THE TOWN.



   (A)   The Town Attorney shall have authority to compromise and
settle any claim against the town only to the extent that such settlement
involves money damages under $2,000.



   (B)   The Town Attorney shall not have any authority to compromise
and settle any claims against the town for an amount in excess of $2,000
without such settlement first being submitted to and approved by a Settlement
Committee of the Legislative Council.



   (C)   The Settlement Committee of the Legislative Council shall be
comprised of five Councilmembers selected by the President of the Council, no
more than three of which may be of the same political party.



   (D)   The Town Attorney shall not have authority to compromise and
settle any claim by the town against any party for any amount of money
damages without such settlement first being submitted to and approved by a
Settlement Committee of the Legislative Council.



   (E)   The Town Attorney shall not have authority to compromise and
settle any claim by or against the town, which settlement involves any action
and/or commitment on the part of the town, other than the payment or
acceptance of money damages without such settlement first being submitted to
and approved by a Settlement Committee of the Legislative Council, and if so
approved, then without such settlement also being submitted to and approved
by the full Legislative Council. It is the intention of this section to
specifically preclude the Town Attorney from entering into any settlements
which include, within their provisions, the promotion of town employees, the
awarding of contracts with the town, any apologies to the other party, or the
commitment by the town to take any action other than paying or receiving
money damages as limited above, without prior Legislative Council approval.



   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall preclude the Settlement
Committee or the full Legislative Council from considering in executive
session any matter within the purview of this subchapter, whenever such
executive session is appropriate under the Connecticut Freedom of Information
Act.



   (G)   The term "SETTLEMENT" as used in this subchapter shall include
the Town Attorney's agreement to a stipulated judgment, to be submitted to
the court or the Town Attorney's confession of judgment or failure to contest
any matter which allows for the entry of judgment against the town.



(Ord. 388, passed 4-5-99)



Cross-reference:



   Town Attorney, see Charter, Chapter VI



CHAPTER 36:  MISCELLANEOUS



Section



Bonds



   36.01   [Reserved]



   36.02   [Reserved]



   36.03   Approval by Legislative Council required



Purchasing Procedures



   36.10   Purchase of supplies, materials, etc.



   36.11   Requisition to bear written approval



   36.12   Expenditures



   36.13   Exemptions



   36.14   Competitive bidding may be waived



   36.15   Record to be kept



   36.16   Emergency purchases by purchasing agent



   36.17   Emergency purchases by other than purchasing agent



   36.18   Definitions



   36.19   Cooperative purchasing plans



   36.20   Control of warehouse or stockroom



   36.21   Issuance of rules and regulations



Greater New Haven Transit District



   36.25   Intent; legislative authority



   36.26   Powers



   36.27   Board of directors



   36.28   Period of effectiveness; withdrawal from district



   36.29   Obligations or commitments by town



Probate Court



   36.35   Established



Lost Property



   36.40   Statutory provisions relative to lost property adopted



Exemptions from Property Tax



   36.45   Exemption for totally disabled persons



   36.46   Exemption for motor vehicles specially equipped for disabled
veterans



   36.47   Exemption for blind persons



   36.48   Exemption for veterans and spouses



   36.49   Exemption for certain ambulance-type motor vehicles and
property owned by a nonprofit ambulance company



   36.50   Exemption of property acquired by religious organizations



   36.51     Exemption for properties using alternative sources of
energy



   36.52     Waiver of property tax under five



Commission on Disabilities



   36.60   Title



   36.61   Definitions



   36.62   Findings



   36.63   Establishment of Commission



   36.64   Commission's organization



   36.65   Powers and duties



   36.66   Personnel and services authorized by Commission



Schedule of Fees



   36.80   Fees for engineering services



BONDS



§ 36.01  [RESERVED].



§ 36.02  [RESERVED].



§ 36.03  APPROVAL BY LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL REQUIRED.



   The bonds of the town shall not be issued unless approved by ordinance
of the Legislative Council.



('66 Code, § 77-3) (Am. Ord. 476, passed 10-7-02)



PURCHASING PROCEDURES



§ 36.10  PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, ETC.



   The purchasing agent shall purchase all supplies, material, equipment,
goods and contractual services required by any department, office or agency
of the town government, except that he/she will not purchase books,
publications, subscriptions for periodical literature or non-print materials
in the library collections of the board of education or the library board.
All purchases for equipment and materials used for classroom, instructional,
or library collections use, other than books, publications or subscriptions
for periodical literature, are to be purchased in accordance with the
specifications furnished by the superintendent of schools or his/her duly
appointed agent, or the town librarian or his/her duly appointed agent.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.11  REQUISITION TO BEAR WRITTEN APPROVAL.



   No request or requisition for any purchase forwarded to the purchasing
agent for action shall be valid unless it bears the written or electronic
approval of the head of the department, office, or agency, or his/her
previously designated agent.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.12  EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   Transactions from $0.01 to $2,500.00 shall be awarded
prudently on the basis of the best value, using known and reliable sources of
supply. Requests for expenditures under this section along with the
justification shall be forwarded by the department head or his/her designee
to the purchasing agent for review and approval.



   (B)   Transactions from $2,500.01 to $10,000.00 shall be awarded to
the most “qualified” vendor based on results of three or more electronic
or written quotations. Requests for expenditures under this section along
with the justification shall be forwarded by the department head or his/her
designee to the purchasing agent for review and approval.



   (C)   Transactions of $10,000.01 or more shall be awarded on the
results of formal bid procedures, except as provided herein. The purchasing
agent shall invite sealed bids or request for proposals through the town’s
website and other notification tools, which may include the State of
Connecticut or other procurement websites, giving at least ten days’ notice
thereof from the posting or advertising date and shall contain a statement
reserving the right to reject all bids or proposals. The purchasing agent
shall award the contract or make the purchase from the lowest qualified
bidder for a bid; for proposals, to the bidder deemed to be in the best
interest of the town; or may reject all bids or proposals subject to the best
interests of the town. If there are two or more responsible bids or proposals
which are equal in price and specifications, the award is to be made on the
basis of the following criteria:



      (1)   Past performance.



      (2)   Priority to town vendors.



      (3)   When divisions (C)(1) and (2) have not resolved the
equality, or when application of one or more than one town vendor is
involved, the purchasing agent shall award the contract or make the purchase
by drawing of lots in public, to which drawing the vendors shall be invited.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.13  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.



   (A)   Local suppliers.  Where practicable and beneficial to the
operations of the town, the purchasing agent may assign up to $10,000
annually, contracts for goods (only) required for the day-to-day maintenance
and repair of the town (and school facilities) to suppliers located within or
near the town’s geographical area. The purchasing agent will annually
request and keep on file price/discount structures from critical suppliers
and will work with operations personnel to ensure all goods are procured on
the basis of a best value proposition.



   (B)   Sole source.  Where beneficial to the town, the purchasing
agent may purchase on the basis of best value, without publicly bidding,
goods and services from suppliers who are the sole source of copyrighted,
patented and/or specialized equipment or services; library/
educational/curriculum materials and/or textbooks; and utilities. In each
case, the purchasing agent may waive the requirement to obtain competitive
quotes or bids upon receipt and review of sole source documents which shall
be kept on file for examination and audit, confirming the exclusivity of the
goods and an explanation/calculation of the best value proposition. For
purposes of this chapter, “SOLE SOURCE” shall mean one source of supply
deemed acceptable or capable of meeting the specifications for a product or
service and shall be qualified with a sole source justification document to
the purchasing agent.



   (C)   Consortiums.  Where beneficial to the town, the purchasing
agent may purchase goods and services through any and all state or federal
purchasing strategies or produce confirmation the supplier holds a contract
awarded by the U.S. Government Services Administration (GSA) to document the
federal government has conducted a public bidding process, or purchase from
contracts publicly bid by a consortium. In each case, the purchasing agent
may waive the requirement to obtain competitive bids or quotes upon receipt
and review of documents, which shall be kept on file for examination and
audit, confirming the explanation/calculation of the best-value proposition.



   (D)   State bids.  Where beneficial to the town, the purchasing
agent may purchase goods and services from the State Bid List.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.14  COMPETITIVE BIDDING MAY BE WAIVED.



   (A)   Competitive bidding may be waived by the purchasing agent,
upon the written approval of the Director of Finance and the Mayor, and
negotiations may be utilized in the following circumstances.



      (1)   Emergency requirements as per §§ 36.16 to 36.18,
inclusive.



      (2)   Management or consulting services, and those services
requiring special or unique skills.



      (3)   Service, repair or maintenance of equipment normally
handled by the manufacturer and/or his/her authorized dealer of the equipment.



      (4)   In those circumstances where uniformity or consistency
with goods or equipment already owned by the town is deemed to be of
substantial importance.



      (5)   When purchasing goods or services which are not
generally competitive as to price or because of lack of availability.



   (B)   Copies of all quote waivers between the sum of $2,500.01 and
$10,000.00 shall be sent to the Legislative Council upon receipt by the
Director of Finance on a semi-annual basis.



   (C)   Notwithstanding provisions (A)(1) through (A)(5), above, any
bid waiver over the sum of $10,000.00 must receive the approval of the
majority vote of the Legislative Council, present and voting.



   (D)   All waivers of bid shall contain a statement of the reasons
therefor and shall be kept on file in the office of the purchasing agent.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.15  RECORD TO BE KEPT.



   The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open-market orders and
the bids submitted in competition thereon, and the records shall be open for
public inspection.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.16  EMERGENCY PURCHASES BY PURCHASING AGENT.



   In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate acquisition
of supplies or contractual services, the Mayor may authorize the purchasing
agent to secure, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual
services. A written report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase
shall be filed with the Mayor and the Legislative Council by the purchasing
agent and shall be open for public inspection.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.17  EMERGENCY PURCHASE BY OTHER THAN PURCHASING AGENT.



   In case of actual emergency, the head of any using department, office
or agency may purchase directly any supplies or contractual service whose
immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using
agency which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of citizens.
The department head shall file with the purchasing, not later than the next
business day, a requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together with
a written report of the circumstances of the emergency, and shall file a copy
of the report with the Mayor and the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.18  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “BEST VALUE.” A function/service comparison performed with cost,
quality and availability variables among others; obtaining the best possible
products/services at the lowest possible cost.



   “BEST VALUE PROPOSITION.” A function/service comparison performed
with cost, quality and availability variables among other criteria; obtaining
the best possible products/services considering any intangible or other
benefits that may not necessarily represent the lowest possible cost, but
overall better value perceived.



   “FORMAL BID PROCEDURE.”



      (1)   “INTENT TO BID.” The offer of a supplier (bidder) to
provide specific goods and/or services in accordance with all specifications
and conditions indicated in a solicitation. The purchasing agent shall award
the contract or make the purchase from the lowest qualified bidder.



      (2)   “REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL (RFP).” A document used to
solicit proposal to accomplish a specified scope of work. Negotiations may be
conducted after evaluation of all offers. The purchasing agent shall award
the contract or make the purchase deemed to be in the best interest of the
town.



   “GSA.” General Services Administration, which is the acquisition
and procurement agency for the government of the United States; it contracts
for all goods, services and real property required by the operation of the
civilian federal government.



   “LOWEST QUALIFIED BIDDER.” A supplier who has the capacity and
capability to provide goods/services in conformance with the specifications
at the lowest cost.



   "MRO." Maintenance, repair and operation.



   “SOLE SOURCE.” One, and only one, source of supply deemed
acceptable or capable of meeting the specification for a product/service
qualified with a sole source justification document to the purchasing agent.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.19  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING PLANS.



   The purchasing agent may join with other towns or other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans and consortiums on an equitable
basis in large bulk purchasing, in the best interests of the town.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.20  CONTROL OF WAREHOUSE OR STOCKROOM.



   Should any central warehouse or stockroom be established for the use of
the agencies, departments or offices of the town the facility shall be under
the control of the purchasing agent and he/she shall be empowered to
promulgate rules and regulations for its proper functioning. For purposes of
this section the Board of Education shall be deemed an agency of the town.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



§ 36.21  ISSUANCE OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The purchasing agent is empowered to issue rules and regulations to
assure the proper and efficient implementation of §§ 36.10 to 36.21,
inclusive. All such regulations shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor
and the Director of Finance.



(Ord. 645, passed 1-6-14)



GREATER NEW HAVEN TRANSIT DISTRICT



§ 36.25  INTENT; LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.



   The town desires to join a transit district known as the Greater New
Haven Transit District established by ordinance of the City of New Haven
pursuant to the authority provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 103a, for the
formation of such districts.



(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)



§ 36.26  POWERS.



   Except as otherwise limited by §§ 36.25 to 36.29, inclusive, the
Greater New Haven Transit District shall have all the powers provided in
Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 103a, for transit districts established thereunder.



(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)



§ 36.27  BOARD OF DIRECTORS.



   The affairs of the district shall be managed by a board of directors
chosen from among the electors of the constituent municipalities, the
membership of the board of directors to be constituted as set forth in Conn.
Gen. Stat., Ch. 103a, or such other general or special act regarding
representation on the board of directors of a transit district. The persons
to serve as Hamden's representatives on the board of directors of the
district shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by a majority
vote of the legislative council.



(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)



§ 36.28  PERIOD OF EFFECTIVENESS; WITHDRAWAL FROM DISTRICT.



   Sections 36.25 to 36.29, inclusive, shall continue in force for a
period of 24 months from passage, but may be continued thereafter by further
affirmative vote of the legislative council; provided, however, that the
legislative council may vote the withdrawal prior to the termination of the
24 months. The legislative council specifically reserves the right to
withdraw from the transit district whenever, by curtailment of service or
otherwise, the transit district, in the opinion of a majority of the
legislative council then voting, ceases to adequately provide public bus
service within the town.



(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)



§ 36.29  OBLIGATIONS OR COMMITMENTS BY TOWN.



   Relying upon the representations of the governor of this state, the
town does not assume and shall not be bound to any obligation or commitment
of any nature by reason of the creation or operation of the transit district,
without prior action by the legislative council in accordance with the
appropriation provisions of the town charter.



(Ord. 108, passed 3-20-73)



PROBATE COURT



§ 36.35  ESTABLISHED.



   The town shall, on and after the Wednesday following the first Monday
of January 1947, constitute a probate district by the name of the probate
district of Hamden. In 1946, and qua drennially thereafter, a judge of
probate for the district shall be elected, at the time and in the manner
provided by law for the election of judges of probate. From and after the
Wednesday following the first Monday of January 1947, the probate court for
the district of Hamden shall have jurisdiction of all probate business
arising in the town, but all business previously entered or begun in the
probate court for the district of New Haven shall be completed in the same
manner as if this section had not been passed.



('66 Code, § 85-1)



LOST PROPERTY



§ 36.40  STATUTORY PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO LOST PROPERTY ADOPTED.



   Pursuant to the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 50-9, the town
adopts the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 50-10 to 50-14, inclusive.



('68 Code, § 38-1)



EXEMPTIONS FROM PROPERTY TAX



§ 36.45  EXEMPTION FOR TOTALLY DISABLED PERSONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an additional
exemption for persons totally disabled and eligible for exemption under Conn.
Gen. Stat. § 12-81i subject to the income requirements as stated herein.



   (B)   Exemption. Any person entitled to the exemption from property
tax applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of 
$1,000, as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(55), shall be entitled to
an additional exemption from such tax in an amount up to $1,000 of such
assessed value, provided such person's qualifying income does not exceed the
applicable maximum amount as provided under section Conn. Gen. Stat. §
12-81l.



   (C)   Application for exemption. Any person submitting a claim for
the additional exemption as provided under division (B) of this section,
shall be required to file an application on a form prepared for such purpose
by the Assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with respect
to which such additional exemption is claimed, provided when an applicant has
filed for such exemption and received approval for the first time, such
applicant shall be required to file for such exemption biannually thereafter.
Each application shall include a copy of such person's federal income tax
return, or in the event a return is not filed, such evidence related to
income as may be required by the Assessor, for the tax year of such person
ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to with such
additional exemption is claimed.



(Ord. 287, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 632, passed 6-3-13)



§ 36.46  EXEMPTION FOR MOTOR VEHICLES SPECIALLY EQUIPPED FOR DISABLED
VETERANS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an exemption
applicable to the assessed value of a motor vehicle specifically equipped for
disabled veterans eligible for exemption.



   (B)   Exemption. There shall be an exemption from property tax of
100% of assessed value of any one motor vehicle owned by such veteran with a
condition of a disability enabling such veteran to qualify for the exemption
from property tax currently allowed under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(20) and
(21), provided such motor vehicle must be specially equipped for purposes of
adapting its use to the disability of such veteran.



   (C)   Applications for such exemptions shall be filed with the Chief
Assessor in such a manner and requiring such information as required by the
Chief Assessor, not later than November 1 following the assessment date with
respect to which such exemption is claimed, or for vehicles purchased on or
after September 1 and on or before July 31 of the assessment year for which
such assessment is requested, not later than 60 days after such purchase.
Reapplication for the same vehicle shall not be required.



   (D)   Medical documentation. The Chief Assessor may require medical
documentation verifying that the modifications to the vehicle are directly
related to the medical incapacity or the physical disability of the
individual seeking such exemption. Exemptions shall expire when the vehicle
is sold.



(Ord. 288, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 633, passed 6-3-13)



§ 36.47  EXEMPTION FOR BLIND PERSONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow an additional
exemption for blind persons eligible for exemption under Conn. Gen. Stat. §
12-81j, subject to certain income requirements.



   (B)   Exemption. Any person entitled to an exemption from property
tax applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of 
$3,000, as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-81(17) and (18), shall be
entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in an amount up to $2,000
of such assessed value, provided such person's qualifying income does not
exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under section 12-81l.



   (C)   Application procedure. Any person submitting a claim for the
additional exemption as provided for above, shall be required to submit an
application on a form prepared for such purpose by the Assessor, not later
than the date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional
exemption is claimed, provided when an applicant has filed for such exemption
and received approval for the first time, such applicant shall be required to
file for such exemption biannually thereafter. Each such application shall
include a copy of such person's federal income tax return, or in the event a
return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by
the Assessor for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to the
approval of a claim for such additional exemption.



(Ord. 289, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 634, passed 6-3-13)



§ 36.48  EXEMPTION FOR VETERANS AND SPOUSES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an
additional exemption for veterans and veteran's surviving spouses entitled to
an exemption from property taxes in accordance with Public Act 16-191,
subject to the income requirements contained herein. Any veteran or any
veteran's surviving spouse shall be entitled to receive one additional
exemption § 36.48 for any applicable grand list year.



   (B)   Exemption for veteran.



      (1)   Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax
in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(19) and whose qualifying income
does not exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-81l, as may be amended from time to time, by more than $25,000,
shall be entitled to an additional exemption of $15,000. The exemption
provided under this subsection shall be applied to the assessed value of an
eligible veteran's property.



      (2)   Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax
in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(20) and whose qualifying income
does not exceed the applicable maximum amount as provided under Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-81l, as may be amended from time to time, by more than $25,000
shall be entitled to an additional exemption of $15,000. The exemption
provided under this subsection shall be applied to the assessed value of an
eligible veteran's property.



   (C)   Exemption for veteran's surviving spouse. Any veteran's
surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance
with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(22) and whose qualifying income does not
exceed the applicable maximum amount applicable to an unmarried person as
provided under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81l, as may be amended from time to
time, by more than $25,000 shall be entitled to an additional exemption of
$15,000. The exemption provided under this subsection shall be applied to the
assessed value of an eligible surviving spouse's property.



   (D)   Application procedure.



      (1)   Any such veteran or veteran's surviving spouse
submitting an application for such additional exemption on the grant list of
October 1, 2017, shall make application on a form prepared by the assessor in
the office of the Assessor on or before October 1, 2017. New applications in
succeeding years shall be made in the office of the assessor, on or before
October 1 of such tax year.



      (2)   An applicant, who has filed for such exemption and
received approval for the first time, shall be required to file for such
exemption biennially thereafter, subject to the provision of division (D)(1)
of this section.



      (3)   Each such application shall include a copy of such
veteran's or veteran's surviving spouse's federal income tax return, or in
the event such a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may
be required by the Assessor, for the tax year of such veteran or veteran's
surviving spouse ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect
to which such additional exemption is claimed.



      (4)   Any person who has submitted an application and been
approved in any year for the additional exemption under division (B) or (C)
of this section shall, in the year immediately following approval, be
presumed to be qualified for such exemption. During the year immediately
following such approval, the assessor shall notify, in writing, each person
presumed to be qualified pursuant to this section. If any such person has a
qualifying income in excess of the maximum allowed under either division (B)
or (C), such person shall notify the assessor on or before the next filing
date for such exemption and shall be denied such exemption for the assessment
year immediately following and for any subsequent year until such person has
reapplied and again qualified for such exemption. Any person who fails to
notify the assessor of such disqualification shall make payment to the town
in the amount of the property tax loss related to the exemption improperly
taken.



(Ord. 290, passed 4-24-89; Am. Ord. 560, passed 5-5-08; Am. Ord. 689, passed
9-18-17)



§ 36.49  EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN AMBULANCE-TYPE MOTOR VEHICLES AND PROPERTY
OWNED BY A NONPROFIT AMBULANCE COMPANY.



   (A)   Definitions.



      "AMBULANCE." A vehicle for transporting the sick and injured
which is equipped and staffed to provide medical care during transit, and
which is operating as an ambulance under the authority and in compliance with
promulgated regulations of the State of Connecticut, and registered as such
by the Department of Motor Vehicles.



      "AMBULANCE-TYPE VEHICLE" or "MOTOR VEHICLE OWNED BY A PERSON WITH
A DISABILITY." Any motor vehicle specifically equipped or modified in a
significant way for the purpose of transporting medically incapacitated or
disabled individuals, including but not limited to, the inclusion of lifts or
hand brakes, the equipping with stretchers, beds or other special seating and
equipment such as oxygen.



      "USED EXCLUSIVELY." The vehicle is used and devoted to the
transporting of medically incapacitated individuals.



   (B)   Exemption. There is hereby created, pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 12-81c, an exemption from personal property taxation for (1) any
ambulance-type vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose of
transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle
used to transport any individual for profit; (2) any property owned by a
non-profit ambulance company, and (3) any motor vehicle owned by a person
with disabilities, or owned by a parent or guardian of such person, which
vehicle is equipped for purposes of adapting its use to the disability of
such person.



   (C)    Application procedure. Applications for such exemption shall
be filed with the Assessor of the Town, in such manner and requiring such
information as required by the Assessor. Applications shall be filed no later
than the date of the assessment list with respect to which such exemption is
claimed, or for vehicles purchased after October 1 and on or before July 31
of the assessment year for which such exemption is requested, not later than
60 days after such purchase. Reapplication for the same vehicle shall not be
required.



(Ord. 376, passed 5-4-98; Am. Ord. 451, passed 11-5-01; Am. Ord. 635, passed
6-3-13)



§ 36.50  EXEMPTION OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)    Exemption. Any religious organization entitled to an
exemption from property tax, as provided under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(14)
and (15) shall be entitled to have its exemption effective as of the date of
the acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies.  Said
organization shall be entitled to a reimbursement of any tax paid by it for a
period subsequent to said date and for any tax paid by the prior owner for a
period subsequent to said date for which such organization reimbursed such
owner on the transfer of title to such property.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   Applications for exemptions shall be filed with the
Assessor on a form prepared for that purpose by the town's Assessor. Each
application shall include a copy of the organization's letter of
determination of exemption by the Internal Revenue Service for federal income
tax. The Assessor may require further documentation verifying that the
property has been used exclusively for its exempt tax purposes.



      (2)   The tax exemptions shall expire when the property is
sold or no longer used exclusively for tax-exempt purposes.



      (3)   Any religious organization submitting a claim for the
reimbursement of any tax paid by it or for any tax paid by the prior owner
for which the organization reimbursed the owner on the transfer of title to
the property, shall file an application, on a form prepared for that purpose
by the town's Tax Collector.



   (C)   This section shall be applicable with respect to the
assessment year which commenced on October 1, 2001.



(Ord. 309, passed 5-7-90; Am. Ord. 449, passed 11-5-01)



§ 36.51  EXEMPTION FOR PROPERTIES USING ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF ENERGY.



   (A)   The following property in the Town of Hamden is exempt from
taxation in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(56):



      (1)   Any building, the construction of which is commenced on
or after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 2006, which is equipped with
an active solar energy heating or cooling system, or any building to which a
solar energy heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976,
and before October 1, 2006, to the extent of the amount by which the assessed
valuation of such real property equipped with such solar heating or cooling
system exceeds the assessed valuation of such real property equipped with the
conventional portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any
portion of such system related to solar energy, provided this exemption shall
only apply to the first 15 assessment years following construction of such
building or addition of any such system to a building;



      (2)   As used in this division, “active solar energy heating
or cooling system” means equipment which (1) provides for the collection,
transfer, storage and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space
heating or cooling which absent such solar energy system would require a
conventional energy resource, such as petroleum products, natural gas or
electricity; (2) employs mechanical means such as fans or pumps to transfer
energy; and (3) meets standards established by regulation, in accordance with
the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., Chapter 54, by the Secretary of the
Office of Policy and Management;



      (3)   Any person claiming the exemption provided in this
division for any assessment year shall, on or before the first day of
November in such assessment year, file with the Assessor in which such real
property is located written application claiming such exemption. Failure to
file such application in the manner and form as provided by such Assessor
within the time limit prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to
such exemption for such assessment year. Such application shall not be
required for any assessment year following that for which the initial
application is filed, provided if such solar energy heating or cooling system
is altered in a manner which would require a building permit, such alteration
shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such exemption until a new
application, applicable with respect to such altered system, is filed and the
right to such exemption is established as required initially;



   (B)   The following property in the Town of Hamden is exempt from
taxation in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(57):



      (1)   Any Class I renewable energy source, as defined in Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 16-1, or any hydropower facility described in division (27) of
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 16-1 of the Code, installed for the generation of
electricity for private residential use, provided such installation occurs on
or after October 1, 1977, and further provided such installation is for a
single family dwelling or multifamily dwelling consisting of two to four
units.



      (2)   Any person claiming the exemption provided in this
division for any assessment year shall, on or before the first day of
November in such assessment year, file with the Assessor in the town in which
such Class I renewable energy source is located, written application claiming
such exemption. Failure to file such application in the manner and form as
provided by such assessor or board within the time limit prescribed shall
constitute a waiver of the right to such exemption for such assessment year.
Such application shall not be required for any assessment year following that
for which the initial application is filed, provided if such Class I
renewable energy source is altered in a manner which would require a building
permit, such alteration shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such
exemption until a new application, applicable with respect to such altered
source, is filed and the right to such exemption is established as required
initially.



      (3)   For assessment years commencing on or after October 1,
2013, 100% of the real property tax for the Class I renewable energy source
as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 16-1 of the Code, hydropower facility
described in division (27)(a) of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 16-1 of the Code, or
solar thermal or geothermal renewable energy source, installed for generation
or displacement of energy located at 100 Overlook Drive, Hamden, CT 06514 and
owned by SJBSKB, LLC shall be abated, provided (1) such installation occurs
on or before December 31, 2013; (2) such installation is for commercial or
industrial purposes; and (3) the nameplate capacity of such source or
facility does not exceed the load for the location where such generation or
displacement is located.



   (C)   The following property in the Town of Hamden is exempt from
taxation in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(63):



      (1)   The cogeneration system, owned by UTC Power and used by
the Hamden Board of Education, which shall be installed at Hamden High
School, 2040 Dixwell Avenue, Hamden, CT as more particularly described in
Appendix A, attached hereto and made a part of this section. Such system
shall be exempt from taxation for 15 assessment years following the
installation of a system.



      (2)   As used in this division, “cogeneration system”
means equipment which is designed, operated and installed as a system which
produces, in the same process, electricity and exhaust steam, waste steam,
heat or other resultant thermal energy which is used for space or water
heating or cooling, industrial, commercial, manufacturing or other useful
purposes and which meets standards established by regulation, in accordance
with the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., Chapter 54, by the Secretary of the
Office of Policy and Management.



      (3)   The applicant requesting this exemption shall, on or
before the first day of November in such assessment year, file with the
Assessor in the town in which such the system is located written application
claiming the exemption. Failure to file the application in the manner and
form as provided by such Assessor within the time limit prescribed shall
constitute a waiver of the right to the exemption for such assessment year.
Such application shall not be required for any assessment year following that
for which the initial application is filed, provided if such solar energy
electricity generating system or cogeneration system is altered in a manner
which would require a building permit, such alteration shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to such exemption until a new application, applicable
with respect to such altered system, is filed and the right to such exemption
is established as required initially.



(Am. Ord. 532, passed 10-31-05; Am. Ord. 608, passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. 641,
passed 10-7-13)



§ 36.52  WAIVER OF PROPERTY TAX UNDER FIVE DOLLARS.



   Any property tax due to the Town of Hamden in an amount less than $5.00
shall be waived as provided by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 12-144c.



(Ord. 616, passed 5-7-12)



COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES



§ 36.60  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Commission on Disabilities.



(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)



§ 36.61  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "COMMISSION."  The Commission on Disabilities of the town.



   "DISABILITY."  Any condition or characteristic that renders a person a
"PERSON WITH DISABILITIES" as defined below.



   "PERSON WITH DISABILITIES."  Any person who has a physical or mental
impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, has
a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an
impairment.  As used herein:



      (a)   Physical or mental impairment means any physiological
disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting
one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal;
special sense organs; respiratory; including speech organs; cardiovascular;
reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and
endocrine; or any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and
specific learning disabilities.  This term includes, but is not limited to,
however, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple
sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional
illness, drug addiction and alcoholism.



      (b)   Major life activities means functions such as caring for
one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning, and working.



      (c)   Has a record of such an impairment means has a history
of, or has been misclassified as having a mental or physical impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities.



      (d)   Is regarded as having an impairment means has a physical
or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities,
but that is treated by the commission as constituting such a limitation; or
has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life
activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment.



(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)



§ 36.62  FINDINGS.



   (A)   Persons with disabilities have for some time been subjected to
varying levels of societal indifference and neglect.  These conditions have
resulted in limiting the rights and participation of persons with
disabilities or have otherwise restricted their opportunities for employment,
education, and community services.  Government at all levels is finally
recognizing the needs of persons with disabilities.  These needs have begun
to be addressed by legislation, programs, and various forms of assistance. 
The responsibility of local government as well as various community
institutions and organizations is responding to the needs of persons with
disabilities is broad and encompassing.



   (B)   Therefore, it is essential that official local action be taken
to promote the effective marshaling of resources and to constructively
respond to the needs of persons with disabilities.



(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)



§ 36.63  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Commission on Disability Rights
and Opportunities, consisting of nine members appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of the Legislative Council. Commission members shall serve
without compensation and shall reside in the town. Commission members may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incurred. Membership on the Commission shall
include:



      (1)   Three person with disabilities who are town residents.



      (2)   Two town residents who are either relatives of a person
with disabilities or citizens active in the disabled community.



      (3)   Two representatives of disabled service agencies, who
are town residents.



      (4)   Two additional representatives from the community at
large.



   (B)   Of the nine members first appointed, three Commissioners shall
be appointed for a term of three years, three Commissioners shall be
appointed for a term of two years, three Commissioners shall be appointed for
a term of one year, and thereafter, Commissioners shall serve three-year
terms. However, in the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, the
successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term of the vacating
member.



   (C)   Upon the effective date of the amended ordinance, the current
members of the Commission shall continue to serve the remainder of their
unexpired terms. The new Commissioners shall thereafter be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative Council, for terms commencing
October 1, 2000.



(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92; Am. Ord. 420, passed 10-2-00)



§ 36.64  COMMISSION'S ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Commissioners shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and secretary from their membership.  The Commission may also organize
itself in whatever other manner it deems appropriate.  The Commission may
adopt such rules and regulations as it considers necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this subchapter.



   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)



§ 36.65  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall perform all duties necessary to effectuate this
subchapter, including the following:



   (A)   To seek to reduce both physical and attitudinal barriers
confronting persons with disabilities.



   (B)   To establish and maintain cooperative working relationships
with public and private agencies serving town people with disabilities.



   (C)   To study and investigate individual or community problems
which limit the rights of persons with disabilities or otherwise restrict
their opportunities in employment, housing, economic status, recreation,
education, health, transportation and similar pursuits.



   (D)   To issue reports and publications on its studies, research and
investigations to promote public awareness and understanding of disabled
problems and needs.



   (E)   To receive complaints and grievances of persons or groups with
disabilities.  The Commission may review, investigate, conciliate and/or
refer such complaints or grievances to appropriate town, state and federal
agencies or take other appropriate action within the scope of its powers.



   (F)   To work with federal, state, and local agencies as well as
private, civic, religious, business, industrial, labor and other
organizations, groups and persons to foster the development of programs and
services that address the needs of persons with disabilities and increase
opportunities and to enable persons with disabilities to live with maximum
independence and enhance to quality of life of persons with disabilities.



   (G)   To promote cooperative program planning and development among
service providers in order to improve and expand the delivery of services to
the town's disabled.



   (H)   To conduct public forums to ascertain the views of the
disabled in developing program objectives and setting service priorities to
address the needs of the disabled and to raise the public awareness of the
concerns of the disabled.



   (I)   To encourage the commitment of public and private resources to
meet the needs of persons with disabilities.



   (J)   To increase advocacy for the disabled.



   (K)   To monitor, assess, and conduct periodic evaluations of
programs and services funded through the town for their particular effect on
persons with disabilities.



   (L)   To establish policy and procedures for the department of
services for persons with disabilities.



   (M)   To offer policy recommendations to  the mayor and Legislative
Council and advise on matters which may strengthen the town's ability to
respond to the varied needs of persons with disabilities.



   (N)   The Commission shall submit an annual report of its activities
to the Mayor and the Legislative Council during the month of March.



(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)



§ 36.66  PERSONNEL AND SERVICES AUTHORIZED BY COMMISSION.



   Subject to the approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council, the
Commission may employ personnel and may contract for services in exercising
the power and duties enumerated in § 36.65.  The Commission shall have no
authority to incur any expenses  without the prior approval of the Mayor and
the Legislative Council.  The Commission shall have no fiscal authority.



(Ord. 323, passed 9-8-92)



SCHEDULE OF FEES



§ 36.80  FEES FOR ENGINEERING SERVICES.



   The following fee structure for services provided by the Engineering
Department shall be as follows:



 

Services
 
Fees




Photocopy
 
$    .50


Map copy
 
20.00


Street excavation permit (§ 97.01 (B))
 
 



Up to 200 square feet

 
95.00



Greater than 200 square feet/up to one block in length

 
150.00



Each additional block or part of an additional block

 
150.00


Sidewalk license (§ 96.05 (E))
 
100.00


Sidewalk permit (§ 96.01 (B))
 
50.00


GIS plot
 
 



8" x 5"

 
5.00



11" x 17"

 
10.00



24" x 36"

 
40.00


GIS shapefile, geodatabase, or other digital data (town-wide)
 
300.00




 



(Ord. 339, passed 9-7-93; Am. Ord. 459, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 592, passed
6-9-10)



CHAPTER 37: OTHER DEPARTMENTS



Section



   37.01   Establishment of Department of Arts and Culture



   37.02   Establishment of Department of Recreation



§ 37.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF ARTS AND CULTURE.



   The Department of Arts and Culture. The Department shall be responsible
for community arts and heritage programs and events in Hamden and such other
powers and duties as may be required by the General Statutes, the Charter,
the Code of Ordinances or Order or Motion of the Legislative Council.



   (A)   The Director of Arts and Culture. The Department Head shall be
the Director of Arts and Culture, who shall exercise the powers and duties of
the Department under the direction of the Mayor. The Director shall be
responsible for the supervision of members of the Department, and such other
powers and duties as may be required by the General Statutes, the Charter,
the Code of Ordinances or Order or Motion of the Legislative Council.



   (B)   Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Arts and
Culture as set forth in § 8-2.A of the Charter. The Director shall serve a
term coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the provisions
of §§ 3-10.A(2) and 8-2.B of the Charter and until a successor shall be
appointed and shall have qualified.



   (C)   Qualifications. The Director of Arts and Culture shall be
chosen on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications or
experience. Said qualifications shall be in accord with nationally accepted
professional standards and best practices in the applicable filed as
developed pursuant to § 8-2.F of the Charter.



   (D)   Appointment and removal of employees. Subject to the Merit
System, except as provided therein, the Director shall appoint and may remove
all other employees of the Department.



   (E)   Additional duties and responsibilities. The Director shall:



      (1)   Perform such other duties as the Mayor shall direct;



      (2)   Consult with any board or commission established to
address arts and culture;



      (3)   Prepare regulations for arts, culture and town events;
and



      (4)   Prepare budget for review and approval by any board or
commission established to address arts and culture; and



      (5)   Make recommendations for the fees to be charged for
events related to arts and culture.



(Ord. 685, passed 1-17-17)



§ 37.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION.



   The Department of Recreation. The Department shall be responsible for
recreational programing, camps and special events and such other powers and
duties as may be required by the General Statutes, the Charter, the Code of
Ordinances or Order or Motion of the Legislative Council.



   (A)   The Director of Recreation. The Department Head shall be the
Director of Recreation, who shall exercise the powers and duties of the
Department under the direction of the Mayor. The Director shall be
responsible for the supervision of members of the Department. The Director
shall be responsible for administrative oversight and management of
recreational programing, camps and special events.



   (B)   Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the Director of
Recreation as set forth in § 8-2.A of the Charter. The Director shall serve
a term coterminous with that of the appointing Mayor, subject to the
provisions of §§ 3-10.A(2) and 8-2.B of the Charter and until a successor
shall be appointed and shall have qualified.



   (C)   Qualifications. The Director of Recreation shall be chosen on
the basis of executive and administrative qualifications or experience. Said
qualifications shall be in accord with nationally accepted professional
standards and best practices in the applicable filed as developed pursuant to
§ 8-2.F of the Charter.



   (D)   Appointment and removal of employees. Subject to the Merit
System, except as provided therein, the Director shall appoint and may remove
all other employees of the Department.



   (E)   Additional duties and responsibilities. The Director shall:



      (1)   Perform such other duties as the Mayor shall direct;



      (2)   Consult with any board or commission established to
address recreation;



      (3)   Prepare regulations for recreation; and



      (4)   Make recommendations for the fees to be charged for
events related to recreation.



(Ord. 685, passed 1-17-17)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter



         50.   SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



         51.   SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM REGULATIONS



         52.   LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM



CHAPTER 50:  SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



Section



Sanitary Sewage Disposal Systems



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Approval of new construction; permit



   50.03   Approval of additions; permit



   50.04   Permits for septic tanks and cesspools



   50.05   Applications for permits; fees



   50.06   Final inspections



   50.07   Additional rules and regulations



   50.08   Violation prohibited



Private Sewage Disposal Systems



   50.10   House sewers



   50.11   Separating distances



   50.12   Septic tanks



   50.13   Distribution boxes



   50.14   Septic tank effluent



   50.15   Classification of soils



   50.16   Leaching area required



   50.17   Commercial buildings



   50.18   Privies



   50.19   Other discharges



   50.20   Nuisances



   50.21   Permits



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Sanitary sewerage system regulations, see Chapter 51



SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, and the rules and regulations of the
director of health, the words and phrases defined in Chapter 10 of this code
shall be applicable.



('66 Code, § 57-1)



§ 50.02  APPROVAL OF NEW CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be
constructed or commence the construction of any building which is not to be
connected with the sanitary sewerage system provided and maintained by this
town, unless and until plans for a sewage disposal system for the building
shall first have been approved by the director of health or an inspector duly
appointed by him, and a written permit issued by the director of health or
his duly appointed inspector for the construction of an individual sanitary
sewage disposal system for the building. 



('66 Code, § 57-2)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.03  APPROVAL OF ADDITIONS; PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or commence the
construction of any additional building or an addition to any existing
building on any lot which cannot be served by the sanitary sewerage system
provided and maintained by this town, unless and until plans for the location
of the addition are approved by the director of health or an inspector duly
appointed by him, and a written permit issued by the director of health or
his duly appointed inspector for the construction, certifying that the
proposed construction will:



   (A)   Not render the existing individual sanitary sewage disposal
system inadequate;



   (B)   Not interfere with the functioning, service or maintenance of
the existing individual sanitary sewage disposal system; and



   (C)   Not occupy an area which must necessarily be reserved for the
expansion of the present individual sanitary disposal system in order to
assure proper functioning of the system in the future.



('66 Code, § 57-3)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  PERMITS FOR SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS.



   Any person constructing, altering or repairing or causing to be
constructed, altered or repaired any septic tank or cesspool, or laying any
pipes connected with either, or causing the pipes to be laid, within the
limits of the town, shall first obtain a written permit from the director of
health or an inspector duly appointed by him. 



('66 Code, § 57-4)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.05  APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS; FEES.



   (A)   All applications for a permit required by the foregoing
sections shall be in writing and shall be made in the name of the owner of
the premises on which the work will be done, or his agent.  The application
shall contain information as may be required by the director of health on a
form provided by the director of health.  The specifications, construction
and materials used as set forth in the application shall comply with all
rules and regulations made by the director of health before the permit shall
be issued.



   (B)   The director of health may establish a permit fee in the sum
of $10 for each permit.  In addition, there shall be a soil test fee of $10
for each soil test conducted in each lot of a subdivision.



('66 Code, § 57-5; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78)



§ 50.06  FINAL INSPECTIONS.



   All individual sanitary sewage disposal systems constructed, altered,
or repaired pursuant to a duly issued permit shall be subject to a final
inspection by the director of health or his duly appointed inspector before
the systems are covered.



('66 Code, § 57-6)



§ 50.07  ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The director of health shall be authorized from time to time to make
additional or supplementary rules and regulations relating to the
construction, repair, or alteration of individual sanitary sewage disposal
systems or septic tanks, cesspools, and their connections as it may deem
necessary. 



('66 Code, § 57-7)



§ 50.08  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall violate any of the terms or conditions of §§ 50.01
through 50.08, nor shall any person violate or fail, neglect, or refuse to
comply with any regulation prescribed or order made by the director of
health. 



('66 Code, § 57-9)  Penalty, see § 50.99



PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS



§ 50.10  HOUSE SEWERS.



   House sewers shall not be less than 4 inches in diameter.  The grade
shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot for 4-inch sewers and shall not be less
than 1/8 inch per foot for larger sizes.  House sewers shall be laid with
tight joints to a septic tank in a straight line and on a uniform grade
except where accessible manholes or surface cleanouts are provided at changes
of direction or grade.  Pipe for the house sewers shall be of cast iron,
with leaded or equal joints, to a point at least 15 feet beyond the
foundation wall of any cellar or basement.  Portions of house sewers within
74 feet of a well shall be of cast iron with leaded or equal joints, but no
portion of the sewer, however constructed, shall be within 25 feet of a
well.  Greater separating distance may be required for wells with higher
rates of pumpage than for residential use.  No sewer shall be located within
25 feet of a cellar drain or ground or surface water drain unless the pipe is
of cast iron with leaded or equal joints.



('66 Code, § 57-11)



§ 50.11  SEPARATING DISTANCES.



   Minimum separating distances between any part of the sewage disposal
system and items listed below should be provided as follows:



   (A)   Well or spring.  Greater separating distance may be required
for wells with higher rates of pumpage than for residential use - 75 feet



   (B)   Human habitation other than building served - 50 feet



   (C)   Building served - 15 feet



   (D)   Tributary to a water supply or ground or surface water drain
tributary to water supply reservoir - 50 feet



   (E)   Any other stream, pond, lake or tidal water; storm drain,
cellar drain, subsoil drain which discharges into a stream, culvert, lake
tidal water or onto the surface of the ground unless such drain is cast iron
pipe with leaded joints, swimming pool - 25 feet



   (F)   Top of embankment - 15 feet



   (G)   Property line - 10 feet



   (H)   Water pressure line - 10 feet



('66 Code, § 57-12)



§ 50.12  SEPTIC TANKS.



   (A)   A septic tank shall be provided for water-carriage sewage
disposal where no public sewer is available. The septic tank shall be
constructed with watertight walls and bottom, with inlet baffled or submerged
for a depth of 12 to 18 inches and outlet baffled or submerged to a depth of
at least 18 inches below the surface of liquid in the tank but not more than
half the liquid depth. Baffles shall extend 6 inches above the liquid level.
The outlet invert shall be 3 inches lower than the inlet invert. With a 2
compartment tank there shall be adequate connections at mid-depth, and 2/3 or
more of the required capacity shall be in the first compartment. A septic
tank shall have a removable cover, or manhole, so as to provide access to the
tank for purposes of inspection and cleaning. At least 2 manholes shall be
provided for a tank more than 10 feet long and at least one manhole per
compartment. If a manhole is not located over the inlet, an inspection
opening shall be provided at that point. No septic tank shall have a liquid
capacity of less than 750 gallons below the outlet invert. The minimum liquid
depth of septic tanks shall be 36 inches, measured from the bottom of the
invert to the outlet. There shall be a minimum of 8 inches between the liquid
level and the underside of the tank cover.



   (B)   The minimum liquid capacities are as follows:



      (1)   Two bedrooms, 750 gallons;



      (2)   Three bedrooms, 900 gallons;



      (3)   Four bedrooms, 1,200 gallons;



      (4)   Larger sizes, add 250 gallons per bedroom.



      (5)   Where additional capacity is needed, 2 tanks may be used
in series for one installation. No more than 2 tanks shall be installed in
series but larger tanks shall be used to make up the required capacity.



   (C)   If a garbage disposal system is used in connection with a
septic tank, 50% more liquid volume shall be required for the septic tank.



   (D)   Sink drainage or laundry water systems, where no water-flush
toilet fixtures are connected, shall be constructed with a septic tank and
seepage system at least 1/2 the capacity specified for usual house sewerage
systems.



('66 Code, § 57-13)



§ 50.13  Distribution boxes.



   Distribution box of sufficient size to accommodate the necessary field
lateral lines shall be constructed at the head of each disposal field:



   (A)   Each field lateral line shall be connected separately to the
distribution box and shall not be subdivided.



   (B)   The invert of all outlets shall be level, and the inlet invert
shall be at least one inch above the outlets.



   (C)   If the level of the outlet inverts is less than 4 inches above
the floor of the box, distribution baffles shall be provided. Note: If the
level of the outlet inverts is from 4 to 6 inches above the floor of the box,
permitting water retention to act in lieu of a baffle, the baffles will not
be required. The level of the outlet inverts should not be more than 6 inches
above the floor of the distribution box.



('66 Code, § 57-14)



§ 50.14  Septic tank effluent.



   (A)   Disposal of septic tank effluent may be by means of tile or
other accepted distributing pipe laid in screened gravel or broken stone, or
by means of leaching cesspools. Seepage systems shall not be located in fill
placed over impervious soil.



   (B)   Leaching cesspools may be preferable where the amount of area
is limited or where porous soil is at a greater depth than can be secured by
tile fields. They are not recommended where ground water may interfere with
their operation, or where soil of better seepage quality is found at shallow
depth. Leaching cesspools shall not extend to rock.



('66 Code, § 57-15)



§ 50.15  Classification of soils.



   The classification of soil, at the proposed location of a seepage
system, shall be determined by soil tests made as follows:



   (A)   For cesspools, a hole 4 inches to 12 inches in diameter shall
be dug, extending to the depth of the proposed cesspool. For tile field, a
hole 4 inches to 12 inches in diameter shall be dug, extending to the depth
of the proposed trenches.



   (B)   Before observations are made, the pit shall be thoroughly wet
down by filling it to a depth of at least 12 inches. The pit shall then be
refilled with water to a depth of 12 inches or more and the rate of drop of
water measured at intervals for a period of 30 to 60 minutes under normal
conditions. The minimum or slowest uniform rate of drop shall be used in
calculating seepage areas. When tests are made, consideration shall be given
to the finished grade of building sites so that results will correspond to
the absorptive value of the soil in which the leaching systems will be
constructed. In investigating soil conditions for a large area, one test pit
per acre or even one per lot may be required. Also, in investigating soil
conditions, deep test pits may be required to check for ground water, ledge
rock, or available good seepage soil below normal depths.



('66 Code, § 57-16)



§ 50.16  Leaching area required.



   (A)   The following leaching areas are required for the seepage
rates indicated:



 

Minimum uniform seepage rate time to drop one inch
 

Square feet of effective seepage area required per bedroom



 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4


(1)   5 minutes or less
 
125
 
250
 
375
 
500


(2)   6 to 10 minutes
 
165
 
330
 
495
 
660


(3)   11 to 20 minutes
 
225
 
450
 
675
 
900


(4)   21 to 30 minutes
 
250
 
500
 
750
 
1000


(5)   More than 30 minutes
 
Special consideration needed to avoid nuisance conditions. In some soils it
may be impracticable or impossible to use subsurface disposal.



 



      (6)   Where a seepage rate slower than one inch in 30 minutes
or high ground water is found, no sewage disposal system shall be built. In
impervious soil, swamp or rock it may not be feasible to provide subsurface
sewage disposal.



   (B)   All trenches shall follow contours with the bottoms of the
individual trenches level. Depth of trenches should normally be not more than
30 to 36 inches, but depths up to 48 inches or greater may be used if
warranted by conditions of topography or more favorable absorption capacity
of soil at that depth. The width of the trench shall not exceed 36 inches and
the spacing between adjacent sides of trenches shall be at least 3 times the
width of the trench. The length of individual trenches shall not exceed 75
feet except that in installations where dosing apparatus is used, a maximum
length of 100 feet may be used. Distributing pipe shall be laid near the top
of a layer of one inch screened gravel or one inch broken stone placed to a
depth of at least 18 inches in the trenches. The depth of stone under the
pipe invert shall be at least 12 inches. Distributing pipes may be unglazed
drain tile, at least 4 inches in diameter, laid with open joints. Pipe of
vitrified tile or other acceptable material with suitable perforations or
adequate spacing may also be used. The upper portions of joint openings shall
be protected by strips of tar paper or other suitable material. Tile lines
shall be laid on a grade not exceeding 2 to 4 inches per 100 feet. A layer of
salt hay or tar paper shall be placed over the gravel before backfilling the
trenches.



   (C)   Construction shall be such as to provide for proper
distribution of settled sewage to trenches. Better distribution, particularly
for large systems with several trenches, is secured in tile fields by using
siphon dosing apparatus to apply the septic tank effluent. Diverting boxes
with several outlets of the same elevation to individual trenches may be used
to distribute the sewage. Where trenches are at different levels, serial
distribution may be used with high-level overflows from upper to lower
trenches.



   (D)   In seepage beds where space between trenches is also excavated
and .backfilled with one inch stone or one inch screened gravel, only 1/3 of
the total bottom area shall be considered effective. Distributing pipe shall
be laid 6 feet to 8 feet on centers. Installation of stone and distributing
pipe shall be the same as that required for leaching trenches. The bottom of
the entire bed shall be at the same elevation.



   (E)   Leaching cesspools shall be spaced 3 times the diameter
between sides of adjacent cesspools. Cesspool walls shall be constructed with
masonry laid with open joints below the maximum liquid level. The walls shall
be surrounded by 12 inches of screened gravel or broken stone.



('66 Code, § 57-17)



§ 50.17  Commercial buildings.



   No discharges from systems of sewage disposal for commercial building
into watercourses shall be made unless provided with treatment as approved by
the state department of health and the state water resources commission. No
sewage disposal system shall, after the effective date of the regulation, be
constructed or rebuilt for any commercial buildings without compliance with
the following subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the director of
health. Connections shall be made to public sewers if available.



   (A)   The location of the disposal system shall comply with the same
requirements as those listed above, except that in the case of discharges
from laundromats or other commercial or industrial establishments discharging
substantial quantities of detergents, the disposal system shall not be
permitted, unless special plans are prepared and carried out in accordance
with requirements of the local director of health with due regard to the
seepage quality of the soil and location of wells. Disposal systems receiving
substantial quantities of detergents shall be located at least 200 feet away
from any well used as a source of drinking water.



   (B)   The septic tank shall comply with § 50.12 with regard to
construction details and shall have a minimum liquid capacity of 2 cubic feet
per employee or equal to the average 24 hour flow, whichever is greater. In
no case shall a septic tank be installed with a liquid capacity less than 100
cubic feet. For very large commercial buildings, special arrangements may be
required by the director of health. In the case of restaurants, laundromats,
toilets for public use, or other types of establishments where water use and
sewage flows will depend on the extent of public use or employment of water
uses especially pertinent to the type of establishment in question, special
allowances for capacities of disposal units and area for future expansion
shall be provided as approved by the director of health.



   (C)   Seepage systems for commercial buildings other than
restaurants* and laundries* shall be designed in accordance with the
following table:



 



Minimum uniform seepage rate minutes to drop one inch
 
Sewage application in gallons to one square foot of effective seepage area;
bottom area of trenches, bottom area plus side area of leaching wells below
inlet, or 1/3 of gross bottom area of seepage bed


3
 
3.0


5
 
2.5


10
 
1.75


15
 
1.4


20
 
1.1


25
 
.9


30
 
.8


More than 30
 
Special consideration needed to avoid nuisance conditions. In some soils it
may be impracticable or impossible to use subsurface disposal.




 



   (D)   Sewage disposal facilities such as privies and other than of
the water-carriage type shall be installed only with the permission of the
director of health and in accordance with his requirements.



   (E)   No ground water drainage or drainage from roofs, roads,
cellars or yards, or flow of industrial wastes or other liquids that will
adversely affect the operation of a system for domestic sewage disposal or
cause an overload on the system, shall be discharged into or near a sewage
disposal system for a commercial building. The drainage or liquid shall be
disposed of separately subject to any requirements considered necessary by
the director of health.



('66 Code, § 57-18)



*Editor's Note:



   Additional seepage area shall be provided due to clogging
characteristics of waste.



§ 50.18  Privies.



   Privies shall be constructed with adequate storage space for excreta,
with self-closing seat covers and flytight vaults, and with screened vent
from the vault to the atmosphere. Privies shall be constructed so as to
permit ready cleaning. Separate distances, shall comply with § 19-13-B8,
state public health code.



('66 Code, § 57-19)



§ 50.19  Other discharges.



   No ground water drainage or drainage from roofs, cellars or yards shall
discharge into or near any portion of a sewage disposal system. Separate
facilities shall be provided for the drainage.



('66 Code, § 57-20)



§ 50.20  Nuisances.



   Nothing in this regulation shall be construed to permit the creation or
maintenance of any sewage overflow or nuisance, the abatement of which shall
be subject to the provisions of § 19-13-B2 of state public health code.



('66 Code, § 57-21)



§ 50.21  Permits.



   (A)   The application and permit issued for the installation of an
individual sewage disposal system expires 6 months from the date of issue if
construction of the building has not begun.



   (B)   A permit for the installation of an individual sewage disposal
system is not transferable to a new owner.



('66 Code, § 57-22)



§ 50.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 50.02 to 50.04, inclusive, or
50.08 shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days,
or both.



('66 Code, § 57-9)



CHAPTER 51:  SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Creation; purpose



   51.02   Definitions



   51.03   Scope



   51.04   Interpretation



   51.05   State statute amendments



   51.06   Assessment of benefits



   51.07   Tampering with public sewer equipment



Construction Requirements



   51.15   Licenses and permits



   51.16   Bonds and insurance



   51.17   General conditions



   51.18   Trench excavations



   51.19   Pipe and pipe laying



   51.20   Backfill



   51.21   Pavement, curb, and sidewalk replacement



   51.22   Responsibility for installation



Use of Public Sewer System



   51.30   Storm water and unpolluted drainage



   51.31   Prohibited discharges



   51.32   Pretreatment requirements



   51.33   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors



   51.34   Control manholes



   51.35   Measurements, tests, and analyses



   51.36   Heavy metal or toxic discharges



   51.37   Accidental discharges



Enforcement



   51.45   Right of entry and authority of inspectors



   51.46   Noncompliance cause for permit revocation



   51.47   Future permits



   51.48   Violator liable for expense, loss, or damage



   51.49   Written notice of violation



Rates and Charges



   51.55   Rates established



   51.56   Rates for property located outside town



   51.57   No reduced rates or free service



   51.58   Determination of charges, generally



   51.59   Allowance for metered water not discharged into town's sewer
system



   51.60   Engineering study



   51.61   Separate billing for multi-unit connections



   51.62   Deductions for vacancies; removal of apartments from services



   51.63   Billing



   51.64   Collection procedures



   51.65   Adjustment of bill



   51.66   Use of sewer after refusal to pay



   51.67   Implementation of chapter



   51.68   Violations



   51.69   Establishment of Sewer Fund



   51.70   Annual audit



Water Pollution Control Authority



   51.75   Establishment



   51.76   Powers



   51.77   Organization of sewer staff



   51.78   Authority to incur debt



   51.79   Flow of funds



   51.80   Budgeting



   51.81   Executive Committee



 



   51.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  CREATION; PURPOSE.



   The construction, extension, maintenance and operation of sanitary
sewer system, sewers, sewage works, public sewer system, town sanitary sewer
system, sewage system and all facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping,
treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial waste water shall be
under the control of, and subject to the regulation of the Water Pollution
Control Authority of the town, hereinafter referred to as WPCA, under the
authority of Conn. Gen. Stat., Chapter 103, § 7-246, revision 1958, revised
1979, as amended and in accordance with the power granted the said WPCA by
the Charter of the town.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "B.O.D. (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand)."  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure for five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per
liter (mg/l) as described in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published by the
American Public Health Association, as may be amended from time to time.



   "BUILDING DRAIN."  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.



   "BUILDING SEWER OR SEWER CONNECTION."  The extension from the building
drain to the public sewer, storm sewer or other place of disposal.



   "CCF."  The volume measure of 100 cubic feet.



   "CHECK VALVE."  A one-way water/sewage valve which stops sewer backups
from entering buildings and structures.



   "CHLORINE DEMAND."  The amount of chlorine which must be added to
water or wastewater to produce a residual chlorine content in such water or
wastewater.



   "CITY."  The City of New Haven.



   "COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)." The quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or
wastewater, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as described in the
most current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, as such may
be amended from time to time.



   "COMBINED SEWERS."  Any public sewer receiving both sewage and storm
and surface waters and drainage.



   "COMMERCIAL USER."  Any business or establishment which does not meet
the definition of industrial producer as defined in this section, or the
definition of residential user herein.



   "COMPANY." Regional Water Authority, its successors and assigns.



   "CONTRACTOR."  Any person, partnership, company, corporation, or other
entity doing business under this chapter and to whom the Water Pollution
Control Authority or its authorized agent shall have issued a permit,
together with any and all sub-contractors employed by said principal
contractor, suppliers of materials and their agents when on or near the site
of work to install and repair sewers and building sewers during the period
when such permit is valid.



   "COOLING WATER."  The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air-conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or other, but shall
be free from odor or oil. It shall contain no pollution substances which
would produce B.O.D. or suspended solids, each in excess of 10 parts per
million by weight.



   "CUSTOMERS." Any and all contributors of wastewater to the sewer system.



   "DOMESTIC WASTEWATER." Residential-type wastewater which requires no
pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the
town's sanitary sewer system, excluding all manufacturing and industrial
wastewater.



   "DRY INDUSTRY."  An industry discharging only domestic wastewater into
the town's sanitary sewer system, and having no process or manufacturing
operation that discharges liquid industrial wastewater of any characteristic
into the town's sanitary sewer system.



   "ESTABLISHMENT PLANT."  Any establishment or plant producing liquid
waste, with or without bearing suspended solids, required to be discharged
into the town's sanitary sewer system.



   "GENERAL MANAGER."  The WPCA's engineer and chief of operations and
maintenance, shall be the same as the Town Engineer according to the duties
and powers assigned to him by the town.



   "GROSS REVENUES."  All revenues of the sewer fund regardless of
source, except for federal and state grants.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRODUCER."  Any plant, establishment or industry
which discharges industrial waste water resulting from a process or
manufacturing operation, whether or not such wastewater is segregated from or
combined with domestic wastewater from the plant, establishment, or industry.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTES."  Any solid, liquid, or gas discharged, permitted
to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or
business establishment or process, or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER."  Any liquid, free-flowing wastewater,
including contaminated cooling water, resulting from any industrial or
manufacturing process or from the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources with or without suspended solids, as distinct from domestic
wastewater.



   "INSPECTOR."  An employee of the town assigned by the Engineer to
examine and test material and work proposed to be furnished by the
contractor, to observe the construction of the project or any part thereof,
to assist the contractor in the interpretation of specifications and methods
of construction, to make measurements and keep records for the Engineer, and
to report to the Engineer on the performance of the contractor relative to
the work, all as and only as instructed by the Engineer.  The inspector
shall not act as assistant to or foreman for the contractor.  Inspectors
have no power to waive these specifications, rules, and regulations or  to
otherwise deviate from the original covenants of the agreement or contract.



   "INSTITUTIONAL USER."  That class of users not meeting the definition
of residential, commercial, or industrial users, and meeting the criteria for
nonprofit, tax-exempt status.



   "MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l)." The same as parts per million (ppm), and
is a weight-to-volume ratio; when the milligrams-per-liter value is
multiplied by the factor  750, an equivalent to units per hundred cubic feet
(ccf) of water is obtained.



   "NATURAL OUTLET."  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   "PERMITTEE, PERMIT HOLDER."  Any person, firm, association,
corporation or trust which owns, operates, possesses or controls an
establishment or plant being operated under a valid industrial waste permit
to discharge wastewater into the town's sanitary sewer system.



   "PERSON or PERSONS."  Individuals, firms partnerships, companies and
government entities, whether one or more, or a combination of one or more
thereof.



   "pH VALUE."  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration in grams per liter of solution, i.e. pH=1 log(H+). pH will be
determined according to the most current edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association.



   "PRODUCER."  Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which
owns, operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or
not a permittee.



   "PUBLIC SEWER."  Any sewer owned, constructed, maintained or
controlled by the town.



   "RESIDENTIAL USER."



      (1)   Single-family residence: A residential establishment
serving a single-family household. In those instances where there is no meter
on the water supply to the principal household, separate living quarters will
be considered as a separate residence and a separate user charge will be
applied.



      (2)   Duplex residence: A single building equipped for
occupancy by two families.



      (3)   Multiple dwelling units: One or more buildings each
equipped for occupancy by three or more families.



   "ROAD."  That portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular
travel.



   "SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM, SEWERS, SEWAGE WORKS, SEWER, PUBLIC SEWER
SYSTEM, TOWN SANITARY SYSTEM, TOWN SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM." All facilities for
collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastewater. For the purpose of this chapter, however,
water-courses and storm sewers shall not be included in this definition.



   "SEWAGE."  A combination of the waterborne wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. Any
substance, liquid or solid, which may contaminate or pollute or affect the
cleanliness or purity of any water.



   "SEWER."  Any portion of the accepted or approved sanitary sewer
system of the town.



   "SEWER FUND."  The sewer fund of the town.



   "SLUG."  Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.



   "STANDARD METHODS."  The most current edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public
Health Association, as it may be amended, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the General Manager, New Haven WPCA.



   "STORM SEWER."  A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters,
drainage, groundwater or unpolluted water from any source, but excludes
sewage and polluted industrial wastes.



   "STREET."  The entire width of any dedicated public right-of-way used
as a highway.



   "TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS)."  Solids measured in milligrams per
liter (mg/l) that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory
filtration device, as defined in the most current edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public
Health Association, as amended, and referred to as nonfilterable residue.



   "TOWN." Town of Hamden, Connecticut.



   "TOWN ENGINEER."  The Engineer of the town or his or her authorized
deputy, agent, representative, or such other person as may be designated by
the Mayor of the town, with the approval and the consent of the majority of
the Legislative Council.



   "TOWN'S SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM." All sanitary sewer systems and
extensions or enlargements thereof, owned by the town or in which the town
has an equity ownership, and there is specifically included all the systems
constructed by persons as that term is defined herein, and which have
heretofore or may hereafter be acquired by the town. Included in such
definition but not limited to, are the following: Sanitary sewer systems,
sewers, sewage works, public sewer, public sewer system, sewage system,
sewerage system and all facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping,
treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastewater.



   "UNPOLLUTED WATER."  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards, and would not be benefitted by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and waste water treatment facilities provided.



   "USER CHARGE OR TAX."  Charges or tax established under this chapter
for discharging wastewater into the sanitary sewer system.



   "WASTEWATER."  See "sewage."



   "WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY (WPCA)."  The Water Pollution
Control Authority of the town as provided by the Charter of the town and the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.



   "WATERCOURSE."  A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of
water occurs either continuously or intermittently.



   "WPCA."  The Water Pollution Control Authority of the town as
designated by the Town Charter.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 371, passed 2-3-97; Am. Ord. 397, passed
10-25-99)



§ 51.03  SCOPE.



   This chapter shall govern the construction  and installation of all
building  sewers connected to the public sewer system of the town, including
all building sewers constructed and installed pursuant to orders of the Water
Pollution Control Authority issued under the General Statutes of Connecticut,
all building sewers constructed and installed pursuant to orders issued by
other federal, state, or municipal authorities having jurisdiction in the
premises, and all building sewers constructed and installed pursuant to
federal, state, or municipal statutes, codes, rules, regulations, or
ordinances.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.04  INTERPRETATION.



   In the event of any question as to the interpretation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the decision of the Water Pollution Control
Authority or its agent shall be final.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.05  STATE STATUTE AMENDMENTS.



   To the extent that any of the Connecticut State Statutes referred to
herein are amended, those amendments will be considered a part of this
chapter.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.06  ASSESSMENT OF BENEFITS.



   (A)   The assessable buildable unit method shall be adopted for
direct benefits.  The area assessment method shall be adopted for overall
area benefits.  These two methods will include all costs and assessments.



      (1)   The assessable buildable unit shall be defined as an
existing constructed single-family residence, constructed on an allowable
sized lot according to zoning, and which is benefitted by the improvement.



      (2)   The overall area benefit charge shall be based on the
actual square footage of area involved, or 30,000 square feet per buildable
unit, whichever is the smaller figure.



   (B)   Properties which are vacant, either of allowable size,
according to zoning, or potentially allowable size, and on which a use has
not been established, shall be considered as subject to deferred payment
assessment which will be properly documented in the land records to protect
the town for future assessments when property is put to use.



   (C)   Existing uses of properties other than single-family residence
will be converted to buildable units for assessment purposes in accordance
with the following rules.



      (1)   Multiple dwellings.  One buildable unit for the first
unit and thence:



         0.25 unit for each additional one-bedroom unit;



         0.50 unit for each additional two-bedroom unit;



         0.75 unit for each additional three-bedroom unit.



      (2)   Commercial property.  One buildable unit minimum for
the first 1500 square feet or less of possible buildable area based on zoning
requirements to the maximum of 30% building to lot coverage of the buildable
area of the lot, thence 1/15 of a buildable unit for each 100 square feet of
additional buildable area.



      (3)   Manufacturing property.  One buildable unit minimum for
the first 10,000 square feet or less of possible buildable area based on
zoning requirements to the maximum of 50% building to lot coverage of the
buildable area of the lot, thence 1/10 of a buildable unit for each 1000
square feet of additional buildable area.



   (D)   On all shapes and sizes of property, the foregoing rules shall
govern insofar as applicable.  The Water Pollution Control Authority shall
have the discretionary power to apply a method of determining assessable
units in all questionable cases.



   (E)   Rates for assessable buildable units and for overall area
benefit charge shall be established by the Water Pollution Control Authority
for each assessment district.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.07  TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC SEWER EQUIPMENT.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the public sewer.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.15  LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   (A)   The contractor shall be duly licensed by the state to install
and repair building sewers.



   (B)   A permit for any connection to the sewers shall be obtained
from the Water Pollution Control Authority or its authorized agent. This
permit shall specify the location of the property involved, the location,
where available, of the sewer connection, and the name and address of the
contractor to whom it is issued.  The fee for each permit shall be $25.



   (C)   A permit for excavation shall be obtained from the Town
Engineer, consistent with the requirements of §§ 97.01 and 97.01b.



   (D)   A permit for the installation of a check valve shall be
obtained from the W.P.C.A. or its authorized agent. This permit shall specify
the location, where available, of the check valve, and the name and address
of the Contractor to whom it is issued.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 371, passed
2-3-97; Am. Ord. 434, passed 3-12-00; Am. Ord. 460, passed 6-3-02)  Penalty,
see § 51.99



§ 51.16  BONDS AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   The contractor shall be protected by and shall pay the
premiums on policies of insurance coverage both Employers' Liability under
Connecticut Law and Public Liability insuring him against liability to
persons outside of his employ, in the amounts of: liability - $500,000/
$500,000; property damage - $100,000/ $100,000; said policies to be issued by
an insurance company licensed in the state.  Special coverage for blasting
shall be provided when needed. Said policies shall include the town as the
name insured.  The insurance coverage shall show proof of adequate insurance
indemnifying the Water Pollution Control Authority from any damage.



   (B)   The contractor shall provide the Water Pollution Control
Authority with a performance bond.  This is required for the faithful
performance of the work contemplated.  This shall be issued by an approved
surety company licensed in the state.  It shall be for an amount of a
minimum of $10,000 and may vary upwards on larger projects in amount as
required by the Engineer.  This bond will be in force from January 1 to
December 31, and shall cover any project by the contractor until the
expiration of the maintenance period for that project.



   (C)   The maintenance period shall be for one year from completion
of connection.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.17  GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The contractor or his agent shall under no circumstances start
work on a project until the provisions of §§ 51.15 and 51.16 are fulfilled
and the permit required therein is on the site of the work where it shall
remain until completion of the job. The contractor is not allowed to commence
any work until arrangements have been made for its inspection.



   (B)   At least one-way traffic shall be maintained in the road at
all times. However, under unusual circumstances, the Police Department may
permit the temporary closing of a road.  In such case, the contractor shall
secure permission from the Police Department and should notify the Fire
Department of such closing permission.



   (C)   Adequate barricades and, when necessary, lights and red flags
shall be erected and maintained in the street as long as the Police
Department deems it advisable.



   (D)   The contractor shall schedule his work so as not to allow open
trench conditions over the weekend or holidays, nor during the week in excess
of 48 hours without special permission from the Engineer.



(Ord 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.18  TRENCH EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Work shall, in every case, proceed from the sewer toward the
structure involved.  Any variation in this procedure shall be at the sole
responsibility of the contractor unless prior approval of the Engineer has
been secured.



   (B)   Trenching shall proceed in accordance with latest manual on
Safety in Construction as published by the Occupational Safety and Health
Act.  The trench shall be ample width at the bottom to accommodate the
structure  to be placed and any work on the structure that conditions
necessitate.  Tunneling under existing structures may be permitted when
practical, but in no case shall any one tunnel exceed ten feet in length.



   (C)   Sheeting requirements for excavation to insure the safety of
personnel, the public, property, or proper installation, shall be furnished
and placed by the contractor in accordance with good practice and at his own
expense. Requirements and specifications for sheeting shall satisfy the
intent of the Occupational Safety and Health Act.



   (D)   Where water is encountered in a trench, sufficient sump shall
be constructed and adequate pumping equipment made available so that the
installation of any drain or appurtenances shall be done in the dry.  Under
no conditions shall water be allowed to enter the sewer from the trench.



   (E)   If at any time during the excavation, in the Engineer's
opinion, the material being excavated is not suitable for backfill, such
material shall immediately be removed from the site by the contractor at his
own expense.  Unsatisfactory materials shall include, but not be limited to,
boulders, clay, muck, frozen ground, and the like.  Where unsatisfactory
material is removed, it shall be replaced by sand or gravel not containing
pieces larger than three inches in diameter.  Furnishing and placing this
material shall be at the contractor's expense.



   (F)   Any unsuitable foundation material shall be removed and
replaced with crushed stone or selected sand.  If excavation is deeper than
desired depth, the trench shall be filled with crushed stone or selected
sand.  In no case may loose fill from excavation be used to bring the trench
up to grade.  Blocks or rigid objects should never be used to support the
pipe.  Selected sand bedding and tamped cover to twelve inches above the
pipe will be required.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.19  PIPE AND PIPE LAYING.



   (A)   All building sewer pipe shall be cast iron pipe, ASTM A 74; or
plastic, type P.S.P. poly (vinyl chloride) PVC ASTM (D 3034).



   (B)   The minimum inside pipe diameter and minimum fall per foot of
the building sewer shall be in accordance with the following table of
allowable number of fixture units.



 


Maximum Number of Fixture Units*



Pipe Diameter in Inches
 

Fall Per Foot



 
1/16"
 
1/8"
 
1/4"
 
1/2"




4
 
 
180
 
216
 
250


5
 
 
390
 
480
 
575


6
 
 
700
 
840
 
1000


8
 
1400
 
1600
 
1920
 
2300


10
 
2500
 
2900
 
3500
 
4200




 



*The unit values for each plumbing fixture are as set forth in the current
BOCA Basic Plumbing Code manual.



   (C)   The building sewer in all cases shall be first connected to
the sewer and may then be extended to proceed toward the structure to be
served.  Pipe laying shall proceed in accordance with the best accepted
practices true to line and grade.



   (D)   If a water service is to be laid in the same trench with the
building sewer, the rules and regulations of the South Central Regional Water
Authority shall be followed.



   (E)   Clean out, to approximate ground elevation, must be provided
five to ten feet from the structure served if clean out does not exist inside
foundation wall.  On longer lines, clean out shall be provided at approved
intervals.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.20  BACKFILL.



   Backfill shall be in accordance with Regulations for Street and Highway
Excavation, Public Works Department, Hamden, latest edition, and as
supplemented hereto.



   (A)   Under no circumstances shall backfill be permitted around and
over the pipe until the pipe, joints, lines, elevations, and workmanship has
been inspected and approved by the Engineer.



   (B)   Wherein under § 51.18(E) the excavated material is deemed not
suitable for backfill, such material shall be replaced by sand or gravel, not
containing pieces larger than three inches in diameter.  The furnishing and
placing of satisfactory material shall be at the contractor's expense.



   (C)   Backfilling of trenches on private property shall proceed in
the following manner:  The installed pipe or structure shall be covered with
approved fine material to a depth of at least one foot compacted. Compaction
shall be by means of at least a 10-pound hand tamper or an approved hand
mechanical tamper.  Succeeding layers shall not be more than two feet in
depth with each layer thoroughly compacted to the satisfaction of the
Engineer before placing the next layer.



   (D)   Backfilling of trenches within the street area from the back
of the area reserved for sidewalks to the trunk line of the sewer shall
proceed in the following manner:  The installed pipe or structure shall be
covered with approved fine material to a depth of at least one foot
compacted. Compaction shall be by means of at least a 10-pound hand tamper or
an approved hand mechanical tamper.  Succeeding layers of approved backfill
material shall not be more than six inches in depth after compaction, with
each layer thoroughly compacted to the satisfaction of the Engineer before
placing the next layer.  Material taken from the trench excavation shall not
be used to backfill this portion of the sanitary lateral without first
receiving permission from the Engineer.  This permission will only be
granted in the case of suitable gravel or sand.  Barring receipt of this
permission, the contractor must at his own expense furnish suitable gravel
and place each as previously prescribed.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.21  PAVEMENT, CURB, AND SIDEWALK REPLACEMENT.



   The contractor shall restore or replace all of the appurtenances of the
street, including, but not limited to, pavement, curb, and sidewalk.  As
soon as the trench has been backfilled, a temporary cold patch surface shall
be placed and maintained for safe and comfortable public passage.  The
permanent surface must have a minimum of eight inches gravel, four inches
bounded, broken stone, and two inches bituminous concrete, unless the
pavement being replaced is of a higher degree of construction.  In such
case, the replacement must equal existing surface.  Sidewalk and curb
construction will be in accordance with the latest specifications and
standards governing such construction.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.22  RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION.



   The contractor shall assume complete responsibility for the quality of
the building sewer installation, and it shall not rest with the Engineer or
inspector.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



USE OF PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM



§ 51.30  STORM WATER AND UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.



   (A)   No person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to
be discharged any sewage into any storm sewer.



   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water into any
sanitary sewer.



   (C)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the Engineer.  Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process water may be discharged on specific written approval of
the Engineer and the State Commissioner of Environmental Protection, to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.31  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the public sewer or natural outlet any of the following.



   (A)   Any gasoline, kerosene, alcohol, formaldehyde, disinfectants,
benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or any flammable or explosive liquid solid or gas.



   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic, poisonous, or
radioactive solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant.  Material, such as copper, zinc, chromium, and similar
toxic substances, shall not be allowed in soluble form or in suspended solid
form in concentration higher than those achieved in appropriate pretreatment
facilities approved by the Engineer and the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection.



   (C)   Any sewage having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.00, and
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
the public sewer or its personnel.



   (D)   Solid and viscous substances in quantities, or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, paint, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and so
forth, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



   (E)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 120°F.
(49°C.) except by written approval of the Engineer.  In such cases, the
Engineer may require installation, by the industry, of an approved
temperature recorder in the receiving sewer.



   (F)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils in
excess of 50 mg/l for emulsified material and 15 mg/l for free floating
material, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32°F. and 150°F. (0° and 65°C.)



   (G)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.  The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Engineer.



   (H)   Any sewage containing suspended solids in excess of 350 parts
per million by weight or having a B.O.D. in excess of 300 parts per million
by weight.



   (I)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Engineer as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.



   (J)   Materials which exert or cause:



      (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such
as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of
dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate.



      (2)   Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to,
dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.



      (3)   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.



      (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined in § 51.02.



      (5)   High hydrogen sulfide content.



   (K)   Any substance which is not amenable to treatment or reduction
by the wastewater treatment process employed, or is amenable to treatment
only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant cannot meet the
requirement of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters without first pretreating to a concentration acceptable to
the town.



   (L)   Any overflow or drainage from cesspools or other receptacles
storing or constructed to store organic wastes.



   (M)   Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating
hydrocyanic gas or acidification in excess of one mg/l as CN in the wastes
from any outlet into the public sewers.



   (N)   Radioactive materials exceeding the existing standards of the
State, Department of Environmental Protection, or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.



   (O)   Any wastewaters containing phenols or other taste producing
substances in such concentrations as to produce odor or taste in the effluent
as to affect the taste and odor of the receiving waters.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.32  PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   If any liquid, substance, or gas is discharged or is proposed
to be discharged into the public sewer which contains the substances or
possesses the characteristics enumerated in § 51.31, and which, in the
judgment of the Engineer, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Engineer may do the
following.



      (1)   Reject the wastes.



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewer.



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge.



   (B)   When a proposal is made for the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to review and approval by the Engineer, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.



      (1)   Plans, specifications, expected performance data, and
any other pertinent information relating to holding tanks or to pretreatment
facilities, shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and
submitted for the approval of the Water Pollution Control Authority, and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are
obtained in writing.  The Engineer shall approve the holding tanks, or
pretreatment facilities provided the same shall indicate that an effluent
conforming to the provisions of this chapter will be provided.  If, after
the installation of the facilities has been completed and operation begun,
the facilities do not produce the expected performance, the Engineer shall
have the right to order the owner to cease operation until such time that
modifications are made to enable the facilities to perform properly.



      (2)   Prior to discharge or permission to discharge into the
town public sewers, the applicant must obtain written permission from the
Water Pollution Control Authority, in the form of a permit allowing the
proposed discharge, and must, if required by the town, install suitable
pretreatment facilities and operate and maintain such facilities in a manner
which will insure a continuous and satisfactory effluent.



   (C)   Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his own expense and shall be subject to
periodic inspection by the Engineer and shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Engineer, provided they produce an effluent conforming to the
provisions of this chapter.  The owner shall maintain operating records and
shall submit to the Engineer a monthly summary report of the character of the
influent and effluent as may be prescribed by the Engineer to show
satisfactory performance of the treatment facilities.



   (D)   For the purpose of measurement, the acceptability of
pretreated industrial waste will be measured at the point where the
industrial waste leaves a pretreatment facility, and before dilution with any
other waste stream or process water.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.33  GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand,
or other harmful ingredients except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Engineer and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.34  CONTROL MANHOLE.



   When required by the Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes, shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes.  Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by
the Engineer.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense,
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.35  MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, AND ANALYSES.



   (A)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water", published by the American Public
Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided,
or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole.  In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property.  The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken.  Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and
suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.



   (B)   Any new discharge from a single source of domestic wastewater
in excess of 5,000 gallons per day, or cooling waters, must be authorized by
a permit from the State Department of Environmental Protection, director of
Water Compliance and Hazardous Substances.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.36  HEAVY METAL OR TOXIC DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Except in quantities or concentrations as herein authorized,
it shall be unlawful for any individual or corporation to discharge waters or
wastes to the sanitary sewer containing metallic irons, and salts of the
heavy metals, in solution or suspension, in concentrations exceeding the
following, the analytical results to be expressed in terms of the element
indicated:



 

Element
 
mg/l




Arsenic
 
0.05


Barium
 
5.0


Boron
 
1.0


Cadmium
 
0.02


Chromium
 
5.0


Copper
 
1.0


Cyanide
 
1.0


Lead
 
0.10


Manganese
 
1.0


Mercury
 
0.0005


Nickel
 
1.00


Selenium
 
0.02


Silver
 
0.10


Zinc
 
5.0




 



   (B)   No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged to
the sewer system without an industrial waste permit which shall specify
permitted concentrations.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.37  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   Each user shall provide protection for accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other waste regulated by this chapter. Facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense.  The town may
require the plans showing facilities and operating procedures be submitted
for review and approval prior to construction of the facilities.



   (A)   For countermeasures to be taken by the town to minimize damage
to the sanitary sewer program or degradation of the receiving waters,
permittee shall notify the town immediately upon accidentally discharging
wastes in violation of this section.  This notification shall be followed
within three days of the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being
taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve
permittee of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the sanitary sewer
system, or for any fines imposed on the town on account thereof or for any
enforcement action pursuant to this occurrence.



   (B)   In order that officers, agents, and employees of user will be
informed of the town's requirements, user shall make available to their
employees copies of this chapter together with such other wastewater
information and notices which may be furnished by the town from time to time
for the purposes of improving and making more effective water pollution
control.  A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the
permittee's bulletin board advising officers, agents, and employees who to
call in case of an accidental discharge.



   (C)   Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous or
prohibited substance to the user's plumbing or drainage system shall be
appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of such
substances in violation of this section.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.45  RIGHT OF ENTRY AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (A)   While performing the necessary work in private properties, the
Engineer or duly authorized employee of the town shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the user.  The user shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the town employees and the town shall
indemnify the user against loss or damage to its property by town employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the user and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the user
to maintain safe conditions.



   (B)   The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works
lying within said easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.46  NONCOMPLIANCE CAUSE FOR PERMIT REVOCATION.



   Failure of a contractor to comply with any part of this chapter shall
be cause for revocation by the Water Pollution Control Authority or its agent
of any permit issued by the Water Pollution Control Authority or its agent. 
If a permit is revoked, the Water Pollution Control Authority may recommend
that the contractor's state license be revoked.  When such action is taken
by the Water Pollution Control Authority and any building sewer work remains
to be completed by the contractor, the Water Pollution Control Authority or
its agent shall be empowered to complete the work or to employ any contractor
deemed competent for such completion.  The cost of such completion may be
claimed against the contractor or his performance bond.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.47  FUTURE PERMITS.



   No person who has violated any provision of this chapter, or whose
license has been revoked as herein provided, or who has refused or neglected
to make good to the satisfaction of the Water Pollution Control Authority any
defective or imperfect work, or who has refused or neglected to pay any fees,
fines, or penalties imposed under the provisions of this chapter, shall
receive any future permits in the town.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.48  VIOLATOR LIABLE FOR EXPENSE, LOSS OR DAMAGE.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable
to the town for any expense, loss, or damage which may be caused to the
public sewer system by reason of such violation.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)



§ 51.49  WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be given a
written notice by the Engineer stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, correct
such violation.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84)  Penalty, see § 51.99



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.55  RATES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Charges for sanitary sewer services furnished by the WPCA for
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional users shall be as
established and revised from time to time by majority vote of the members of
the WPCA (to be approved by a majority vote of the Legislative Council).



   (B)   Such charges shall reflect a proportional distribution of
costs among all users pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-255, and Section
204(b) of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1284(b).



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.56  RATES FOR PROPERTY LOCATED OUTSIDE TOWN.



   The charges to be made by the WPCA for sewer service to property
located outside the limits of the town shall be established on the basis of a
formal contract, the charges shown in said contract to be not less than
actual costs to the WPCA, and said contract to be approved by the Legislative
Council.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.57  NO REDUCED RATES OR FREE SERVICE.



   All persons owning, renting, leasing or having management or control of
property or premises that produce waste that is discharged into the sanitary
sewers of the town, including domestic waste, and subject to the provisions
of this chapter, shall be charged the rates established by the WPCA, and no
reduced rates or free sanitary sewer service shall be furnished to any such
person, property or premises. In all cases, the owner of property shall have
final responsibility for the payment of sewer charges.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.58  DETERMINATION OF CHARGES, GENERALLY.



   In those instances where water meters are provided on the sources of
water providing water to the facilities discharging into the sanitary sewer
system of the town, portable water usage will be determined from the water
meter readings for the purpose of determining the sewer service charge,
except as may be modified or amended by the WPCA with the approval of the
Legislative Council from time to time. As to such water sources that are not
metered, estimates of water usage will be made.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.59  ALLOWANCE FOR METERED WATER NOT DISCHARGED INTO TOWN'S SANITARY
SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Any person owning or having control of property discharging
waste into the sanitary sewers of the town and on whose property there is
located one or more facilities requiring water from the source of supply that
also furnishes water to the sanitary sewer system, and such water provided to
the town, may at his or her own expense install a water meter of a type and
design, and at a location, approved by the General Manager, and the WPCA will
accept readings from such meter taken and provided to the WPCA by such person
or his or her duly authorized agent, such readings to be furnished on forms
provided by the General Manager and sworn to as correct by the person taking
the reading. Meters installed for this purpose shall be sealed by the WPCA,
and the owners shall ensure that said seal is not broken.



   (B)   The amount of water measured by the reading of such meter will
be used to adjust the water usage upon which the user charge established by
this chapter will be computed. In the event such property is not supplied
water by the company, such meter reading will be deducted from the total
water usage furnished to the property as estimated by the General Manager as
provided for in this chapter.



   (C)   No facility for which a meter is installed under the
provisions of this section shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of
the town without the owner thereof having first notified in writing the
General Manager of such proposed connection.



   (D)   The sewer staff shall have the right, at any time during
regular business hours, to check the meter reading on such meter installed to
measure the amount of water provided to the facility not discharging waste
into the town's sanitary sewers, and to remove and test such meter at any
time.



   (E)   Any person making a false affidavit as to the amount of water
usage registered by a meter installed under the provisions of this section,
or any person representing to the WPCA that the facility for which a meter is
installed under the provisions hereof does not discharge waste into the
sanitary sewer when, in fact, it does, or any person having facilities for
which such a meter is installed who subsequently connects such facility to
the town's sanitary sewer system without notifying the WPCA and the General
Manager shall be guilty of an offense. Each and every day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable as set forth in §
51.99.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.60  ENGINEERING STUDY.



   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply only to those
industrial, commercial and institutional water users who have facilities
connected to the sanitary sewers of the town and who make application to the
General Manager under the provisions hereof.



   (B)   Any industrial, institutional and commercial water user owning
or having control of property discharging waste into the sanitary sewers of
the town, and on whose property there is located one or more facilities
requiring water from the source of supply that also furnishes water to the
sanitary sewer system, and all or part of such water provided to any such
facility is not discharged into the sanitary sewers of the town, may make
application to the General Manager and the WPCA, on forms furnished by the
WPCA, requesting that an engineering study of the applicant's property and
facilities be made for the hereinafter stated purpose, and paying the fee
established by the WPCA.



   (C)   Applications made under the provisions of this section shall
be upon forms promulgated and furnished by the General Manager with the
approval of the WPCA, and the applicant shall furnish all the information and
other matters requested therein to the WPCA. The fee for making the first
application under the provisions hereof shall be as established and revised
from time to time by the WPCA upon approval of the Legislative Council. No
fee shall be required for studies initiated by the General Manager subsequent
to the first application. The fee is to reimburse the WPCA for the expense of
making the engineering study and report. Each applicant shall agree, as a
condition precedent to the WPCA conducting the study and tests provided for
herein, to indemnify and hold harmless the WPCA of and from any and all such
liability for any acts or omissions by the WPCA, its agents and employees,
committed while conducting the engineering studies and tests provided for
herein, causing or resulting in damages to the property or person of the
applicant, his or her agents, employees and invitees.



   (D)   Upon receipt of an application and the fee required herein,
the WPCA will, as soon as possible, make an engineering study of the
applicant's property and facilities.



   In those instances where, in the opinion of the WPCA Manager based upon
an engineering study of the property and facilities of the applicant, it is
impractical or infeasible for the applicant to install one or more meters to
measure the amount of water passing through the water meter serving such
property and not being discharged into the sanitary sewers of the town, the
WPCA is authorized to make an engineering study to determine the percentage
of the amount of water passing through such meter that is being discharged
into the sanitary sewer of the town. A report of such determination, showing
the basis thereof, shall be certified by the WPCA, and one copy shall be
retained by the WPCA and one copy shall be filed with the General Manager and
one copy shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Such report, when so filed,
shall constitute the basis upon which the sewer service charge established by
this chapter shall be computed.



   (E)   The General Manager is authorized by the majority vote of the
WPCA to make such additional engineering studies from time to time of any
such property and facilities, to check the current accuracy of the filed
report on any such property, and if it is then determined that the filed
reports annual estimated sewage volume is now estimated to differ by more
than 5%, a new report based upon the latest studies shall be filed with the
WPCA to replace the prior one. A complete copy of each such report shall be
retained by the WPCA, with a copy sent to the General Manager. No change in
the basis of computing the sewer service charge for any property will be made
until the first billing date after the filing by the WPCA of the first or any
subsequent report.



   (F)   In the event the General Manager, with the approval of the
WPCA, determines it is necessary that certain testing instruments be
installed, or the existing equipment of facilities located on the applicants
property be altered, adjusted, disconnected or temporarily moved in order to
facilitate the making of an engineering study or test under the provisions of
this section, all of the foregoing shall be done by and at the expense of the
applicant.



   (G)   When the General Manager has, as a result of an engineering
study made under the provisions of this section, determined the percentage of
metered water passing through the water meters serving a property that is
being discharged into the sanitary sewers of the town, or when the amount of
metered water passing through the water meter serving such property and which
is not being discharged into the town's sanitary sewers is determined from a
water meter installed to measure the amount of such water, billings by the
WPCA for sanitary sewer service to such property made prior to such
determination shall be reviewed for the purpose of making whatever adjustment
is necessary in order to charge such customer only for the amount of metered
water that is or has been discharged into the town's sanitary sewers. No
adjustment shall be made in excess of that determined to be proper from such
engineering study or from the metering of water that is not discharged into
the sanitary sewers of the town. Once the proper percentage of adjustment has
been determined and certified to the WPCA under the provisions of this
section, all subsequent adjustment of water usage for sanitary sewer service
charge purposes shall be computed only on the certified basis of adjustment
currently on file with the WPCA.



   (H)   The WPCA may deny an application to conduct a study authorized
by this section, for reasons including a finding by other methods adopted by
the General Manager to reflect differences in the amounts of metered potable
water and estimated wastewater discharges for the purpose of assessing user
charges.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.61  SEPARATE BILLING FOR MULTI-UNIT CONNECTIONS.



   Where the company does not supply the source of water for all multiple
living unit connections, the owner of the premises will be billed directly
for the sewer service charge, where individual water meters are not provided
for each living unit.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.62  DEDUCTIONS FOR VACANCIES; REMOVAL OF APARTMENTS FROM SERVICES.



   No deductions will be made for vacancies in the application of the
minimum sewer service charge to apartments or duplex residences in any
classification. An apartment unit or duplex unit removed from such services
by remodeling or abandonment will be relieved of payment of a sewer service
charge, but correction of the WPCA's record must be requested by the owner in
writing or by signing the proper forms provided by the WPCA.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.63  BILLING.



   (A)   Billing for sewer service charges shall be made to the sewer
customers of the WPCA by the town annually. Those persons without water
meters or with a source of water supply other than the Regional Water
Authority will be billed quarterly.



   (B)   All sewer user charges shall be due and payable on or before
ten days after the date of the mailing of the bill to the persons. Any sewer
use charge not paid within 30 days of due date shall be delinquent and shall
bear interest from the due date at the rate and in the manner provided by the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut for delinquent property taxes.
There shall be indicated on each bill the last date on which the same may be
paid without becoming subject to the interest charge, together with a
statement to the effect that if the bill is not paid within 30 days from the
due date, it will become subject to interest from the due date at the
applicable rate. The town shall exercise due diligence to collect the full
amount due. The town may consider accounts, in its discretion, uncollectible.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.64  COLLECTION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any unpaid sewer user charges shall constitute a lien upon the
real estate against which such charge was levied from the date it became
delinquent. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the
manner provided by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut for
continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens and encumbrances
except taxes, and may be foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for property
taxes. The WPCA, with the approval of the Legislative Council, shall
designate a person as the collector of the sewer use charges, and such
collector may collect such charges in accordance with the provisions of the
General Statutes, aforesaid, for the collection of property taxes. The town
official will prepare a list of accounts deemed uncollectible in whole or in
part with recommendations as:



      (1)   Write off as uncollectible. Said list shall be submitted
to the WPCA for review and approval.



      (2)   Delinquent unpaid sewer user charges shall be increased
to include all fees and charges applicable to the unpaid sewer use charges.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.65  ADJUSTMENT OF BILL.



   (A)   In the event any adjustment in a water bill affects the basis
on which the town sewer charge is levied for the same period, an appropriate
adjustment in the sewer use charge shall be made by a credit or additional
charge on the next bill. In all cases, the General Manager shall certify to
the WPCA the validity of each adjustment.



   (B)   The WPCA may permit adjustments to a user's sewer bill for
various reasons under provisions of rules, regulations and guidelines that
may be adopted from time to time by the WPCA with the approval of the
Legislative Council.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.66  USE OF SEWER AFTER REFUSAL TO PAY.



   Any person failing or refusing to pay the charges provided for in this
chapter, or to deposit the proper sum in the event of a dispute as to the
amount of such charges in the time and manner provided, and who continues to
discharge wastewater from his property into the sanitary sewer systems of the
town, shall be guilty of an offense. Each and every day that such violation
continues shall constitute separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
The conviction of a person for such an offense shall not be a bar to the
institution by the WPCA of a suit for the collection of the delinquent
charges and for an injunction to enjoin such person from discharging waste
into the sanitary sewer system of the town without complying with the
provisions of this subchapter and paying the charges established hereby.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.67  IMPLEMENTATION OF CHAPTER.



   All provisions of this chapter shall become effective upon their
passage in accordance with the Town Charter.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.68  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly
furnishing the WPCA with false or fraudulent information, or failing to
comply with the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of an offense.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.69  ESTABLISHMENT OF A SEWER FUND.



   There shall be no separate sewer fund in the town outside of the normal
accounting methods used by the town's Finance Office. All notes, bonds and
any other funds for the purpose of the town's sewerage system shall be
allocated in the same manner as any other borrowing prescribed by the Town
Charter with the recommendation and approval of the town's fiscal authority,
the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.70  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   Any and all funds connected with the collection of sewer use charges
and/or the maintenance of the town's sewer shall be part of the annual town
audit.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY



§ 51.75  ESTABLISHMENT.



   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 7-246 through 7-269a, revision of
1958 as amended, there is hereby created an authority to be designated and
known as the Water Pollution Control Authority of the Town of Hamden
(hereinafter referred to as the WPCA). The purpose for which the authority is
hereby created is to operate the sewerage system of the town, to use, equip,
re-equip, repair, maintain, supervise, manager, operate and perform any act
pertinent to the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of sewage.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.76  POWERS.



   In furtherance of the purpose for which it is created, the WPCA may
exercise any and all of the powers not to exceed the powers granted to such
an authority by Conn. Gen. Stat., 7-246 through 7-289a, not to exceed those
powers not specifically granted to it by the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.77  ORGANIZATION OF SEWER STAFF.



   (A)   The sewer staff, under the Director of Public Works, shall be
responsible for the operations maintenance and administration of the sewerage
system.



   (B)   The personnel needs of the sewerage system shall be presented
annually in accordance with the procedures established in the budget of the
Public Works Department.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.78  AUTHORITY TO INCUR DEBT.



   The Finance Director may issue and sell tax anticipation notes from
time to time as necessary to meet the short-term liabilities of the sewer
fund prior to the receipt of revenues, provided such notes are authorized by
the WPCA, Legislative Council and the Finance Director determines that said
notes are payable from sewer fund revenues prior to the end of the fiscal
year during which said notes are issued. The Finance Director may issue and
sell long-term debts on behalf of the sewer fund, in the form of general
obligation bonds or other legal debt instruments, provided such issuance is
authorized by the Legislative Council and the Finance Director



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.79  FLOW OF FUNDS.



   Any and all flow of funds shall be in accordance with and with the
consent of the fiscal authority of the town, upon the recommendation of the
Director of Finance.



   (A)   The disposition of any excess revenues remaining at the end of
the fiscal year shall be the sole discretion of the fiscal authority of the
town.



   (B)   Any deficit net of receivables remaining at the end of the
fiscal year shall be added to the cost of service for the following years and
recovered through rates and charges for sewer service.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.80  BUDGETING.



   An annual budget of the next fiscal year's projected revenue and
expenditures of the sewer fund and recommended sewer use charges shall be
submitted to the Water Pollution Control Authority and filed with the Town
Clerk by the town's Finance Director within 24 hours after the end of the
budget process, up to and including Mayoral approval or veto of the Council
Approved Budget for the next fiscal year and any time period thereafter,
until such process is complete.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.81  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.



   The town shall have no fewer than two representatives on the New Haven
WPCA. The appointments of these representatives shall be recommended by the
Mayor of Hamden and approved by the Legislative Council. Their terms shall be
coterminous with the Mayor. Said terms shall begin December 31 of a mayoral
election year and expire December 31 of the next mayoral election year.



(Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who continues to violate any provision of §§
51.01 through 51.49 after the time limit specified in any notice given in
accordance with § 51.49 has expired, shall be fined not less than $25, nor
more than $100 for each offense.  Each day that any violation of  §§
51.01 through 51.49 continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense for
the purpose of the penalty provided in this section.



   (B)   Each violation of §§ 51.55 through 51.81 shall be punishable
by a fine of $100.



(Ord. 235, adopted 9-4-84; Am. Ord. 397, passed 10-25-99)



CHAPTER 52:  LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM



Section



   52.01   Mandatory leaf collection program



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Separation of leaves from rubbish and placement at the curb
for removal



   52.04   Leaves and yard waste collected by collectors



   52.05   Regulations



   52.06   Exemption



   52.07   Enforcement



 



   52.99   Penalties



§ 52.01  MANDATORY LEAF COLLECTION PROGRAM.



   There is hereby established a chapter for the mandatory separation of
leaves from refuse, placement of the leaves into required bags by residents
of the town and the separate collection of these leaves curbside by the
Department of Public Works, or its agents.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "COLLECTOR."  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or
other entity or organization of any kind which engages in the business of
collecting and removing leaves and yard waste.



   "LEAF COLLECTION SYSTEM."  The period of time for collection of leaves
determined by the Director of Public Works.



   "LEAVES."  Depositions from deciduous and evergreen trees, excluding
pine cones.



   "PAPER BAG."  A sack of up to 30 gallon capacity, two ply 50 pound
wet-strength with decomposing glue, environmentally safe inks and reinforced
self-supporting square bottom closure.



   "YARD WASTE."  Hedge trimmings, garden waste, branches or brush. Yard
waste shall not include grass clippings, tree stumps, tree roots or tree
branches in excess of four inches in diameter.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 352, adopted 10-3-94; Am. Ord. 628,
adopted 12-3-12)



§ 52.03  SEPARATION OF LEAVES FROM RUBBISH AND PLACEMENT AT THE CURB FOR
REMOVAL.



   (A)   In accordance with the Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-241(b), leaves
may not be disposed of in a landfill or incinerator. Leaves collected by
persons, firms or corporations shall be processed for the purpose of
composting in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   During the declared leaf collection season, residents shall
place all leaves into paper leaf bags as defined in this chapter. These paper
leaf bags shall be placed at the curb on collection days specified by the
Director of Public Works. Leaves placed at the curb without being contained
in paper leaf bags, or placed at the curb after the scheduled collection
days, shall be in violation of this chapter.



   (C)   No other yard waste or other material shall be placed in paper
leaf bags.



   (D)   No tape, staples or string shall be used as a closure on paper
leaf bags.



   (E)   Leaves shall not be placed in plastic bags during the leaf
collection season for collection as refuse. Leaves shall not be mixed with
refuse for collection as refuse.



   (F)   Paper leaf bags shall be placed at the curb separate from any
refuse of bulk trash, and shall not obstruct any fire hydrant, sidewalk,
driveway or street.



   (G)   No person or property owner shall rake, place or blow, or
cause to be raked, placed or blown, any leaves into any street within the
town, from private lands, property or sidewalk.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)  Penalty, see §
52.99



§ 52.04  LEAVES AND YARD WASTE COLLECTED BY COLLECTORS.



   (A)   Leaves and yard waste collected by collectors shall be
transported separately to a compost facility approved by the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection. A list of such facilities in this
area will be available from the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Any collector who transports leaves and-or yard waste in
accordance with division (A) of this section to a facility located within the
town shall be required to obtain a permit.



   (C)   Permits may be purchased by collectors at the Department of
Public Works, 1125 Shepard Avenue, Hamden. Fees for such permits are to be
established by the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 352, adopted 10-3-94; Am. Ord. 628,
adopted 12-3-12)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.05  REGULATIONS.



   The Director of Public Works may, from time to time, establish
regulations pertaining to the matters of this chapter.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 52.06  EXEMPTION.



   Residents unable to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
submit information to the Mayor or his/her designee to establish such
inability or disability, and if approved, may rake or cause their leaves to
be raked to the curb in loose piles. Residents may be required to present
such information in order to qualify on a yearly basis.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)



§ 52.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   Whenever the Director of Public Works has reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she
shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible therefor. The
notice shall be delivered either by hand or by certified mail to the property
owner, shall include a statement of the violation and shall indicate a
deadline for remedial action which allows reasonable time for compliance. If
corrective action is not taken within the time period allowed, the Director
of Public Works may take such action as is appropriate under § 52.99.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 352, adopted 10-3-94; Am. Ord. 628,
adopted 12-3-12)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.99  PENALTIES.



   Every person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, including
regulations established hereunder, shall be fined $100 for every such
violation. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Penalties imposed under this chapter shall not be applied to
violations occurring prior to October 1, 1994.



(Ord. 343, adopted 2-7-94; Am. Ord. 628, adopted 12-3-12)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter



         70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS



         71.   WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



Fire Zones



   70.01   Defined



   70.02   Establishment of



   70.03   Filing of orders



   70.04   Appeal of orders; hearing



   70.05   Marking zones



   70.06   Cost of marking zones



   70.07   Parking or standing in zones prohibited; prima facie evidence



   70.08   Towing away vehicles



   70.09   Notice of violation; payment



Securing of Loads



   70.15   Construction and loading requirements



   70.16   Securing loads and coverings



   70.17   Violation prohibited



Towing



   70.20   Authority to remove and impound vehicles — Illegally
parked vehicles; notice to owner of vehicle; release of impounded vehicle;
record of impoundment of vehicle



   70.21   Tower to be authorized and insured



   70.22   Request for immediate hearing when vehicle is impounded



Snow Removal



   70.25   Depositing snow on highways prohibited



Miscellaneous



   70.30   Parking prohibited



   70.31   School crossing guards



   70.32   Handicapped parking spaces



   70.33   Handicapped parking eligibility



   70.34   Parking prohibited



   70.35   Parking tickets



   70.36   Presumption in reference to illegal parking



   70.37   Formal hearing procedure; parking violation hearing officers



 



   70.99   Penalty



FIRE ZONES



§ 70.01  DEFINED.



   As used in §§ 70.01 through 70.09 "FIRE ZONE" is a designated,
unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to permit free passage of fire and
other emergency equipment from a public highway to all necessary areas or
portions of any private or public property as hereinafter set forth. 



(Adopted 3-2-70)



§ 70.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF.



   Whenever the fire marshal shall determine that the reasonable safety of
persons occupying or using any premises, public or private, having a capacity
of at least 15 persons, requires the establishment of a fire zone for orderly
access of fire and other emergency equipment, he shall establish such fire
zone by written order and cause to be made public, announcement of the fire
zone establishment.  He shall cause a copy of the order to be delivered to
the owner or owners, or agents thereof, of any private land on which the fire
zone is established. 



(Adopted 3-2-70)



§ 70.03  FILING OF ORDERS.



   Whenever a fire marshal establishes a fire zone, he shall file one copy
of his order with the clerk of the legislative council and one copy with the
traffic authority.



(Adopted 3-2-70)



§ 70.04  APPEAL OF ORDERS; HEARING.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the order may file with the clerk of
the legislative council, within 15 days after the date of the order, written
notice of appeal, setting forth therein reasons of aggrievement.



   (B)   After hearing, the legislative council may affirm, modify, or
rescind the order. 



(Adopted 3-2-70)



§ 70.05  MARKING ZONES.



   Upon establishment of a fire zone, the traffic authority shall cause to
be erected or installed adequate signs, markings, and other devices to
delineate the fire zone.



(Adopted 3-2-70)



§ 70.06  COST OF MARKING ZONES.



   Signs, markings, and other devices erected or installed on privately
owned premises shall be at the cost of the owner and may be billed for and
collected in the same manner as municipal taxes; provided the traffic
authority causes notice of lien to be filed on the land records within 60
days after the erection or installation.



(Adopted 3-2-70)



§ 70.07  PARKING OR STANDING IN ZONES PROHIBITED; PRIMA-FACIE EVIDENCE.



   (A)   No person shall park or permit to stand a motor vehicle in a
fire zone, or to obstruct a fire hydrant, except when actually picking up or
discharging passengers.



   (B)   The registered owner of a motor vehicle shall be presumed to
be the operator of the vehicle.



(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75)  Penalty, see § 70.99(A)



§ 70.08  TOWING AWAY VEHICLES.



   Any motor vehicle found standing in a fire zone which has been
established in accordance with §§ 70.01 to 70.09, inclusive, or any motor
vehicle found standing within 10 feet of a fire hydrant may be towed, upon
the direction of a police officer, the fire chief, the fire marshal, any
deputy fire chief or any person acting in the capacity of deputy fire chief,
to any public or private parking facility, and all expenses of the towing any
subsequent storage shall be borne by the registered owner of the vehicle.



(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75)



§ 70.09  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; PAYMENT.



   Whenever a motor vehicle is found standing in violation of § 70.07, a
police officer, the fire chief, the fire marshal, any deputy fire chief, or
any person acting in the capacity of deputy fire chief shall serve upon the
owner or operator of the vehicle, or place upon the vehicle, a notice
directing the owner or operator thereof to appear  at the police department
prior to a time specified in the notice. If any person receiving the notice
shall appear as directed and shall pay an amount as specified in the notice,
not exceeding $5, the payment shall bar a prosecution for violation of §
70.07.



(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75)



SECURING OF LOADS



§ 70.15  CONSTRUCTION AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall operate or shall cause to be operated or moved any
vehicle on any highway unless the vehicle is so constructed, loaded or
properly covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting,
blowing, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that some substances
may be dropped or sprinkled on the roadway for the purpose of securing
traction, cleaning or maintaining the roadway.



(`66 Code, § 56-1)  Penalty, see § 70.99(B)



§ 70.16  SECURING LOADS AND COVERINGS.



   No person shall operate or shall cause to be operated or moved any
vehicle on any highway with any load unless the load and any covering thereon
is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming
loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway.



(`66 Code, § 56-2)  Penalty, see § 70.99 (B)



§ 70.17  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall violate any provisions of §§ 70.15 to 70.17,
inclusive.



(`66 Code, § 56-3)  Penalty, see § 70.99 (B)



TOWING



§ 70.20  AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND IMPOUND VEHICLES — ILLEGALLY PARKED
VEHICLES; NOTICE TO OWNER OF VEHICLE; RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE; RECORD OF
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of
this Chapter or any parking ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the
Traffic Authority, such vehicle may be removed under the direction of a
member of the Police Department by means of towing the vehicle to a towing
garage.  Such removal shall be at the risk and expense of the owner.



   (B)   Vehicles towed for any violation of this Chapter or any
parking ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the Traffic Authority shall
be stored in a safe place and shall not be restored to the owner of such
vehicle until payment of towing and storage fees.  Storage fees shall not be
charged for any vehicle removed or towed to a designated Town owned garage or
parking area.



   (C)   Whenever a Police Officer removes or causes the removal of a
vehicle for a violation of this Chapter, or any parking ordinance, rule,
regulation or order of the Traffic Authority, such Officer shall within a
reasonable time, report such action to the Desk Sergeant on duty or other
designated person who shall notify the owner of the vehicle upon the owner's
inquiry of the removal and the reasons thereof, and the name and location
where the vehicle is impounded.



   (D)   The owner of the vehicle impounded under this section shall
have the right to contest such impoundment by application on a form
prescribed by the Chief of Police.



   (E)   The owner of any vehicle impounded shall be duly informed as
to which provisions of this Chapter, Town ordinance, rule, regulation or
order of the Traffic Authority has necessitated the impoundment of said
vehicle.



   (F)   Before the owner of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted
to remove the impounded vehicle from such impound, such person shall provide
evidence of his/her identity, and ownership, shall sign a receipt for such
vehicle, and shall pay the cost of towing and storing for each day or portion
of a day that such vehicle is stored by the tower in excess of the first
twenty-four (24) hours.



   (G)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record
of the names of the owners of all vehicles impounded, the nature and
circumstances of each violation and the disposition of each case.



   (H)   The Town, its officers, agents, and employees shall not be
liable for any damage done to any vehicle as a result of towing and storing
affected under the terms of this Chapter.



(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)



§ 70.21  TOWER TO BE AUTHORIZED AND INSURED.



   Any person authorized to remove a vehicle under the provision of this
Chapter, shall be an authorized tower for the Hamden Police Department and
shall carry adequate insurance to indemnify and hold the Town harmless
against any and all claims for damages caused to such vehicle while such
vehicle is being removed or stored by such authorized tower.



(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)



§ 70.22  REQUEST FOR IMMEDIATE HEARING WHEN VEHICLE IS IMPOUNDED.



   Any person whose vehicle is impounded may request an immediate hearing
on the validity of the charges on which the impoundment was based. A hearing
shall be convened thereafter by one of the parking violation hearing officers
as soon as practicable. The procedure for the hearing shall be informal as to
the rules of evidence, but testimony shall be taken under oath or
affirmation. In considering the charges, the hearing officer may consider all
relevant facts and circumstances and may require the personal appearance of
the person requesting the hearing and the issuing officer. Should the hearing
officer find in favor of the person charged, he/she shall so certify to the
Town, and the record of charge or charges shall be removed from the files of
the Town and the vehicle released to the owner. Should the hearing officer
find the issuance of the charge(s) proper, he/she shall so certify to the
Town and no further appeal hearing shall be considered. The hearing officer
shall determine the amount due the Town for the cost of impoundment and the
amount due for citations outstanding. The owner may regain possession by
paying the amount found due by the hearing officer and establishing his/her
identity and right to possession and upon signing a proper receipt for the
vehicle. If not paid the same day, the owner shall also pay all charges due
for the storage of the vehicle.



(C.G.S. § 14-150)  (Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)



SNOW REMOVAL



§ 70.25  DEPOSITING SNOW ON HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall deposit, or permit to be deposited, any snow
on a public highway.  The registered owner of any motor vehicle equipped
for, or capable of, use in snow plowing shall be presumed to be the operator
of such vehicle.



   (B)   "MOTOR VEHICLE" as used in this section includes all
combustion-engine vehicles, whether wheeled or tracked.



   (C)   No person shall violate any provision of this section.



(Adopted 2-2-70)  Penalty, see § 70.99 (A)



MISCELLANEOUS



§ 70.30  PROHIBITING MOTOR VEHICLES BETWEEN THE SIDEWALK AND THE CURB OR ON
MEDIAN DIVIDERS.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon, nor shall any
motor vehicle be left parked, standing, or stopped, on or across any piece of
property located between the sidewalk and the curb or any median divider
except to cross the property to enter or leave adjacent areas or to perform
necessary construction or maintenance.



   (B)   "MEDIAN DIVIDER" as used in this section  shall be defined as
an intervening space or physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing
section separating traffic lanes provided for vehicles proceeding in
different directions.



   (C)   Disabled motor vehicles removed from traveled portions of the
highway at the direction of a police officer or those motor vehicles clearly
bearing disabled notices for a period of 24 hours, pending removal, shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section.



   (D)   Provisions of this section shall be enforced by sworn members
of the town department of police service by affixing a parking violation
notice to any vehicle in violation of this section. 



(Ord. 165, passed 4-3-78)  Penalty, see § 70.99 (C)



§ 70.31  SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.



   School crossing guards duly appointed by the chief of police are hereby
empowered and authorized to stop or direct traffic in those areas deemed
necessary for the protection of children traveling to and from school. 



(Ord. 185, passed 9-10-79)



§ 70.32  HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section shall apply to all new and
existing nonresidential sites that have a parking area for 20 or more
vehicles, including but not limited to, shopping centers, office buildings,
commercial buildings, mercantile buildings, warehouses, storage buildings,
manufacturing buildings, schools, and public buildings.



   (B)   Use.  After establishment of specially marked parking spaces
for handicapped persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in such space
unless a handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle
and the vehicle contains a designation issued by the commissioner of motor
vehicles for the state or some other governmental authority which designation
shall be visible.



   (C)   Number of spaces to be provided.



      (1)   On each side having parking spaces for at least 20 but
not more than 25 spaces, at least one space shall be specially designated and
reserved for handicapped parking.  Additional spaces for handicapped parking
shall be in accordance with the following table.



 

Total parking on site
 
Required number of handicapped parking spaces




26-50
 
2


51-75
 
3


76-100
 
4


101-150
 
5


151-200
 
6


201-300
 
7


301-400
 
8


401-500
 
9


501-1000
 
2% of total


over 1000
 
20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000




 



      (2)   Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be located as
close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways, and entrances, and so
located that the handicapped  person is not compelled to wheel or walk
behind parked vehicles to reach entrances, ramps, walkways, and elevators.



   (D)   Parking spaces.  Each such space designated for handicapped
parking shall not be less than 15 feet in width, including a three feet cross
hatch, unless the same would require the enlarging of existing parking
spaces, in which event the existing parking space width shall be permitted.
Each space shall be designated by above grade signs with white lettering
against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking -
State Permit Required".  Such signs shall be erected, installed, and
maintained by and    at the expense of the owner, operator, lessee, or
tenant of the site and shall further indicate that unauthorized use of the
space shall subject the violator to a fine.  If the signs and markings
called for herein are not installed within 30 days after written request by
the town police department, the town may proceed to install the same and
impose the cost thereof against the owner of the site.



   (E)   Owner's responsibility.  The registered owner of any vehicle
parked in violation of this section shall be presumed to be the operator at
the time of the violation. 



(Ord. 191, passed 4-7-80) Penalty, see § 70.99(D)



§ 70.33  HANDICAPPED PARKING ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any on-street parking
space designated by the Traffic Authority for parking by handicapped persons
unless a handicapped person is either a passenger or occupant of the vehicle
and the vehicle contains a designation issued by the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles for the state or some other governmental authority.  Such
designation shall be visible.



   (B)   The registered owner of any vehicle parked in violation of
this section shall be presumed to be the operator at the time of violation.



   (C)   The penalty for violations of this section shall be found in
§ 70.99(D)



(Ord. 313, passed 1-16-91)



§ 70.34  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of any of
the following traffic regulations except when in compliance with the
direction of a Police Officer or traffic control sign or signal.



      (1)   Overtime Parking.  No vehicle shall be parked beyond
the time permitted on streets so designated for specific time limitations.



      (2)   More Than 12-Inches From Curb.  No vehicle shall be
parked on any street with its wheels more than twelve (12) inches from the
curb.



      (3)   More Than One Space.  Vehicles are to be parked as so
designated by appropriate markings.



      (4)   Obstructing Driveway.  No person shall park or leave
stationary on a public highway any vehicle in front of or so as to obstruct
or interfere with the ingress or egress of any private driveway or alleyway
except with the permission of the owner of such driveway or alleyway. 



(C.G.S. § 14-252)



      (5)   25-Feet of Stop Sign.  No vehicle shall be parked
within 25-feet of any stop sign prescribed by the Traffic Authority or the
State Traffic Commission. 



(C.G.S. § 14-251)



      (6)   Entrance to Public Building.  No vehicle shall be
parked as to obstruct the ingress or egress to a public building.



      (7)   Parking on Sidewalk.  No vehicle shall be left parked,
standing or stopped on or across any public sidewalk except to cross such
sidewalk to enter or leave adjacent areas or to perform any necessary
sidewalk construction, maintenance or snow removal. 



(C.G.S. § 14-250a)



      (8)   25-Feet From Corner.  No vehicle shall be parked within
25-feet of the corner of any intersection or a marked crosswalk. 



(C.G.S. § 14-251)



      (9)   Public Service Vehicle Stop/Stand.  No person other
than an operator of a motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers
for hire shall park any vehicle in any officially designated public service
motor vehicle stand, and no operator of any such motor vehicle shall park
such vehicle upon any highway in any business district other than a public
service motor vehicle stand. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
any such motor vehicle from temporarily stopping such vehicle in accordance
with parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.



(C.G.S. § 14-305)



      (10)   Parking Prohibited.  No vehicle shall be parked in any
area as so designated by appropriate signs and/or markings erected by the
Traffic Authority or the State  Highway Commission. 



(§ 14-307)



      (11)   Obstructing Traffic.  No person shall be permitted to
remain stationary within the limits of a public highway in such a manner as
to constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the free movement of traffic. A
vehicle that has become disabled to such an extent that it is impossible or
impracticable to remove it may be permitted to remain for a reasonable time
for the purpose of making repairs or obtaining sufficient assistance to
remove it. 



(§ 14-251)



      (12)   Double Parking.  No person shall park in such a manner
as to constitute a traffic hazard or obstruct the free movement of traffic
upon the highways.



      (13)   Mayor's Proclamation.  Whenever traffic conditions
make it necessary that parking within the paved portion of the highway or
adjacent thereto be curtailed, a special parking restriction may be declared.
While the restriction is in effect, no person shall park or allow to remain
parked, any motor vehicle on any portion of any highway to which it applies.



      (14)   Wrong Side of Street.  Vehicles must be parked facing
the same direction as the flow of traffic.



   (B)   Prohibited or restricted commercial motor vehicle parking.



      (1)   No person shall park or leave standing a commercial
motor vehicle on any town street or portion thereof in a residential
district. For purposes of this division (B), a "RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT" shall
be defined as an area zoned for residential use under the Hamden zoning
regulations and as shown on the Hamden zoning map. In the event that a street
is the boundary of a residential and non-residential district, the
prohibition shall apply only to the residential side of the street. This
prohibition shall not apply to the parking or standing of such a vehicle for
the purpose of making pick-ups or deliveries from or to any home, structure
or building located within the residential district, or for the purpose of
delivering materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or
construction of any such home, building or structure, or for loading and
unloading. This prohibition shall also not apply to: school buses on or
between daily routes; town, state or utility company vehicles parked for
purposes of performing work on such street or utility; nor shall it apply to
firefighting apparatus or other authorized emergency vehicles parked for the
purpose of performing emergency or routine services.



      (2)   For purposes of this division (B), "COMMERCIAL MOTOR
VEHICLE" means a motor vehicle having a gross motor vehicle weight rating of
11,000 pounds or more and designed or used to transport passengers or
property.



   (C)   Any violation shall be subject to penalties as set forth in §
70-99(E).



(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 483, passed 4-14-03)



§ 70.35  PARKING TICKETS.



   The Chief of Police may void a parking ticket in the following
circumstances:



   (A)   Ticket is on its face improper in that it is incomplete or
contains obvious errors;



   (B)   Ticket issued to the blind, handicapped or veterans pursuant
to Connecticut General Statutes §§ 14-253 and 14-290 respectively; and



   (C)   Ticket(s) issued to official police, fire and any vehicles
exempt by statutes (marked and unmarked).



(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)



§ 70.36  PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



   In any hearing charging a violation of any law, regulation, rule,
ordinance or order governing vehicle parking, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law,
regulation, rule, order or ordinance, together with proof that the defendant
named in the complaint was at the time of such parking violation the
registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who
parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, such violation occurred. If the violation is unregistered, it is
presumed that the last registered owner is the present owner of said vehicle.



(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96)



§ 70.37  FORMAL HEARING PROCEDURE; PARKING VIOLATION HEARING OFFICERS.



   (A)   Any person or owner of a vehicle cited for a violation of this
ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the Town pertaining to parking, may
request in writing, on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police, a formal
hearing before a Parking Violations Hearing Officer(s) within fifteen (15)
days of issuance of a parking violation citation.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint parking violation hearing officer(s)
other than a police officer, persons working in the Police Department or
person(s) authorized to issue tickets. Such officer(s) shall serve for a term
of two (2) years from the effective date of appointment.



   (C)   The hearing officer(s) shall be empowered to hear appeals from
the issuance of parking violation citations and take such other actions in
processing parking violations as authorized by State statutes and Town
ordinances and regulations.



   (D)   Procedure.



      (1)   In scheduling a formal appeal hearing, the appellant
shall be notified by mail of the place and the time of hearing. Such notice
shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days, but not more than thirty (30)
days prior to the scheduled hearing date.



      (2)   The procedure for the hearing shall be informal as to
the rules of evidence, but testimony shall be taken under oath or affirmation.



      (3)   The provisions of this section shall be construed in
accordance with the provisions of applicable State statutes and Town
ordinances.



      (4)   In considering an appeal, the hearing officer(s) may
consider all relevant facts and circumstances and may require personal
appearance of the appellant and issuing officer.



      (5)   Should the hearing officer(s) find in favor of the
appellant, he/she shall so certify to the Town and the record of the citation
shall be removed from the files of the Town.



      (6)   Should the hearing officer(s) find the issuance of the
citation proper, he/she shall so certify to the Town and inform the appellant
of the applicable fine.



      (7)   If such violation is not paid on the date of the
judgment of the hearing officer(s), the Town shall send, by first-class mail,
a notice of the penalty assessment to the person found liable and shall file,
not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such
mailing, a certified copy of the notice of penalty assessment with the Clerk
of the Superior Court for the geographical area of New Haven, together with
an entry fee as required by statute. The certified copy of the notice of
penalty assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such
twelve (12) month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued
and filed as one record of assessment. The Clerk shall enter judgment in the
amount of such record  of assessment and court costs against such person in
favor of the Town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the General
Statutes, the hearing officer(s) assessment, when so entered as a judgment,
shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a Levy of execution on
such judgment may issue without further notice to such person. 



(C.G.S. § 7-152b).



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 70.07 or 70.25 shall be
fined not more than $100. 



(Ord. 134, passed 9-2-75)  (Ord. adopted 2-2-70)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 70.15 through 70.17
shall be fined not more than $50 for each offense. 



('66 Code, § 56-3) 



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of § 70.30 shall be fined not
more than $25 for each violation. 



(Ord. 165, passed 4-3-78)



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of
§§ 70.32 or 70.33, any town police officer may issue a parking citation,
which parking citation shall provide for a fine equivalent to the maximum
parking fine then currently prevailing in the town, payable to the town and
remitted to the police department within seven days of the parking citation
date.  If any fine is not paid within seven days, a penalty in an amount
equal to the fine shall immediately become due and payable in addition to the
original fine and a warrant may be issued for the arrest of the violator. 



(Ord. 191, passed 4-7-80; Am. Ord. 313, passed 1-16-91)



   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of § 70.34 shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $100 for each violation. Any town Police Officer
may issue a parking citation, which parking citation shall provide for a fine
equivalent to the maximum parking fine prevailing in the town, payable to the
town and remitted to the Police Department within 15 days of the parking
citation date. If any fine is not paid within 15 days, a penalty in an amount
equal to the fine shall immediately become due and payable in addition to the
original fine, and a warrant may be issued for the arrest of the violator.



(Ord. 368, passed 12-2-96; Am. Ord. 377, passed 5-4-98)



CHAPTER 71:  WINTER PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Purpose



   71.02   Definitions



   71.03   Declaration by the Mayor



   71.04   Termination of snow emergency



   71.05   Parking restricted



   71.06   Provisions temporarily effective to take precedence



   71.07   Impounding vehicles



   71.08   Towing and storage



   71.09   Evidence with respect to vehicles parked or left in
violation of this chapter



   71.10   Citation for unlawfully parked vehicle



   71.11   Severability



   71.12   Promulgation of regulations



   71.13   Hearing procedure



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  PURPOSE.



   It is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the public safety,
convenience, and welfare of the town to regulate and restrict the parking of
vehicles on public streets and highways within the control and limits of the
town, during a period of snow emergencies, so as not to impede the
transportation and movement of food, fuel, medical care, fire, health, police
protection, and other vital facilities of the town.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CHIEF OF POLICE."  The Hamden Chief of Police or any person
authorized to act as a representative of the Chief of Police.



   "OPERATOR."  The person using, operating, or having the care, custody
or control of a vehicle being used, operated, or found upon a highway.



   "OWNER."  Any person, firm, corporation, or association holding title
to a vehicle or having legal right to register same.



   "PARK."  The standing of a vehicle other than temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or
passengers on a public street or highway, whether occupied or not.



   "SNOW EMERGENCY."  Whenever the Mayor finds, on the basis of falling
snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the united
states Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet or freezing
rain that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle
traffic be expedited and that parking on town streets or highways be
prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the Mayor shall
put into effect a snow emergency by declaring it in the manner prescribed
herein.



   "STREET OR HIGHWAY." The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is under the control
and maintenance of the town, dedicated, appropriated or open to public travel
or other use.



   "VEHICLE."  Every device upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.03  DECLARATION BY THE MAYOR.



   A snow emergency shall be declared by the Mayor of the town and in the
Mayor's absence by the acting Mayor.  The Mayor shall cause each declaration
made pursuant to this chapter to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts
or telecasts from stations with a normal operating range covering the town. 
The Mayor may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of
general circulation when feasible.  Each announcement shall describe the
action taken by the Mayor, including the time it became or will become
effective.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.04  TERMINATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY.



   Once in effect, a snow emergency under this chapter shall remain in
effect until terminated by announcement of the Mayor in accordance with §
71.03 of this chapter.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.05  PARKING RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful at any time during the period of any snow
emergency under the provisions of this chapter for:



   (A)   Any person to park or allow to remain parked, any vehicle on
any odd numbered portion of a town street or highway;



   (B)   Any person to allow, permit or suffer a vehicle to stand or
park on any town street or highway in such a manner as to constitute a hazard
or obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  PROVISIONS TEMPORARILY EFFECTIVE TO TAKE PRECEDENCE.



   Any provision of this chapter which becomes effective by declaration of
the Mayor or upon occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while
temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of
law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over
provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of
authorized emergency vehicles or emergency traffic directions by a Police
Officer.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.07  IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter may be
impounded and no person shall recover any vehicle removed pursuant to this
chapter without first paying the cost of removal and the cost of storage. 
Any payments required by this section shall not be construed as a penalty so
as to preclude prosecution for a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Before the owner or person in charge of any vehicle impounded
under this section is permitted to remove the vehicle from the place of
impoundment, he or she shall furnish evidence of his or her identity and
ownership, furnish  evidence that payment was made to the Hamden Police for
any citation issued under § 71.10 of this chapter, sign a receipt for the
vehicle and shall pay, in full, the fee for towing and charges for storage.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.08  TOWING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Any Hamden Police Officer by direction of the Chief of Police
is authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle parked in violation of
this chapter to a towing garage. Such removal shall be at the risk and
expense of the owner.



   (B)   Vehicles towed for any violation of this chapter, shall be
stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner of such vehicle
upon payment of an established storage fee.



   (C)   Whenever a Police Officer removes or causes the removal of a
vehicle for a violation of this chapter, such officer shall within a
reasonable time report such action to the desk sergeant on duty or other
designated person who shall notify the owner of the vehicle upon the owner's
inquiry of the removal and the reason thereof, and the name and location
where the vehicle is impounded.



   (D)   The town, its officers, agents and employees shall not be
liable for any damage done to any vehicle as a result of towing and storage
effected under the terms of this section.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.09  EVIDENCE WITH RESPECT TO VEHICLES PARKED OR LEFT IN VIOLATION OF
THIS CHAPTER.



   In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in violation
of this chapter, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint
was parked or left in violation of this chapter, together with proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the
person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.10  CITATION FOR UNLAWFULLY PARKED VEHICLE.



   (A)   When any vehicle is found parked in violation of this chapter,
any Police Officer finding such violation shall take its registration number
and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its
user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation on a
form provided by the Chief of Police stating that such vehicle is parked
unlawfully and shall state the penalty for such violation.  Such citation
shall state the provision of each violation.



   (B)   No person shall recover any vehicle removed pursuant to this
chapter until payment is received by the Hamden Police for any citation
issued for a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   Any owner or operator of the vehicle on which the citation was
attached may make payment in person or remit by mail in the form of a check
or money order payable to the Town of Hamden and delivered to the Hamden
Police Department as specified on the citation, as a penalty for violations
of this chapter.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94) Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of
this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.12  PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The Legislative Council may adopt regulations consistent with this
chapter which thereafter shall have the effect of an ordinance.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.13  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   An owner of a vehicle cited for a violation of this chapter
may, within seven days of issuance of a parking violation citation, request
in writing, on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police, a formal hearing
before a Parking Violations Hearing officer(s);



   (B)   The Mayor, shall appoint parking violation hearing officer(s)
other than policemen, persons working in the police department or person
authorized to issue tickets.  Such officer(s) shall serve for a term of two
years from the effective date of appointment.



   (C)   The hearing officer(s) shall be empowered to hear appeals from
the issuance of parking violation citations and take such other actions in
processing parking violations as authorized by the state statutes and Town
ordinances and regulations.



   (D)   In scheduling formal appeal hearings, the appellant shall be
notified by mail of the place and time of hearing.  Such notice shall be
provided at least 15 days, but not more than 30 days, prior to the scheduled
hearing date.



   (E)   The procedure for the hearing shall be informal as to the
rules of evidence, but testimony shall be taken under oath or affirmation.



   (F)   The provisions of this section shall be construed in
accordance with the provisions of applicable state statutes and town
ordinances.



   (G)   In considering an appeal, the hearing officer(s) may consider
all relevant facts and circumstances and may require personal appearance of
the appellant and issuing officer.



   (H)   Should the hearing officer(s) find in favor of the appellant,
he shall so certify to the town and the record of the citation shall be
removed from the files of the town and any payments made by the appellant
shall be refunded.



   (I)   Should the hearing officer(s) find the issuance of the
citation proper, he shall so certify to the town and inform the appellant by
first-class mail.



   (J)   If such violation has not been paid by the date of the
judgment of the hearing officer(s), the town shall send by first class mail a
notice of the penalty assessment to the person found liable and shall file,
not less than 30 days nor more than 12 months after such mailing, a certified
copy of the notice of penalty assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court
for the geographical area in which the town is located together with an entry
fee as required by statute.  The certified copy of the notice of penalty
assessment shall constitute a record of assessment.  Within such 12 month
period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one
record of assessment.  The Clerk shall enter judgment in the amount of such
record of assessment and court costs against such person in favor of the
town.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the general statutes, the
assessment of the hearing officer(s), when so entered as a judgment, shall
have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution of such
judgment may issue without further notice to such person.



   (K)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal.  An appeal
may be instituted as provided by statute within 30 days of the mailing of
notice of such assessment.  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as a
limitation on the power of the Superior Court to impose a fine in accordance
with the ordinances of the town for violations thereof.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Any owner, operator, person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than $50
for each violation.



(Ord. 354, adopted 11-7-94)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         90.   ANIMALS; FOWL



         91.   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; APPLIANCES



         92.   CURFEW



         93.   FIRE PREVENTION



         94.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH



         95.   PARKS



         96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



         97.   MISCELLANEOUS



         98.   SCENIC ROADS



         99.   FAIR HOUSING; HOUSING PARTNERSHIP



         100.   EMERGENCY ALARMS



         101.   NOISE



         102.   TOBACCO PRODUCTS



         103.   HAZARDOUS WASTE



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS; FOWL



Section



   90.01   Prohibited locations for housing



   90.02   Ratproofing



   90.03   Securing at night; manure  receptacles



   90.04   Exceptions



   90.05   Violation prohibited



   90.06   Inspection of premises



   90.07   Dog defecation



   90.08   Fees



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  PROHIBITED LOCATIONS FOR HOUSING.



   No person shall erect, use, or maintain any building or structure for
housing domestic animals or fowl which is located within 50 feet of a
dwelling house.



('66 Code, § 8-1)  Penalty, see § 90.99(A)



§ 90.02  RATPROOFING.



   No person shall erect, use, or maintain any building or structure for
housing domestic animals or fowl unless the same shall be effectively
ratproofed in accordance with such rules and regulations prescribed for that
purpose by the director of health.



('66 Code, § 8-2)  Penalty, see § 90.99(A)



Cross-reference:



   Ratproofing methods, see Title XV, Ch. 154, §§ 154.20 through 154.22



§ 90.03  SECURING AT NIGHT; MANURE RECEPTACLES.



   The owner or keeper of any domestic animals or fowl shall keep and
maintain, effectively closed during the nighttime, all doors of any building
or structure wherein the domestic animals or fowl are housed and shall
further cause all droppings and manure from the domestic animals or fowl to
be kept in a ratproofed and fly-tight receptacle in accordance with the rules
and regulations prescribed for that purpose by the director of health.



('66 Code, § 8-3)  Penalty, see § 90.99(A)



§ 90.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any doghouse used for
keeping a dog as a house pet nor shall the provisions of §§ 90.02 and 90.03
of this chapter apply to any building or structure that is used or maintained
for housing domestic animals or fowl when located on a farm consisting of 3
or more acres.



('66 Code, § 8-4)



§ 90.05  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter or fail to comply
with any rule or regulation adopted hereunder by the director of health. 



('66 Code, § 8-5) Penalty, see § 90.99(A)



§ 90.06  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   (A)   The director of health is authorized to make inspections of
all premises within the town which house 4 or more dogs, if the owner or
occupant of the premises does not hold a valid and current kennel license. 
The inspections should ensure that the proper levels of health and sanitation
are being maintained and that the presence of the dogs does not cause
violations of the housing code or other lawful rules and regulations adopted
to protect health and safety within the town.



   (B)   Whenever, in the opinion of the director of health, it is
necessary or desirable to inspect any premises, he shall arrange for this at
a reasonable time and with the consent of the owner or occupant. If the
consent is refused, the director of health shall resort to a properly issued
warrant.



   (C)   If, in the course of the inspection, the director of health
determines that the dogs or other animals housed in the premises are being
mistreated, he shall report this to the dog warden, who shall take the
necessary action, not inconsistent with his powers, to protect the animals
and alleviate the problem.



(Ord. 166, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.07  DOG DEFECATION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "PERSON."  Any individual who is in charge of the dog at the time of
the violation or, if no one is in charge or control of the dog, person shall
mean the owner of any duly licensed dog, or if the dog is unlicensed, person
shall mean the actual owner of the dog determined by the circumstances
surrounding the care and custody of the dog at or about the time of the
violation.  If there is more than one person owning a dog, all such persons
shall be jointly liable for any fines imposed hereunder.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any dog
to defecate upon any sidewalk, public street, median divider within public
streets, grass, or paved strips between streets and sidewalks, public parks
and other public property, unless such person shall remove all feces so
deposited by such animal immediately before leaving the area of the
defecation.



   (C)   The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to any blind
person when accompanied by a guide dog, to any deaf person when accompanied
by a guide dog or to any physically handicapped person who under the
circumstances is unable to comply with this section.



   (D)   This section shall be enforced by the town dog warden and his
assistants. 



(Ord. 175, passed 2-5-79)  Penalty, see § 90.99(B)



§ 90.08  FEES.



   The Legislative Council has established the following fees to be
charged by the town:



 

 
Fee


Redemption
 
15 for each incident, plus any advertising cost, and the amount determined to
be the full cost of detention (cost of impound) and care, including, but not
limited to, veterinary care of such impounded dog, cat or other animal.


Cost of impound
 
15 per day


Quarantine
 
Amount determined to be the full cost of detention (cost of impound) and
care, including, but not limited to, veterinary care of such quarantined
animal.


Sale as a pet (adoption fee)
 
5


Euthanasia and cremation
 
Actual cost


Cremation only
 
Actual cost



 



(Ord. 262, passed 7-10-87; Am. Ord. 607, passed 5-2-11)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which
another penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not more than $50. 



('66 Code, § 8-5)



   (B)   Any violation of § 90.07 shall be punishable by a fine of no
more than $25.



(Ord. 175, passed 2-5-79)



CHAPTER 91: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES; APPLIANCES



Section



Motor Vehicles; Appliances



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Legislative intent



   91.03   Storage restrictions



   91.04   Notice of violation



   91.05   Failure to comply; lien on land



   91.06   Exceptions



   91.07   Violation prohibited



Refrigerators



   91.10   Abandoning, etc. prohibited



   91.11   Removal of snap locks and doors



   91.12   Violation prohibited



 



   91.99   Penalty



MOTOR VEHICLES; APPLIANCES



§ 91.01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of §§ 91.01 to 91.07, inclusive, unless otherwise
specifically provided, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them respectively:



   (A)   Enforcement officer. The director of health or his designated
agent or deputy.



   (B)   Junk appliance. Washing machine, drying machine, stove,
refrigerator, freezer, air-conditioning device and machine, water heater and
water cooler and device for the storage of hot water or cold water,
dishwasher, television receiver, furniture, office equipment, machine or
implement for business, manufacturing or farming purposes and any other
similar thing or part thereof, in an inoperative or discarded condition.



   (C)   Junk vehicle. Any motor vehicle, or part thereof, which is not
currently licensed by the commissioner of motor vehicles for lawful operation
on the public highways of this state and is in a rusted, wrecked, discarded,
partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition.



   (D)   Operator. Any person who has apparent charge, care or control,
possession or occupancy of land.



   (E)   Owner. Any person who:



      (1)   Has any legal title to, or beneficial interest in, any
land with or without actual possession or occupancy thereof; or



      (2)   Has charge, care or control of any land as an owner or
as an agent of an owner, or as an officer, director or employee of a
corporation or other business entity, which is an owner or an agent of an
owner, or as an executor, administrator, trustee, conservator or guardian of
an owner or the estate of an owner.



(Adopted 8-5-68)



§ 91.02  Legislative intent.



   (A)   It is found and declared that junk vehicles and junk
appliances upon any property within the town:



      (1)   Are detrimental to public safety, health and welfare;



      (2)   Constitute a nuisance and particularly imperil the
health and safety of children;



      (3)   Constitute a potential source of fire and explosion;



      (4)   Are and may become harborages of rodents and breeding
places of insects; and



      (5)   Threaten and depreciate neighboring properties.



   (B)   The preservation of public health, the elimination of such
public peril and the general protection of property and maintenance of
property values are proper concerns of the town.



   (C)   The enactment of §§ 91.01 to 91.06, inclusive is necessary
for the protection and preservation of the public health and safety, and
property and property values.



(Adopted 8-5-68)



§ 91.03  Storage restrictions.



   No owner or operator of any parcel of land, wholly or partly within the
town shall deposit or cause or permit to be deposited, or retain, or cause or
permit to be retained, any junk vehicle or junk appliance on the land, except
in a suitable enclosed and secured structure.



(Adopted 8-5-68)



§ 91.04  Notice of violation.



   On information or complaint of any violation of § 91.03, the
enforcement officer shall cause to be served written notice, either
personally or by mail, upon the owner or operator of the land on which the
violation is found or complained of, setting forth, and ordering correction
of, the violation. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:



To:               



   As Owner Or Operator Of



               , in the



   Address



Town of Hamden.



You are hereby notified that you are in violation of § 91.03 of the code of
ordinances of this town, in that a junk vehicle or junk appliance has been
found deposited or retained upon the above listed land, and you are hereby
ordered to remove said junk vehicle or junk appliance within ten (10) days
from the date of this notice. Failure to comply with this notice within the
time stated is punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.) for
each day of noncompliance.



In addition to possible fine, the Town of Hamden may cause the removal of
said junk vehicle or junk appliance and all costs and expense so incurred
shall be chargeable to you, shall constitute a lien against your property,
and may be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of
delinquent taxes.



TOWN OF HAMDEN, CONNECTICUT



Dated:                  By:               



                      Authorized Signature



(Adopted 8-5-68)



§ 91.05  Failure to comply; lien on land.



   (A)   Upon the failure of any owner or operator of any land to
comply with the provisions of any notice issued in accordance with § 91.04,
the enforcement officer or his agents may enter upon the land and cause to be
removed the junk vehicle or junk appliance.



   (B)   All costs and expense incurred in connection with the removal
shall be charged to the owner of the land, and shall constitute a lien upon
the land.



(Adopted 8-5-68)



§ 91.06  Exceptions.



   (A)   Section 91.03 shall not apply to any land actually operated
and occupied for the sale, repair, reconditioning, or remodeling of motor
vehicles when operated in conformance with zoning regulations of the town and
applicable general statutes of this state.



   (B)   Section 91.03 shall not apply to any land actually operated
and occupied by any person for the sale or service of appliances when all
storage is visually screened, to a height of at least 6 feet, from the street
and from all adjoining properties, and when all storage areas are maintained
in a neat and orderly fashion as not to create health hazards, insect
breeding places, or rodent harborage, and when all exterior storage areas are
securely locked and physically inaccessible to any person not employed or
engaged in the business.



(Adopted 8-5-68)



§ 91.07  Violation prohibited.



   (A)   No person, who as owner or operator of any parcel of land,
shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice
served in accordance with § 91.04.



   (B)   No person shall resist, obstruct, or interfere with any agent,
servant, or officer of the town when engaged in the execution of any
provision of §§ 91.01 to 91.06, inclusive.



   (C)   The penalties provided in § 91.99 (A) and (B) of this chapter
shall be in addition to any other relief or remedy provided by §§ 91.01 to
91.06, inclusive or penalty provided by law.



(Adopted 8-5-68) Penalty, see § 91.99 (A) and (B)



REFRIGERATORS



§ 91.10  Abandoning, etc. prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave
outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or any other,
container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be
released for opening from the inside of the icebox. refrigerator or container.



('66 Code, § 4-1) Penalty, see § 91.99 (C)



§ 91.11  Removal of snap locks and doors.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave
outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other
container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or any other devices
therein without first removing the snap lock or doors from the icebox,
refrigerator or container.



('66 Code, § 4-2) Penalty, see § 91.99 (C)



§ 91.12  Violation prohibited.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
91.10 to 91.12, inclusive, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.



('66 Code, § 4-3) Penalty, see § 91.99 (C)



§ 91.99  Penalty.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of § 91.07 (A) shall be fined
not more than $50.



('66 Code, § 4-10)



   (B)   Whover violates any provision of § 91.07 (B) shall be fined
not more than $100.



('66 Code, § 4-10)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 91.10 to 91.11,
inclusive, shall be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30
days.



('66 Code, § 4-3)



CHAPTER 92: CURFEW



Section



   92.01   Applicable age group; hours



   92.02   Parent responsibility



   92.03   When effective; notice



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  Applicable age group; hours.



   No child under the age of 16 years shall loiter upon any street, alley
or public place within the town between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
unless the child shall be accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or some
adult person authorized by the parent or guardian to attend the child.



('66 Code, § 16-1)



§ 92.02  Parent responsibility.



   No parent or guardian shall permit any child under the age of 16 years
to loiter any street, alley or public place within the town between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless the child shall be accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian or some adult person authorized by the parent or
guardian to attend the child.



('66 Code, § 16-2) Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  When effective; notice.



   The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be suspended
until such time and for such period or periods as the legislative council
shall deem advisable or expedient. Whenever, in the opinion of the
legislative council, the safety and the protection of the public shall be
served by the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the council
shall publish once in some newspaper having a circulation in the town notice
of its decision to declare this chapter in force and thereupon this chapter
shall forthwith, as of the date of publication of the notice and for the
period as shall be stated in the notice, become enforceable and in effect.



('66 Code, § 16-3)



§ 92.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of § 92.02 shall be fined not more than
$50 for each offense.



('66 Code, § 16-2)



CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION



Section



Fireworks



   93.01   Discharge prohibited; exception



   93.02   Sale and storage



   93.03   When discharge is permitted



   93.04   When manufacture, sale of fireworks permitted



   93.05   Use of signaling devices



   93.06   Violation prohibited



Outdoor Fires



   93.10   Definition



   93.11   Kindling of fires



   93.12   Incinerators



   93.13   Location and care of incinerators



   93.14   Cooking fires



   93.15   Nonliability of town officials



   93.16   Violation prohibited



Space Heaters



   93.20   Purpose



   93.21   Definition



   93.22   Sale, installation, etc. prohibited



   93.23   Use of, prohibited



   93.24   Fire department inspector



   93.25   Violation prohibited



Permits and Fee Schedules




   93.30   Permits





   93.31   Operating permit fee schedule





   93.32   Occupancy operating permit and inspection fee schedule





   93.33   Plan review fee schedule





   93.34   Exemptions from fees; exception





   93.35   Penalty for non-payment




   93.36   Fees for reinspection



 



   93.99   Penalty



FIREWORKS



§ 93.01  Discharge prohibited; exception.



   (A)   The discharge, firing or use of all firecrackers, rockets,
torpedoes, Roman candles, fire balloons or other fireworks or substances
designed and intended for pyrotechnic display, and all pistols, canes,
cannons or other appliances, using blank cartridges or caps, containing
chlorate of potash mixture, is prohibited in the town.



   (B)   The mayor and the chief of the fire department, however, upon
written application may grant written permission for the display of
fireworks, provided that, in their opinion, the display or displays shall be
of a character and so located, discharged or fired as not to constitute a
hazard to surrounding property nor endanger any person or persons.



('66 Code, § 25-1) Penalty, see § 93.99 (A)



Statutory reference:



   Fireworks, Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 530, §§ 29-96 to 29-101, inclusive.



§ 93.02  Sale and storage.



   The sale of fireworks at retail and the storage or sale of fireworks at
wholesale is prohibited except as herein provided.



('66 Code, § 25-2) Penalty, see § 93.99 (A)



§ 93.03  When discharge is permitted.



   No provision of §§ 93.01 to 93.06, inclusive, shall be construed to
prohibit the discharge of a pistol or other firearms necessary or proper in
carrying out any part of a theatrical performance or an Independence Day
program where a permit has been obtained from the proper town official.



('66 Code, § 25-3)



§ 93.04  When manufacture, sale of fireworks permitted.



   No provision of §§ 93.01 to 93.06, inclusive, shall be deemed to
prohibit the manufacture, keeping, storage, transportation and sales of
pistols, revolvers, firearms, ammunition and explosives in compliance with
the laws of this state; nor prohibit the storage or sale of fireworks by any
wholesale dealer or jobber who shall sell and deliver the same outside of the
limits of the town; provided, however, that articles above mentioned in this
section when in the process of delivery shall be securely packed in closed
containers.



('66 Code, § 25-4)



§ 93.05  Use of signaling devices.



   No provision of §§ 93.01 to 93.06, inclusive, shall be deemed to
prohibit the possession or use of signaling devices necessary for the safe
operation of railroads or aircraft.



('66 Code, § 25-5)



§ 93.06  Violation prohibited.



   The violation of any provisions of §§ 93.01 to 93.06, inclusive,
shall be deemed a misdemeanor and the chief of the fire department may remove
or cause to be removed, at the owner's expense, all stocks of fireworks or
other combustibles exposed for sale or held in stock in violation of §§
93.01 to 93.06, inclusive.



('66 Code, § 25-6) Penalty, see § 93.99 (A)



OUTDOOR FIRES



§ 93.10  Definition.



   For the purpose of §§ 93.10 to 93.16, inclusive, an outdoor fire
shall mean any fire in the open air or outside the confines of a building for
the purpose of:



   (A)   The burning of woodland, grassland, swampland, leaves and
other forest debris;



   (B)   The burning as a means of disposal of any type of structure,
marine and air craft, vehicles, and the burning of debris from any of the
foregoing; and



   (C)   The burning as a means of disposal of papers, rubbish and all
types of combustibles.



('66 Code, § 43-1)



§ 93.11  Kindling of fires.



   (A)   No person shall kindle an outdoor fire except in an approved
type of incinerator without permission from the fire marshal or his designee,
which permission may be denied if in his opinion conditions are unsafe for
burning.



   (B)   No outdoor fire shall be kindled between sunset and sunrise.



   (C)   No outdoor fire shall be left unattended at any time except in
an approved type of incinerator.



   (D)   Outdoor fires must be extinguished before sunset.



   (E)   Outdoor burning of garbage is prohibited.



('66 Code, § 43-2) Penalty, see § 93.99 (B)



§ 93.12  Incinerators.



   (A)   An "approved incinerator" shall mean any metal drum of
adequate capacity, any masonry incinerator or any steel or cast iron
receptacle with solid or perforated sides, front and backs, used to burn
papers, rubbish and combustibles, with sufficient perforations to provide
adequate ventilation to insure proper combustion.



   (B)   Every approved incinerator must be equipped with a spark
arrester or cover which shall be sufficient to prevent the escape of sparks
and embers. Spark arresters may be of perforated sheet metal or wire mesh
(screen), but the openings shall not exceed 1/4 inch square. The spark
arrester must cover the entire opening of the incinerator.



   (C)   Draft doors or openings designed to create a draft or
stimulate combustion must be protected with a 1/4 square inch wire mesh
screen.



   (D)   Incinerators for the use of occupants of apartment houses,
multiple-family dwellings, commercial and industrial establishments must be
approved by the fire marshal.



('66 Code, § 43-3) Penalty, see § 93.99 (B)



§ 93.13  Location and care of incinerators.



   (A)   No approved incinerator shall be located within 20 feet of any
building, property line or any combustible. No incinerator may be located on
street pavement or within the curb area.



   (B)   All incinerators must be emptied periodically to prevent
choking and poor combustion,



   (C)   Whenever an incinerator is so located or in such condition as
to cause it to be a menace to life, health or property, in the opinion of the
fire marshal, the fire marshal shall serve written notice upon the owner or
user of such incinerator to relocate, clean or replace the incinerator within
5 days of the date of the notice, Failure on the part of the owner or user to
comply with the notice shall be grounds upon which the fire marshal may order
the discontinuance of the use of the incinerator.



('66 Code, § 43-4) Penalty. see § 93.99 (B)



§ 93.14  Cooking fires.



   Sections 93.10 to 93.16, inclusive, do not apply to fires for cooking
purposes.



('66 Code, § 43-5)



§ 93.15  Nonliability of town officials.



   (A)   The town, the town fire department and the officers, agents
and employees of each shall not be held responsible for any damage which may
be caused by an incinerator which has been approved, either as to
construction or location, by the fire marshal.



   (B)   The town, the town fire department and the officers, agents
and employees of each shall not be held responsible for any damage by any
outdoor fire for which permission has been granted.



('66 Code, § 43-7)



§ 93.16  Violation prohibited.



   Any person or firm who violates any provision of §§ 93.10 to 93.16,
inclusive, as enacted, or who shall fail to comply with any notice or order
by the fire marshal of the town fire department, may be subject to arrest and
prosecution by the proper authorities and may be fined as provided by §
93.99.



('66 Code, § 43-6) Penalty, see § 93.99 (B)



SPACE HEATERS



§ 93.20  Purpose.



   The provisions hereinafter contained in §§ 93.20 to 93.25, inclusive,
are declared for the purpose of controlling the sale, use, installation and
storage of space heaters as defined in § 93.21 of this chapter. The hazards
which may result from the use of such units can be eliminated through
regulation for the ultimate protection of lives and property in the town.



('66 Code, § 60-1)



§ 93.21  Definition.



   "Space heater" as used in §§ 93.20 to 93.25, inclusive, shall mean a
heating unit which uses or is designed to use solid, liquid or gaseous fuels,
which is designed to heat or is used to heat the area in which it is located,
and which when installed is not firmly affixed in a permanent position by a
rigid pipe connection, is not permanently connected to a chimney stack or
flue and is not permanently vented.



('66 Code, § 60-2)



§ 93.22  Sale, installation, etc. prohibited.



   No person, firm or corporation shall store, keep, sell or cause to be
sold a space heater as defined in 93.21. No person, firm or corporation shall
use, cause or allow to be used in any dwelling (whether same is owned,
occupied, leased or otherwise used by them) a space heater is defined as §
93.21.



('66 Code, § 60-3) Penalty, see § 93.99 (C)



§ 93.23  Use of, prohibited.



   No person, firm or corporation shall use or maintain or permit the use
or maintenance in any building in the town of any space heater as defined in
§ 93.21. For the purpose of this section, it shall be deemed that a property
owner has permitted the illegal use of a space heater if, knowing that the
premises are not centrally, heated, he has failed to inform himself as to the
legality of any heating apparatus installed by the occupants of the property.



('66 Code, § 60-4) Penalty, see § 93.99 (C)



§ 93.24  Fire department inspector.



   Whenever the fire chief or fire marshal, upon inspection, shall
determine that any heating unit, for any reason, is dangerous to use, or that
its use would be contrary to applicable statutes, ordinances, codes or
regulations, he shall order its removal. The fire department shall keep a
record of all inspections and orders made with relation to §§ 93.20 to
93.26, inclusive.



('66 Code, § 60-5)



§ 93.25  Violation prohibited.



   Every person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of
§§ 93.20 to 93.26, inclusive, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



('66 Code, § 60-6) Penalty, see § 93.99 (C)



PERMITS AND FEE SCHEDULES



§ 93.30  PERMITS.



   (A)   No building or structure subject to the Connecticut State Fire
Safety Code and/or State Fire Prevention Code shall be constructed, used,
occupied, enlarged, altered or repaired unless a permit has been granted for
said activity by the Fire Marshal.



   (B)   No person shall undertake any of the operations or activities
described in §§ 93.31 to 93.33 of this subchapter until such person shall
have obtained a permit from the Fire Marshal. Said permit shall be valid from
the date of issue as follows:



      (1)   Issued in conjunction with building permit: shall follow
building permit guidelines;



      (2)   Issued for occupancy operation: 12 months.



      (3)   All other permits: 12 months.



No continuation, expansion, diminution or modification of said operations
shall be undertaken without obtaining a permit from the Fire Marshal.



   (C)   No person shall install, enlarge, alter, remove, repair or
replace any fire protection system in any building or structure subject to
the Connecticut State Fire Safety Code and/or State Fire Prevention Code,
until such person shall have obtained a permit from the Fire Marshal.



   (D)   The permit(s) required pursuant to this section shall be
required in addition to any other permits or licenses required by federal,
state or local law.



(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)



§ 93.31  OPERATING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.



 



Blasting/explosives permit
 
Per State Statute
 
$60


Ammonium Nitrate
 
To store
 
$50


Automobile Wrecking Yards
 
To operate automobile wrecking yards
 
$50


Battery System
 
To operate stationary  lead- acid battery systems having an electrolyte
capacity of more than 100 gal (379 L) in sprinklered buildings or 50 gal (189
L) in nonsprinklered buildings
 
$50


Candles, Open Flames, and Portable Cooking
 
To use in connection with assembly areas, dining areas of restaurants or
drinking establishments
 
$30


Combustible Material Storage
 
To store more than 2500 ft3 (70.8 m3) gross volume
 
$50


Consumer Fireworks (1.4G)
 
To sell, handle on- site, manufacture and store consumer fireworks (1.4G)
Applicant will need to submit inventory list and site plans for review
 
$200


Exhibit and Trade Shows
 
To operate all exhibits and trade shows held within a jurisdiction
 
$50


Fairs - No Rides
 
To conduct the events
 
$50


Flame Effects
 
To use flame effects before an audience
 
$100


Flammable and Combustible Liquids; Including Underground Storage Tank
installation or removal
 
(1) To use or operate, repair or modify a pipeline for the on-site
transportation of flammable or combustible liquids

(2) To store, handle or use Class I liquids in excess of 5 gallons or in
excess of 10 gallons outside a building

Exception:

A permit is not required for the following:

(a) The storage or use of Class I liquids in the fuel tank of a motor
vehicle, aircraft, motor boat, mobile power plant, or mobile heating plant
unless such storage in the opinion of the AHJ would cause an unsafe condition

(b) The storage or use of paints, oils varnishes, or similar flammable
mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting, or similar
purposes for a period of not more than 30 days

(3) To store, handle or use Class II or Class III A liquids in excess of 25
gallons in a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside a building.

Exception: Fuel oil used in conjunction with oil burning equipment

(4) To remove Class I or Class II liquids from an underground storage tank
used for fueling motor vehicles by any means other than approved, stationary
on-site pumps normally used for dispensing purposes.

(5) To operate tank vehicles, equipment, tanks, plants, terminals, wells,
fuel dispensing stations, refineries, distilleries, and similar facilities
where flammable and combustible liquids are produced, processed, transported,
stored, dispensed, or used

(6) To alter, clean, repair, line with a protective coating, remove, abandon,
place temporarily out of service, or otherwise dispose of a flammable or
combustible liquid tank
 
Residential: $50

Commercial: $100



Hazardous Materials
 
(1) To store, transport on site, dispense, use, or handle hazardous materials
in excess of the amounts listed in Table 1.12.8(d) of 2015 CSFPC

(2) To repair, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, close, or
substantially modify a storage facility or other area regulated by Chapter 60
of the 2015 CSFPC when the hazardous materials in use or storage exceed the
amounts listed in Table 1.12.8(d) of the 2015 CSFPC
 
$50


High- Piled Combustible Storage
 
To use any building or portion thereof as a high-piled storage area exceeding
500 ft2 (46.45m2)
 
$50


Hot Work Operation s
 
For hot work. For additional permit requirements for hot work operations, see
section 41.1.5 of 2015 CSFPC
 
$50


Laboratories
 
To operate
 
$50


Liquefied Petroleum Gases
 
To store, use, handle, or dispense LP-Gas of 125 gallons (water capacity)
aggregate capacity or greater
 
$50


Membrane Structures, Tents, and Canopies - Permanent
 
To locate, erect, or place
 
$50


Membrane Structures, Tents, and Canopies - Temporary
 
To operate an air- supported temporary membrane structure or tent having an
area in excess of 200 ft2 (18.6m2) or a canopy in excess of 400 ft2 (37.2m2)

Exception:

Temporary membrane structure, tents, or canopy structures used exclusively
for camping
 
$30


Organic Peroxide Formulations
 
To store, transport on site, use or handle materials in excess of amounts
listed in Tables 1.12.8(c) and (d) of the 2015 CSFPC
 
$50


Oxidizers
 
To store, transport on site, use, or handle materials in excess of amounts
listed in Tables 1.12.8(c) and (d) of the 2015 CSFPC
 
$50


Parade Floats
 
To use a parade float for public performance, presentation, spectacle,
entertainment or parade
 
No fee


Pyrotechnic Articles/Sparklers
 
To manufacture, store, or sell pyrotechnic articles including sparklers and
fountains. Applicant will need to submit inventory list and site plans for
review
 
$200


Pyrotechnics Before a Proximate Audience
 
To display and use pyrotechnic materials before a proximate audience
 
$100


Pyroxylin Plastics
 
To store, handle, assemble, or manufacture pyroxylin plastics
 
$50


Special Outdoor Events, Carnivals, and Fairs
 
To locate and operate special outdoor events, carnivals and fairs
 
$50


Spraying or Dipping of Flammable Finish
 
To operate any spray room, spray booth, or preparation work station, or to
conduct a spraying or dipping operation utilizing flammable or combustible
liquids or powder coatings
 
$50


Special Outdoor Events
 
To locate and operate special outdoor events
 
$50


Tar Kettles
 
To place a tar kettle, placement shall be obtained prior to the placement of
a tar kettle
 
$50


Tire Storage
 
To use an open area or portion thereof to store tires in excess of 500 tires
 
$50


Torch- Applied Roofing Operation
 
To use a torch to apply roofing materials
 
$50


Other
 
Processes identified in the Connecticut State Fire Prevention Code, but not
listed in this table
 
$50




 



(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)



§ 93.32  OCCUPANCY OPERATING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE.



 




Ambulatory Health Care

 
To operate an ambulatory health care occupancy
 
$50


Apartment Buildings and Dormitories
 
To operate an apartment building or dormitory
 
Up to 11 dwelling units: $40

12 or more dwelling units: $80


Assembly Occupancies : Liquor Licenses
 
To operate an assembly occupancy with liquor license
 
$50

1 day liquor license: $30


Assembly Occupancies : Including Special Amusement Buildings
 
To operate a place of assembly
 
$50


Automotive Fuel Servicing
 
To provide automotive fuel servicing
 
$50


Business Occupancies
 
To operate a business occupancy
 
$50


Day-Care Occupancies
 
To operate a day-care occupancy
 
$50


Drycleaning Plants
 
To engage in business of dry-cleaning or to change to a more hazardous
cleaning solvent
 
$50


Educational Occupancy
 
To operate an educational occupancy
 
$50


Health Care Facility
 
To operate a health care occupancy
 
$160


Hotels and Bed and Breakfast Establishments
 
To operate a hotel, motel or bed and breakfast establishment
 
Up to 11 dwelling units: $40

12 or more dwelling units: $80


Industrial Occupancies
 
To operate an industrial occupancy
 
$50


Mercantile Occupancies
 
To operate a mercantile occupancy
 
$50


Repair Garages and Service Stations
 
To operate service stations and repair garages
 
$50


Residential Board and Care Occupancies
 
To operate a residential board and care occupancy
 
$50


Storage Occupancies
 
To operate a storage occupancy
 
$50


Any other occupancy requiring Fire Marshal Certificate
 
 
 
$30




 



(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)



§ 93.33  PLAN REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The fee for building plan review, fire protection system plan
review and fire alarm system plan review and inspections for new
construction, renovations, additions or modernization of buildings or
structures shall be based on the estimated cost of the construction or
alteration.



   (B)   Estimated cost of the construction or alteration:



      (1)   $0.00 up to and including $10,000: $55.00 fee.



      (2)   In excess of $ 10,000: $55.00 fee plus $5.00 fee per
$1,000 or fraction thereof.



      (3)   Any building plans for structures 10,000 square feet or
greater may be required to have an independent plan review, to be determined
at the sole discretion of the Office of the Fire Marshal. The independent
plan review shall be conducted by a plan reviewer hired by the applicant and
subject to the approval of the Office of the Fire Marshal. The applicant
shall pay all costs associated with the contracted plan reviewer's
independent review. The applicant shall submit the plan reviewer's written
report, along with documentation that the reviewer's costs have been paid in
full, prior to the Office of the Fire Marshal's review and approval of such
plan.



   (C)   Exception. Plan reviews are not required for private dwellings
occupied by one or two families as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., §
29-292(a)(l), as may be amended.



(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16; Am. Ord. 697, passed 2-26-18)



§ 93.34  EXEMPTIONS FROM FEES; EXCEPTION.



   Departments and agents of the Town of Hamden Board of Education shall
be required to obtain all permits, inspections and plan review required
pursuant to §§ 93.31, 93.32, and 93.33 but all fees associated therewith
shall be waived.



(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)



§ 93.35  PENALTY FOR NON-PAYMENT.



   Penalties for non-payment. Failure to pay fees as prescribed by this
subchapter may result in a penalty of legal action or closure. Interest on
delinquent bills will be charged at the rate of one and one-half percent per
month from the due date (18% per annum). Minimum interest charged is $2.00
per bill. Any fees owed will negate the issuance of any further permits until
the fees are paid in full. Emergency work will be considered if it poses a
threat to life safety. The Fire Marshal may choose to write infractions for
operating without a town permit in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code.



(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)



§ 93.36  FEES FOR REINSPECTION.



   The fees for an issued permit include the initial inspection and one
re-inspection. All subsequent re-inspections shall be assessed an additional
$50 fee. Payment for all such re-inspections shall be made payable to the
“Treasurer”, Town of Hamden, in advance of such re-inspection.



(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)



§ 93.99  Penalty.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 93.01, 93.02 or 93.06
shall be fined $100 for each day’s violation.('66 Code, § 25-6)



('66 Code, § 25-6)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 93.11 to 93.13,
inclusive shall be fined $100 for each violation. ('66 Code, § 43-6)



('66 Code, § 43-6)




   (C)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 93.22, 93.23 or 93.25
shall be fined $100. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate
offense.





('66 Code, § 60-6)





   (D)   Any person who commences any work which is subject to the
permit requirements of §§ 93.31, 93.32 and/or 93.33 without first obtaining
a permit shall be required to pay a penalty equal to the amount of the permit
fee otherwise applicable. Said penalty shall be payable in addition to the
required permit fee. No such penalty shall be imposed upon a person who
commences emergency repair work without a permit provided that a permit is
sought promptly thereafter.




(Ord. 682, passed 9-19-16)



CHAPTER 94:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH 



Section



Bringing into Town



   94.01   Permit required



   94.02   Violation prohibited



Transportation and Keeping



   94.05   Nuisance prohibited



   94.06   Hours for collection



Littering



   94.10   Word usage and definitions



   94.11   Littering prohibited



   94.12   Commercial and retail properties



   94.13   Responsibilities of owners of private property



   94.14   Distribution and posting of notices; handbills



   94.15   Placing of handbills on vehicles



   94.16   Distribution of handbills prohibited where posted



   94.17   Enforcement



   94.18   Notice of violations



   94.19   Citations; penalties



   94.20   Appeal; hearing procedure for citations



   94.21   Removal by town



   94.22   Violations and penalties



Hamden Municipal Landfill



   94.25   Purpose



   94.26   Definitions



   94.27   Regulations



   94.28   Fees



   94.29   Violations



   94.30   Responsibility for landfill supervision



Solid Waste Disposal



   94.35   Declaration of policy



   94.36   Definitions



   94.37   Storage of refuse



   94.38   Collection and transportation of refuse



   94.39   Disposal of refuse



   94.40   Use of solid waste disposal area and transfer station



   94.41   Use of system



   94.42   Recycling



   94.43   Issuance of permits



   94.44   Violations; notice



   94.45   Suspension and revocation of permits; appeal



   94.46   Statutory authorization



   94.47   Charter authority



 



   94.99   Penalty



BRINGING INTO TOWN



§ 94.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall bring any garbage or rubbish into the town from any
other town without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Legislative
Council. 



('66 Code, § 30-1)  Penalty, see § 94.99 (A)



§ 94.02  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall knowingly or willfully violate
any provision of § 94.01, and in doing so shall forfeit such permit. 



('66 Code, § 30-2)  Penalty, see § 94.99 (A)



TRANSPORTATION AND KEEPING



§ 94.05  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   No refuse, filth, garbage, offal, manure or other offensive or noxious
substance shall be transported, kept or used within the town in such manner
as to cause injury to other persons, or which constitutes a public or private
health nuisance.  The Director of Health is empowered to make reasonable
regulations for the transportation, use or keeping of the substances.



('66 Code, § 30-3)  Penalty, see § 94.99 (B)



§ 94.06  HOURS FOR COLLECTION.



   Collection of refuse, solid waste or recyclable materials shall be
conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



(Ord. 569, passed 1-5-09) Penalty, see § 94.99(B)



LITTERING



§ 94.10  WORD USAGE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense includes the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.



   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:



      "AIRCRAFT."  Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented
used or designed for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "AIRCRAFT"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.



      "AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE."  A litter storage and
collection receptacle.



      "COMMERCIAL HANDBILL."  Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet and any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature which:



         (a)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product,
commodity or thing;



         (b)   Directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interest of thereof by sales;



         (c)   Directs attention to or advertises any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the sole purpose of private gain or profit; but
the terms of this division shall not apply where an admission fee is charged
or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any
kind, when any of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with
the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary
rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order, provided
that nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to authorize the
holding, giving, or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or
may be required by any law of this state or under any ordinance of this town;
or



         (d)   While containing reading matter other than
advertising matter, is predominately and essentially an advertise-ment and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit
and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



      "DUMP."  To discard (a) more than one cubic foot in volume of
litter at one time, or (b) furniture, garbage bags or contents thereof or
other similar materials. Material which has been placed at a location with an
intent to leave it indefinitely at such location, or material which has not
been removed from a location within 45 days, is deemed discarded.



(C.G.S. § 22a-248(12))



      "GARBAGE."  Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      "LITTER."  Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste
material, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other
natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including but not
limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any
bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or
glowing material, or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass
clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazine, glass, metal,
plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction material which
has not been deposited in a litter receptacle.



(C.G.S. § 22a-248(4))



      "LITTER RECEPTACLE."  A receptacle suitable for the depositing
of litter.



(C.G.S. § 22a-248(6))



      "NEWSPAPER."  Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of
the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by law
and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not fewer than four issues per year and
sold to the public.



      "NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL." Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, or other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."



      "PARK."  A park, reservation, play-ground, beach, recreation
center or any other public area in the town owned or used by the town and
devoted to active or passive recreation.



      "PERSON."  Any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.



(C.G.S. § 22a-2)



      "PRIVATE PREMISES."  Any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.



      "PUBLIC PLACE."  Any area that is used or held out for use by
the public, whether owned or operated by public or private interests.



(C.G.S. § 22a-248(9))



      "REFUSE."  All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes,
except body wastes, including ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and industrial wastes.



      "RUBBISH."  Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, household
items, tires, appliance, crockery, plastic grocery shopping bags, paper,
plastic and aluminum wrapping and similar items.



      "TOWN."  Town of Hamden.



      "VEHICLE."  Includes every device capable of being moved upon a
public highway and in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human or
animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(C.G.S. § 22a-248(17))



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



§ 94.11  LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 22a-250, no person shall
throw, scatter, spill or place or cause to be blown, scattered, spilled,
thrown or placed, or otherwise dispose of any litter upon any public property
in the state or upon private property in this state not owned by him or in
the waters of this state, including but not limited to any public highway,
public park, beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, mobile
manufactured home park, highway, road, street or alley except:



      (1)   When such property is designated by the state or town
thereof for the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized
to use such property for such purpose;



      (2)   Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the
litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements
upon any part of said private or public property or waters.



   (B)   When any such material or substances are thrown, blown,
scattered or spilled from a vehicle, the operator thereof shall be deemed
prima facie to have committed such offense.



(C.G.S. § 22a-250(b))



   (C)   Penalties for any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be in accordance with § 94.22.



(C.G.S. § 22a-226d(a))



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 94.22



§ 94.12  COMMERCIAL AND RETAIL PROPERTIES.



   In order to aid in the disposition of litter in the town, all owners of
commercial or retail property open to the public shall be required to comply
with local planning and zoning regulations regarding the manner of, number
of, and placement of trash receptacles as set forth in said planning and
zoning regulations as determined by the type of operation and its
accompanying zoning requirements.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 94.22



§ 94.13  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall
at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided however, that
this section shall not prohibit storage of litter in authorized private
receptacle for collection.



   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as permitting
the establishment of litter on vacant lots, or the maintenance of private
dumping areas.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 94.22



§ 94.14  DISTRIBUTION AND POSTING OF NOTICES; HANDBILLS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall affix to a telegraph,
telephone, electric light or power pole, or to a tree, shrub, rock or other
natural object in any public way or grounds, a playbill, picture, notice,
advertisement or other similar thing.



(C.G.S. § 23-65(a))



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or throw any
advertisement within the limits of any public way or grounds, or upon private
premises or property, unless same is left at the door of the residence or
place of business of the occupant of such premises or property, or deposit or
throw any refuse paper, camp or picnic refuse, junk or other material within
the limits of any public way or grounds, except at a place designated for
that purpose by the authority having supervision and control of such public
way or grounds, or upon private premises or property without permission of
the owner thereof, or affix to or maintain upon any tree, rock or other
natural object within the limits of a public way or grounds any paper or
advertisement other than notices posted in accordance with the provisions of
state statutes, or affix to or maintain upon the property of another without
his/her consent any word, letter, character or device intended to advertise
the sale of any article.



(C.G.S. § 23-65(c))



   (C)   The affixing of any playbill, picture, notice, advertisement
or other similar thing concerning the business or affairs of any person, firm
or corporation to a pole, shrub, tree, rock or other natural object, within
the limits of any public way or grounds in violation of the provisions of
this section by an agent or employee of such person, firm or corporation,
shall be deemed to be the act of such person, firm or corporation, and such
person or any member or officer of such corporation, as the case may be,
shall be subject to the penalty herein provided, unless such act is shown to
have been done without his knowledge or consent.



(C.G.S. § 23-65(d))



   (D)   The affixing of each individual playbill, picture, notice,
advertisement or other similar thing to a pole, shrub, tree, rock or other
natural object, or the throwing of each individual advertisement or lot of
refuse paper or other material within the limits of any public way or grounds
or on private premises, shall constitute a separate violation of the
provisions of this section.



(C.G.S. § 23-65(e).



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 94.22



§ 94.15  PLACING OF HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.



   Other than notices posted in accordance with the provisions of local,
state or federal law, no person shall leave or deposit any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle whereby it is indicated in a
conspicuous manner that the owner or occupant of said vehicle does not want
to have any handbills left on such vehicle.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 94.22



§ 94.16  DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS PROHIBITED WHERE POSTED.



   Other than notices posted in accordance with the provisions of local,
state or federal law, no person shall throw, deposit or distribute any
commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if there is
placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near or at the entrance
thereof a sign bearing the words "NO TRESPASSING," "NO PEDDLERS OR AGENTS,"
"NO ADVERTISEMENTS," or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the
occupants of said premises do not desire to have the right to privacy
disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such premises.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 94.22



§ 94.17  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated under
this subchapter. The enforcement officer may order any person who violates
this subchapter to abate such violation, and shall be hereby authorized and
empowered to issue citations for violations of this subchapter in accordance
with section § 94.19.



   (B)   Upon the effective date of this subchapter and annually
thereafter, the Legislative Council shall appoint and may remove a Litter
Enforcement Officer (Enforcement Officer) who shall be a resident of the town
during his/her term, and who shall carry out the provisions of this
subchapter and have such other duties as the Mayor may provide. The
Legislative Council shall set the method and amount of the compensation. The
Enforcement Officer shall be under the daily supervision of the Town Planner
and/or other official designated by the Mayor. The Enforcement Officer shall
report to the Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor for
assignment, and shall make weekly reports to the Town Planner on the status
of all investigations and complaints.



   (C)   Complaint forms shall be made available in the office of the
Legislative Council, Town Clerk's office, Town Planner's office and on the
town's website for those citizens who wish to make reports of littering.
These forms are to be returned to the office of the Legislative Council. The
Litter Enforcement Officer shall investigate these complaints. The
Enforcement Officer shall perform routine inspections of all areas of the
town on a rotating basis and issue appropriate citations as necessary.



   (D)   The Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor
shall submit a written report to the Legislative Council, not later than
12:00 noon of the day on which the regular Council meeting is held,
containing not less than: address of, and date of each investigation or
inspection initiated by the Enforcement Officer; address of each alleged
violation concerning which information or complaint has been received by the
Enforcement Officer; date of such receipt; date of correction notice issued;
date(s) of each re-inspection and disposition of each case closed.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



§ 94.18  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   The town shall serve a written notice to an owner, agent, tenant and/or
person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or singularly referred to as
the "Owner"), of a violation(s) of this subchapter to the owner's last known
address by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall direct
the removal, correction or abatement of the violation within ten calendar
days after receipt of written notice and notify the owner that failure to
remove or correct the violation shall result in the issuance of a citation in
accordance with § 94.19; the fines and penalties imposed; and that if the
owner fails to remove or correct the violation, the town may cause the
abatement of the violation at the expense of the owner of the premises on
which such violation exists.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00) 



§ 94.19  CITATIONS/PENALTIES.



   The town shall serve a written citation notifying the owner of a
violation of this subchapter to the owner's last known address by certified
mail, return receipt requested. Such citation shall inform the owner of the
allegations against him/her and the amount of the fines, penalties, costs or
fees due; that he/she may contest his/her liability before a citation hearing
officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice to the Town Planner
or the Legislative Council Office within ten calendar days of the date of the
citation(s); that if he/she does not demand such a hearing he/she shall be
deemed to have admitted liability; that an assessment and judgment shall be
entered against him/her; and that such judgment may issue without further
notice.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



§ 94.20  APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE FOR CITATIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
other than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to
conduct the hearings authorized by this section.



   (B)   If the person who is sent a citation pursuant to § 94.19
wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or
fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the town.
Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to
establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any
person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten
days of the date of the first notice provided for in § 94.19 shall be deemed
to have admitted liability, and the designated town official shall certify
such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer
shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided
for herein, and shall follow the procedures set forth in division (D) of this
section.



   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing
of notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any
reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or continuance. An
original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the
issuing town official or Police Officer shall be filed and retained by the
town, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The
presence of the issuing official or Police Officer shall be required at the
hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his/her
liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his/her
behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may
present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If such person fails to
appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against
him/her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable
provisions(s) of this subchapter. The hearing officer may accept from such
person copies of police reports, investigatory and citations reports, and
other official documents by mail, and may determine thereby that the
appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct
the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he/she
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence
shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end
of the hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, he/she
shall dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in writing
accordingly. If he/she determines that the person is liable for the
violation, he/she shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees against such person as provided by this subchapter.



   (D)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the
hearing officer shall send, by first class mail, a notice of the assessment
to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more
than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of
assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7,
54 West Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry
fee. The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record
of assessment. Within such 12-month period, assessments against the same
person may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall
enter judgment, in the amount if such record of assessment and appropriate
court costs against such person favor of the Town. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so
entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a
levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such
person.



   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-259, with the Clerk of the Superior Court,
Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall
entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the judges of the
Superior Court.



(C.G.S. § 7-152c)



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



§ 94.21  REMOVAL BY TOWN.



   (A)   Notice to remove.  The Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant property
within the town, or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter
located on such owner's property which is dangerous to the public health,
safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said
owner at his/her last known address.



   (B)   Action upon noncompliance.  Upon the failure, neglect or
refusal of any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten days after
receipt of written notice provided for in § 94.18 and division (A) of this
section, or within ten days after the date of such notice in the event same
is returned to the town because of inability to make delivery thereof,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such
owner or agent, the town may cause the abatement of the litter at the expense
of the owner(s) of the premises where such litter exists.



   (C)   Conference granted to owner/agent. Any owner or agent notified
under division (A) of this section shall be granted a conference with the
President of the Legislative Council or other official designated by the
President of the Legislative Council upon his/her request. Such conference
shall be granted as soon as practicable, but the conference shall in no way
stay the abatement order.



   (D)   Recorded statement constitutes lien. Upon completion of such
work, the enforcement agent shall determine the actual cost thereof and bill
the owner or agent therefor. Upon the failure of the owner or agent to remit
to the town the amount of such charge within 30 days from the date of such
notice, the enforcement agent, within 90 days from the date of such notice,
shall cause to be recorded in the land records of the town a sworn statement
showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was
done and the location of the property on which said work was done. The
recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property.
Any appeal from any final action taken following this section may be taken in
accordance with § 94.20.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



§ 94.22  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating:



      (1)   Section 94.11(A)(1) shall be fined as follows:



         First Offense:  $50



         Second Offense:  $100



         Third Offense:  $250



         More Than Three Offenses:  $500



      (2)   Section 94.11(A)(2) shall be fined $50.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating § 94.14(A) shall be
fined $50.



(C.G.S. § 23-65(a))



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating § 94.14(B) shall be
fined $50.



(C.G.S. § 23-65(c).



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any other section of
this subchapter for which a penalty is not provided for in divisions (A)
through (C) of this section, shall be fined $50 per violation.



(Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



HAMDEN MUNICIPAL LANDFILL



§ 94.25  PURPOSE.



   The intent and purpose of this subchapter is to insure the safe and
orderly use of the Hamden Municipal Landfill; to prevent the premature
exhaustion of this important municipal resource; and to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the town.



(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)



§ 94.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR."  Any person, firm, partnership, association,
or corporation that collects, transports, or dumps garbage for the payment of
a fee.



   "DUMPING."  The depositing, discharging, placing, or disposing of
garbage by any person.



   "GARBAGE" or "WASTE MATERIAL."  Trash, rubbish, refuse, or any
unwanted or discarded materials.  It shall not include hazardous waste nor
other prohibited substances.



   "HAZARDOUS WASTE."  Material that is defined and governed by the
Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.),
and Conn. Gen. Stat. 22a-114 et seq.



   "LICENSED COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR."  Including only such commercial
collector as is the holder of a valid license issued by the Director of
Public Works or his agent pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



   "MUNICIPAL LANDFILL."  The area that has been designated by the town
and is presently in operation.



   "PERSON."  Including, but not limited to, individuals, societies,
associations, municipal corporations, or its agents and employees, firms,
partnerships, associations, and corporations.



   "PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE."  Material so designated by regulations drafted
pursuant to § 94.27 and for that reason prohibited from disposal at the
municipal landfill.



   "RESIDENT."  An individual who resides or owns real property in the
town or any person having a place of business within the town. 



(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)



§ 94.27  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall deposit or otherwise dump any garbage at the
municipal landfill or other town-operated disposal site unless such garbage
is waste material generated within the town and unless such person is
licensed to do so by the Director of Public Works or his designated agent.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works or his agents or employees may
require any person, including but not limited to a licensed commercial
collector, seeking to dump waste material at the municipal landfill, to
certify in writing, under penalty of false statement as provided for in the
state statutes, that the waste material to be dumped was not generated or
collected outside the town.  Any licensed commercial collector refusing to
provide such certification shall not be permitted to dispose of such material
in the landfill and shall remove his vehicle from the landfill site
immediately.



   (C)   No garbage may be deposited or dumped at any site that is not
designated for that purpose by the Director of Public Works, or licensed for
that purpose by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (D)   Dumping shall be permitted only at times and on days
designated by the town in accordance with this subchapter.



   (E)   The Director or Public Works or his agents or employees may
refuse to accept at the landfill any highly dangerous materials such as, but
not limited to, materials exposed to highly infectious or contagious disease
or toxic, inflammable, explosive, or radioactive refuse or hazardous waste,
or any materials that do not conform with the requirements set forth in
regulations promulgated pursuant to division (F) below.



   (F)   The Director of Public Works or his agents or employees shall
issue annual landfill licenses and shall promulgate licensing and other
regulations, which may require bonding contracts for each licensed vehicle
and fines up to $100 per incident or such higher amount as may be permitted
by law that is deemed necessary to enforce this section and insure sanitary
landfill and garbage disposal practices. 



(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)



§ 94.28  FEES.



   (A)   Any person who deposits or dumps any waste material at a town
landfill or dump site shall pay a dumping fee.  The method of determining
said fee shall be established by the Director of Public Works.  Residents
who are dumping from a passenger car, including a station wagon or a pick-up
truck, shall be excluded from this provision.



   (B)   Such fee shall be established, amended or changed, when
required by action of the Legislative Council upon request by the Mayor. 



(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)



§ 94.29  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter shall
pay a fine for each offense.  Each separate truckload of material deposited
or otherwise dumped at the municipal landfill or dump site or at a site other
than one designated for such purposes by the town shall be deemed a separate
offense, and such person may be charged with the actual expense of removal
and disposition of such substance outside the town in addition to any other
fines, fees, or penalties required herein.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works may suspend or revoke the
landfill and dumping license described in this section, refuse to renew such
license, or prohibit any person from dumping for a period of up to one year
in cases where he has determined that person has violated any provision of
this subchapter.



   (C)   A license granted pursuant to this subchapter of the Town Code
shall not be suspended or revoked except after a hearing, upon due notice,
where the licensee shall have an opportunity to be present, represented by
counsel, examine any evidence presented, be present arguments and evidence on
all issues involved.



   (D)   Any partner, joint venturer, employer, principal, agent,
employee of a person that has violated any provision  of this section, and
any shareholder who owns more than 10% of any stock in a corporation that has
violated any provision of this subchapter, shall be presumed to be a person
who has violated a provision of this subchapter. 



(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)



§ 94.30  RESPONSIBILITY FOR LANDFILL SUPERVISION.



   The material to be dumped shall at all times be under the supervision
of the Director of Public Works, who shall specify the nature and content of
all such material which may lawfully be dumped, and it shall be his
responsibility to oversee and regulate all dumping operations and shall
exercise due care to protect adjacent waterways from debris emanating from
such operation.



(Ord. 260, passed 2-3-87)



SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL



§ 94.35  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   In order to promote, protect, and preserve the health, safety,
and general welfare of the people of the town (hereinafter referred to as the
municipality), it is hereby declared to be in the public interest that the
accumulation, preparation, removal, storage, collection, transportation, and
disposal of solid waste be regulated so as to prohibit the harboring and
spreading of rodents and insects, to prevent the spread of disease, to
minimize the potential for air, surface and groundwater pollution, and to
prevent unsightliness resulting in a reduction of the quality of life.



   (B)   This municipality is authorized by law to regulate the
disposition of refuse generated within its boundaries, to collect a charge
therefor and to license or permit collectors.



   (C)   In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
this municipality has executed the municipal contract dated November 22,
1985, which provides for a long-term solid waste disposal process which will
conserve landfill space and recover energy from solid waste but will still
allow the municipality to encourage and promote recycling.



   (D)   The municipal contract requires this municipality to cause all
acceptable solid waste generated within its boundaries, except for recycled
materials, to be delivered to the system.



   (E)   The enactment of this ordinance is in furtherance of this
municipality's solid waste plan.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)



§ 94.36  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings herein defined.



   "ACCEPTABLE SOLID WASTE."  Solid waste normally collected from
households and industrial and commercial establishments for disposal at a
sanitary landfill but does not include nonprocessible solid waste that has
been properly rejected by the company at the facility in accordance with
Section 4.01 of the municipal contract, and unacceptable waste.



   "ACTUAL ACCEPTANCE DATE."  The date the facility is  deemed accepted
as provided for in Subsection 7.05(a) of the facility contract dated December
1, 1986, or the date upon which there has been a facility buy-down under
Article 9 or Article 10 thereof, whichever occurs first.



   "ANNUAL OPERATING PLAN." The detailed operating plan for the facility
provided for in Section 5.10 of the municipal contract.



   "ANNUAL SERVICE PLAN." The detailed service plan described in Section
5.10 of the municipal contract.



   "APPROVED CONTAINER." Standard containers, dumpster-type containers,
roll-off containers, and special containers used for the transportation,
storage, or disposal of refuse, consistent with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   "ASHES." The cold residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or
other combustible materials.



   "BUNDLE." Boxes, cartons, paper, trimmings, and similar matter bound so
as not to exceed four feet in length and six and one-half feet in perimeter
and which shall not weigh over 75 pounds.



   "COLLECTOR." Any person, firm, corporation, or governmental agency or
entity, or the like which engages in the business of collecting and/or
removing refuse within this municipality.



   "COMPANY." Wallingford Resource Recovery Associates, L.P. or its lawful
successor under the service contract dated December 1, 1986, or the facility
contract.



   "CONTAINER." An approved container.



   "CRRA."  The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority.



   "DIRECTOR."  The Director of Public Works of this municipality or his
authorized representative.



   "DUMPSTER-TYPE CONTAINER."  A dumpster-type container which is
designed to allow collection and storage of refuse at a specific site, which
is so constructed that the container can be emptied by the equipment used for
collection into the collection equipment at the storage site, which has a
tight-fitting cover or closure and which is of watertight construction where
intended or used for storage of garbage or liquid wastes.



   "FACILITY." The solid waste disposal and resource recovery facility to
be constructed and operated in the Town of Wallingford, Connecticut by the
company pursuant to the Facility Contract and the service contract and all
appurtenant structures and equipment.



   "FACILITY CONTRACT." The facility contract for design and construction
of a resource recovery facility between CRRA and the company, a copy of which
is on file in the Town Clerk's office.



   "GARBAGE." All putrescible wastes except sewage and body wastes,
including vegetable and animal offal.



   "HEALTH DIRECTOR." The Health Director of this municipality or his
authorized representative, or any person or agency performing the functions
of the Health Director.



   "LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY." The Legislative Council of this municipality.



   "MUNICIPAL CONTRACT." The municipal solid waste delivery and disposal
contract between CRRA and this municipality, a copy of which is on file in
the Town Clerk's office.



   "MUNICIPALITY."  The Town of Hamden.



   "NONPROCESSIBLE SOLID WASTE."  The following categories of solid waste
(other than unacceptable waste):



      (1)   Street sweepings;



      (2)   Noncombustible construction materials and demolition
debris, including masonry, brick and stone, structural steel, re-bar, and
structural shapes;



      (3)   Oversized bulky waste, that is, items which exceed seven
feet by three feet by five feet in size;



      (4)   Tree stumps, logs, brush, and combustible demolition
debris which exceeds four feet in length and four inches in diameter or four
inches in thickness; and



      (5)   Other items not normally burned in a mass-burn facility,
such as white goods and engine blocks, the processing of which would cause
damage to the facility (except for ordinary wear and tear.



   "PARTICIPATING MUNICIPALITY."



      (1)   Any of the Towns of Cheshire, Hamden, North Haven, and
Wallingford, the City of Meriden and any other Connecticut municipality which
shall enter into an agreement with CRRA for disposal of waste by the system,
which agreement is generally the same as the municipal contract; and any
other Connecticut municipality delivering solid waste to the system pursuant
to the terms of the municipal contract.



   "PERMITTEE."  A person who is granted a permit by the municipality
under the terms of this subchapter during the time such permit is valid.



   "PERSON."  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or
other entity or organization of any kind.



   "PERSON IN CHARGE."  The foreman or other person in charge of the
solid waste disposal area.



   "RECYCLABLE MATERIALS."  Materials suitable for recycling.



   "RECYCLING."  A method of reducing the volume of wastes which results
in the separation, extraction, refinement or utilization of materials,
including, but not limited to, aluminum or other metal cans and products,
glass, high-grade paper, newsprint and cardboard, which may then be marketed
or delivered for reuse in manufacturing or other processes.



   "REFUSE."  Garbage, ashes, and rubbish, but not unacceptable waste as
herein defined.



   "RESIDUE."  That material remaining after the processing of solid
waste at the facility and includes solid waste accepted but not processed at
the facility.



   "RESIDUE DISPOSAL SITE."  The properly licensed and permitted site or
sites specified by CRRA to be used for the processing for disposal or the
disposal of residue, nonprocessible solid waste, and all acceptable solid
waste not accepted at the facility.



   "RESIDUE DISPOSAL SITE OPERATING PLAN."  The detailed operating plan
for the residue disposal site provided for in the service contract.



   "ROLL-OFF CONTAINER."  A removable container designed to be left at a
location to be filled with refuse, then by means of special equipment, to be
transported to another location where it is emptied for disposal of its
contents.



   "RUBBISH."  All nonputrescible waste materials except ashes, including
but not limited to paper, cardboard, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and
industrial wastes. The term rubbish as used herein shall not mean nor shall
it include in its meaning unacceptable waste.



   "SERVICE CONTRACT."  The waste disposal services contract between CRRA
and the company for the processing and disposal of acceptable solid waste at
the facility, a copy of which is on file in the Town Clerk's office.



   "SOLID WASTE."  Unwanted and discarded solid materials, consistent
with the meaning of that term pursuant to Section 22a-260(7) of the
Connecticut General Statutes. Semi-solid and liquid materials of the type
that are customarily collected and treated in a municipal sewage and/or water
treatment system are not solid waste nor, for the purposes of this
subchapter, is unacceptable waste.



   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA."  The sanitary landfill operated by this
municipality or such other area as may be designated by the Director as a
solid waste disposal area for the disposal of refuse, but shall not include
the facility or the residue disposal site.



   "SPECIAL CONTAINER."  Any other storage container approved by the
Director which does not violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.



   "STANDARD CONTAINER."  A watertight, plastic or metal container with
handles or bails, having a tight-fitting cover, not weighing over 35 pounds
when empty, not weighing over 75 pounds when filled, and not having more than
a 32-gallon capacity.



   "STATE."  The State of Connecticut.



   "SYSTEM."  The complete resource recovery system, including the
facility and the residue disposal site, for the processing or disposal of
acceptable solid waste and nonprocessible solid waste.



   "UNACCEPTABLE WASTE." 



      (1)   Explosives, pathological waste, hazardous chemicals or
materials, radioactive materials, sludges, cesspool or other human waste,
human and animal remains, motor vehicles, liquid wastes, and hazardous
substances as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act, as it may be amended from time to time
hereafter, and any analogous federal, state, or local law, ordinance, rule,
or regulation as may be applicable at the time of delivery of waste to the
system, other than such insignificant quantities of the foregoing as are
customarily found in normal household, industrial, and commercial waste and
as are permitted by law to be treated and disposed of in facilities not
specifically permitted or licensed to treat or dispose of such materials,
including hazardous substances;



      (2)   Any item of waste, either smoldering or on fire;



      (3)   Wastes in quantities and concentrations which by law
require special handling in their collection or processing; and



      (4)   All other items of waste which, at the time of delivery
to the system, would be likely to pose a threat to health or safety, or would
not normally be disposed of in a sanitary landfill, except that if such waste
would be legally processible at the facility, even though it could not be
disposed of at a sanitary landfill before being so processed, it shall not be
unacceptable waste at the facility, or would be prohibited by any judicial
decision, order or action of any federal, state, or local government or any
agency thereof, or any other regulatory authority, or any applicable law or
regulation, from being processed at the facility.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)



§ 94.37  STORAGE OF REFUSE.



   (A)   No person within the municipality shall store or otherwise
have garbage on his property or on property in his control unless all such
garbage shall be stored on the property in a place not visible from the
street and shall be kept in approved containers which shall be maintained in
good condition and shall be kept closed at all times. Garbage shall not be
stored by any person for more than seven days, exclusive of holidays. If
special circumstances require it, the Health Director may order a shorter
time period for storage of garbage.



   (B)   No person within the municipality shall store or otherwise
have rubbish and ashes on his property or property in his control unless all
such rubbish and ashes are kept in a satisfactory manner. "Satisfactory
manner" means all rubbish and ashes shall be kept in approved containers or
bundles. Rubbish and ashes shall not be stored by any person for more than 30
days. The Health Director may, for cause shown, extend this period.



   (C)   Unauthorized accumulation of refuse, garbage, rubbish and
other waste material on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of the same within
seven days after notification by the Health Director shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter, which violation shall be deemed to have caused
irreparable harm to the public health, safety and welfare.



   (D)   No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within
the municipality any refuse, garbage, rubbish, or other waste material in
such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements or other
means to any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place,
stream, body of water, or to any other place in the municipality.



   (E)   No person shall combine or place refuse and unacceptable waste
in the same container. No person shall place unacceptable waste into any
container used for refuse, nor shall any person place refuse into any
container that is or has been used for unacceptable waste.



   (F)   Doors shall be removed from the hinges of all iceboxes,
refrigerators, freezers, stoves, other major metal appliances or other large
containers with doors affixed prior to disposal and prior to storage in any
accessible place for collection or disposal.



   (G)   Approved containers may be placed at curbside no more than 24
hours prior to collection and any empty containers shall be removed from the
curbside or street no more than 24 hours after collection.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.38  COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE.



   (A)   No person other than this municipality shall engage in the
business of collection, storage, or removal of refuse in this municipality
unless such person shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the
Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Collectors shall keep their premises neat and orderly and
shall keep all vehicles, containers, and equipment in good and sanitary
condition, and said vehicles, containers, and equipment shall be constructed,
equipped, maintained, and operated so as to permit no loss of refuse,
including liquid waste therefrom when said vehicles are being used; provided,
however, that any vehicle to be used for the sole purpose of transporting
rubbish, as defined in this subchapter, shall not be required to be
constructed or operated to prevent the escape of liquid wastes. All vehicles
and containers shall have canvas or other suitable covers approved by the
Health Director.



   (C)   The transportation of refuse by any person, whether or not a
collector, shall be subject to the provisions of division (B) above.



   (D)   No person shall transport unacceptable waste to the solid
waste disposal area.



   (E)   Pursuant to the provisions of the municipal contract, the
Mayor may designate routes for the transportation of refuse or residue to the
system by persons from participating municipalities. Persons transporting
refuse or residue shall use only such designated routes.



   (F)   Upon the recommendation of the Mayor, the Legislative Council
shall take such measures as it deems effectual for the removal or collection
of garbage, rubbish, and other waste materials from the municipality and may,
in such years when a determination and sufficient appropriation for the same
has been made for such purpose, employ or make contracts with one or more
persons or corporations for the removal or collection of garbage, rubbish, or
other waste material under the direction of the Director. Before such
employment or contract begins, the Legislative Council shall, by resolution
upon recommendation by the Mayor, adopt regulations concerning collection
which shall state the area from which refuse shall be collected, the method
and frequency of collection, bonding requirements, and all other regulations
required for the health, welfare, and safety of municipal residents.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see 94.99



§ 94.39  DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Any person residing or having a place of business in the
municipality shall be responsible for the removal of his refuse to a lawful
place for disposal either by himself or by a lawful collector. Refuse shall
be disposed of at regular and frequent intervals, but in no event less
frequently than prescribed in § 94.37.



   (B)   No refuse collected, generated or disposed of in this
municipality shall be deposited for disposal except at such sites and under
such conditions as may be approved by the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see 94.99



§ 94.40  USE OF SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA AND TRANSFER STATION.



   (A)   The solid waste disposal area shall be open such hours as may
be designated by the Director of Public Works, subject to approval by
resolution of the Legislative Council and no dumping shall be permitted
except at such designated times.



   (B)   Any person intending to unload at the solid waste disposal
area shall follow the instructions of the person in charge.



   (C)   No appliances, white goods, recyclable salvage material,
tires, construction or demolition material, debris from a structure fire,
trees, stumps, limbs or trunks of trees shall be dumped at the solid waste
disposal area until the person in charge is notified of such items. The
person in charge will direct the person transporting such material where the
material can be dumped. The approved site for such material may be other than
the solid waste disposal area.



   (D)   No person shall bring flammable powders or other combustible
materials or substances which have a low flash point to the solid waste
disposal area.



   (E)   Without prior written permission from the Director of Public
Works, no person shall dispose of storage barrels, drums, or other similar
containers at the solid waste disposal area, unless such containers are
completely emptied and crushed flat prior to disposal. The Director of Public
Works may, upon ten days notice published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the municipality require written permission from the Director
of Public Works before any disposal of any containers.



   (F)   The following materials shall be considered to be unacceptable
for disposal at the solid waste disposal area: unacceptable waste; rock
ledge, stones, rocks and boulders, or fragments thereof whose largest
dimension is in excess of ten inches; and materials which have not been
prepared for collection, collected, or transported in accordance with this
subchapter.



   (G)   No person shall bring to or discharge at the solid waste
disposal area any material of any nature which has picked up by such person
outside the limits of the municipality. The Director of Public Works shall
have the right to inspect the contents of any vehicle or container brought to
the solid waste disposal area. Each piece of refuse brought into the solid
waste disposal area in violation of this subchapter constitutes a separate
violation of this subchapter.



   (H)   There shall be no scavenging at the solid waste disposal area.



   (I)   The Legislative Council may, upon recommendation of the Mayor,
establish by resolution a fee schedule which requires payment by weight or
volume for various categories of refuse deposited at the solid waste disposal
area.



   (J)   The use of the municipal solid waste disposal area shall be at
a person's or his agent's risk and shall be subject to the following
conditions: in consideration of the grants and privileges to use the
municipal waste disposal area, the person or his agent shall, as a condition
precedent, release the municipality from any right of action, claim, or
demand which may otherwise accrue to him by reason of the loss of any of his
property while in, upon, or about the premises at any municipal solid waste
disposal area and further agrees for such consideration to indemnify the
municipality and save it harmless from all claims, demands, actions, costs,
and charges to which the municipality may be subject or which it may have to
pay by reason of injury to any person or property or loss of life or property
suffered or sustained by any person or agent while in, upon, or about the
premises of the municipal solid waste disposal area.



   (K)   Materials governed by the State Public Health Code and
designated by the Health Director as contaminated and condemned shall be
destroyed under the supervision of the Health Director. The Health Director
may promulgate regulations concerning the nature of such materials and their
method of disposal.



   (L)   Any person delivering refuse to the solid waste disposal area
may be required to show identification in such form as is approved by the
Director of Public Works and which may include a sticker or other
identification to be displayed on each vehicle.



   (M)   The provisions of this section shall remain in force only
until CRRA accepts town solid waste on a regular basis and the town's solid
waste disposal area is closed. The Director of Public Works shall notify all
licensed collectors and publish notice of the effective date of this section.



   (N)   If this municipality establishes a transfer station for use
after the actual acceptance date, the provisions of this section shall apply
to the use of the transfer station except that no collector or person doing
business in this municipality shall deliver to the transfer station refuse
from commercial collection or from said business.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see 94.99



§ 94.41  USE OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   Any person using the system shall comply with any rules
established by the company for use of the facility, rules established by CRRA
for use of the residue disposal site, the municipal contract, the collector
contract, the annual operating plan, the annual residue disposal site
operating plan, the annual service plan and any regulations promulgated by
the municipality pursuant to division (B) below.



   (B)   If, in his opinion, it is necessary or desirable to do so for
the sake of clarity or to protect the interests of the municipality, the
Director of Public Works may prepare municipal regulations governing the use
of the system with the approval of the Mayor and the Municipal Attorney. Such
regulations shall be effective when they are approved; when a copy of such
regulations has been delivered by certified mail to each of the persons
possessing a permit hereunder; and when a copy of such regulations has been
placed on file with the Town Clerk.



   (C)   Any person using the system shall report refuse collected or
generated within the limits of this municipality as being from this
municipality to the system operators and shall report any refuse collected or
generated outside the limits of this municipality as being from the city or
town in which it was collected.



   (D)   Any person shall deliver to the facility all acceptable solid
waste generated within municipal boundaries, except presegregated recyclable
materials, to the extent requested by the Director of Public Works in
accordance with a plan developed by CRRA and the company for use in start-up
and acceptance testing of the facility by the company. The Director of Public
Works will notify such person at least 15 days prior to start-up and
acceptance testing of the expected need for such waste. The Director of
Public Works shall give such person at least one day of prior notice of the
specific amount of, and the time schedule for, the delivery of acceptable
solid waste to the facility during this period.



   (E)   Commencing on the actual acceptance date, all persons shall
deliver or cause to be delivered to the system pursuant to the terms of the
municipal contract all of the acceptable solid waste generated within the
boundaries of this municipality except pre-segregated recyclable materials.



   (F)   No person shall deliver any waste material to the system which
was collected, generated or removed from a location outside the limits of the
participating municipalities, nor shall any person deliver unacceptable waste
to the system unless such delivery is permitted pursuant to Section 9.16 of
the municipal contract.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.42  RECYCLING.



   (A)   Purpose. There is hereby established a program for the
mandatory separation of recyclables from solid waste within the Town of
Hamden to comply with the Connecticut General Statutes.



   (B)   Definitions. All definitions, except those set forth below,
shall be the same as those contained in the Solid Waste Ordinance. As used in
this section, the words and terms listed in this section shall have the
following meanings.



      “AGENT.”  The person appointed by the Mayor as the municipal
agent pursuant this section.



      “CARDBOARD.”  Corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and
kraft paper materials, boxboard (food and beverage boxes) which have a
minimum of contamination by food or other material.



      “COLLECTOR.” Any person, firm, corporation or the like which
engages in the business of collecting and/or removing solid waste within this
municipality.



      “GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.”  A glass bottle or jar
of any size or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for
human or animal consumption.



      “GRASS CLIPPINGS.”  Banned from disposal (should be left on
the lawn, or if necessary, composted).



      “LEAVES.”  The foliage of trees.



      “MATERIAL DESIGNATED FOR RECYCLING OR RECYCLABLE ITEM.”  Any
item required by division  (C)(1) of this section to be separated from solid
waste and recycled.



      “METAL FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.”  An aluminum,
bi-metal, steel, tin-plated steel, or other metallic can, plate or tray of
any size or shape used to package food or beverage products suitable for
human or animal consumption.



      “NEWSPAPER.”  Used or discarded newsprint and advertising
inserts which have a minimum of contamination by food or other material.



      “OFFICE PAPER.”  Used or discarded high-grade paper, white
paper and manila paper including, but not limited to, paper utilized for file
folders, tab cards, index cards, post-it notes, writing, typing, printing,
computer printing, and photo-copying, construction paper, colored
paper/envelopes, junk mail and all other mail including envelopes (windows
OK), magazines, catalogs which are suitable for recycling and which has a
minimum of contamination. Included also are soft cover books and hard cover
books if the cover and binder are removed.



      “PERSON.”  Any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or other entity or organization of any kind.



      “PLASTIC CONTAINERS #1-7.”  Any empty and rinsed plastic
containers and their lids (not styrofoam, not plastic bags) less than five
gallons that have a numbered triangle on the bottom of the container
including but not limited to food and beverage containers, shampoo bottles,
medicine bottles, laundry detergent containers, cups, and the like.



      “RECYCLER.” Any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, or other entity or organization of any kind engaged in the
business of recycling.



      “RESIDENTIAL.”  Any dwelling unit contained in a building
containing six or fewer such units, provided such building has no units not
designated for use as a dwelling. Any dwelling unit contained in a common
interest community of more than six units shall not be considered residential.



      “SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE.”  The Solid Waste Ordinance of this
municipality.



      “STORAGE BATTERY.”  Lead acid batteries or other batteries
used in motor vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational
vehicles, tractors, and like applications.



      “WASTE OIL.”  Crankcase oil that has been utilized in
internal combustion engines.



   (C)   Procedure.



      (1)   Each person in this municipality shall separate from his
or her solid waste and shall cause to be recycled the following items: glass
food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspapers,
office paper, juice and milk cartons, plastic containers #1-7, aluminum foil
and trays, cardboard, grass clippings, leaves, storage batteries, scrap
metal, waste oil, and electronics. Placing any of the above items in a
container with solid waste is prohibited unless such item, because of
contamination or some other inherent quality cannot be recycled.



      (2)   Persons living in residential units shall place glass
food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspapers,
office paper, juice and milk cartons, plastic containers #1-7, aluminum foil
and trays, cardboard, grass clippings and leaves for collection at such times
and in such manner as shall be ordered by the Director of Public Works.
Storage batteries, scrap metal, waste oil, grass clippings and electronics
shall be taken to such location or locations as may be designated by the
Director of Public Works.



      (3)   Each person occupying a residential unit shall place the
materials described above, at such location, at such time in such manner as
shall be designated by the Director of Public Works. Containers shall be
emptied and cleaned prior to being placed out for collection. No
non-recyclable solid waste shall be mixed with any recyclable items placed
out for collection.



      (4)   Each person who does not dispose of solid waste through
a collector shall separate materials designated for recycling and deliver or
cause all such materials to be delivered to a recycler. Any person
transporting recyclable items not picked up by the town collected from a
residence, however, shall bring such materials to the town's designated
recycling drop-off locations.



      (5)   No person shall take any material which has been
separated for recycling from any public or private property in this
municipality unless specifically authorized to do so under the terms of these
regulations.



      (6)   The Mayor shall provide the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection with the name of a person to receive information and
respond to questions regarding recycling and shall designate a municipal
agent to enforce these regulations.



      (7)   Any collector who has reason to believe that a person
from whom he or she collects solid waste has discarded recyclable items with
other solid waste in violation of these regulations shall promptly notify the
agent of the alleged violation. If so requested by the agent, a collector
shall provide a notice, warning or other information as specified by the
agent to any person suspected by the collector or by the municipality of
violating separation requirements. A collector shall also assist the
municipality in identifying any person responsible for creating loads
containing significant quantities of recyclable items mixed with other solid
waste.



      (8)   The owner of any residential property containing seven
or more dwelling units shall make provisions for the residents of such
dwelling units to properly separate materials.



   (D)   Enforcement.



      (1)   The Litter Enforcement Agent and/or the Mayor's designee
shall be responsible for enforcement of the provision of this section. All
notices and fines required or permitted by this section shall be issued by
the Litter Enforcement Agent and/or the Mayor's designee. Fines shall be paid
to "Treasurer, Town of Hamden."



      (2)   Penalty: failure to abide by the provision of this
section shall be considered a violation and punishable as follows:



         (a)   First offense per calendar year- written warning.



         (b)   Second offense (if within the same 12 month period
as the first offense)- $50 fine.



         (c)   Three (or more) offenses (if within the same 12
month period as the second offense) - $100.



      (3)   Appeal: whenever a fine is imposed under this section,
an appeal may be filed within ten days of the issuance of the citation by
filing a written notice of an appeal to the town's Hearing Officer. The
filing of an appeal shall stay any fine imposed until such time as a decision
is rendered on the appeal. The provisions of this section may be enforced by
citation and hearing as permitted by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152c.



(Ord. 612, passed 8-1-11)



Cross-reference:



   Uniforms packaging regulations, see Chapter 122



§ 94.43  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   In order to qualify for a permit, an applicant must present documents
and information to the Director of Public Works to assure the municipality
that the applicant possesses the financial and other qualifications and has
available the necessary equipment to adequately perform the service of
collection, transportation, storage, and removal of refuse. Such documents
and information shall include but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   Certificates of insurance showing coverage satisfactory
to the Director of Public Works;



      (2)   A certificate declaring under penalty of false statement
as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes that no person, partner,
joint venturer, employer, principal, agent, or shareholder associated with
the applicant has violated this subchapter or the collector contract within
the past 12 months or is under a period of permit suspension or revocation at
the time of application, or a statement completely and accurately describing
any such suspension, revocation, violation or alleged violation;



      (3)   A list of the names and addresses of any and all persons
owning an interest in the applicant's business;



      (4)   A description of the area served by the applicant by
street names or a map marked to show the area and streets served;



      (5)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant's
customers residing or located within this municipality;



      (6)   A list of collection equipment and the capacity of such
equipment for all equipment owned or leased by the applicant at the time of
application or upon acquisition thereafter, including containers, used or
intended to be used in this municipality for collection, transportation or
storage of refuse and the capacity and location of each such container;



      (7)   A certification that all collection and transportation
vehicles and equipment used or intended to be used by the applicant in this
municipality for collection, transportation, or storage of refuse comply with
all applicable safety requirements; and



      (8)   Proof of compliance with any bond or other financial
security required by the municipal contract. As a further condition precedent
to issuance of a permit, the applicant must number all vehicles and
containers used or intended to be used for the collection, transportation, or
storage of refuse within this municipality. The applicant shall be further
required to notify the Director of Public Works in writing within 15 days of
any changes with regard to such information, except that the list of names
and addresses required under division (A)(5) above shall be updated and
submitted to the Director of Public Works no less often than quarterly
provided that there are any changes to such list.



   (B)   No person shall be issued a permit unless each collection
vehicle, roll-off container, or other container used by such person in the
collection of refuse has been inspected by the Health Director and the Chief
of Police or his authorized representative. In lieu of inspection and
approval by the Chief of Police the Director of Public Works may accept or
request a certification that all such vehicles and containers complies with
all applicable safety requirements. Such certification shall be in such
manner and form as shall be satisfactory to the Director of Public Works.
Upon a satisfactory inspection of all such vehicles and containers, the
Health Director and the Chief of Police, if he has performed the safety
inspection, shall sign the application form evidencing applicant's compliance
with this section. Each vehicle shall be subject to inspection at any time by
the Director of Public Works, the Health Director, or the Chief of Police, or
their authorized representatives.



   (C)   Only one permit may be issued to each applicant hereunder
whether such applicant is an individual, partnership, or corporation and
regardless of the number of vehicles such applicant uses in the collection of
refuse.



   (D)   No permit except a temporary permit shall be issued after June
30, 1988 unless the applicant has signed a collector contract committing him
to take proper responsibility for his actions as a designee of the
Municipality under the terms of the municipal contract. Such collector
contract shall be prepared by the Municipal Attorney with the approval of the
Mayor and the Director of Public Works and shall include language requiring
liquidated damages as compensation for damages to the municipality caused by
any violation by the applicant of contracts or rules regarding the system or
any regulations promulgated by the municipality.



   (E)   The Director of Public Works may issue short-term temporary
permits which shall have a duration of not more than two weeks.



   (F)   All permits, except for temporary permits, issued hereunder
shall be valid for a period of one year from July 1 of each year. (Any annual
permit which is valid at the time of passage of this subchapter or any annual
permit issued after adoption of this subchapter, is hereby extended to expire
on June 30, 1989). All permittees shall cause such permit identification as
is required by the Director of Public Works to be displayed conspicuously, in
the manner prescribed by the Director of Public Works, on each vehicle and
container used in this municipality in the business of collection, storage,
or transportation of refuse.



   (G)   Each applicant for a permit hereunder shall pay a fee for such
permit and inspections, which fee shall be set as part of a fee schedule to
be established by resolution of the Legislative Council upon the
recommendation of the Mayor. The permit fee may be based on the number of
vehicles and containers used by the applicant and the capacities of such
vehicles or containers. No proration of such fees shall be allowed for late
registration.



   (H)   When any permittee shall sell or transfer all or part of his
business, it shall be the obligation of both the permittee and the purchaser
or transferee to notify the Director of Public Works, in writing, of such
sale or transfer no later than 24 hours after completion of said transaction.
No prorated refunds shall be issued.



   (I)   Any person having a place of business in this municipality who
removes the refuse from his business for disposal by himself shall first
apply for and obtain a permit. Any such person shall comply with all of the
provisions of this section except for division (A)(3), (4), and (5).



   (J)   No permit shall be issued to any applicant if any person,
partner, joint venturer, employer, principal or agent associated with the
applicant, shareholder who owns more than 10% of such applicant's stock, or
employee having some responsibility for the applicant's business is, at the
time of application, associated with any person, collector or other business
which is under a period of permit suspension or revocation in accordance with
the terms of this subchapter, or has been associated with any such person,
collector, or other business during a period of suspension or revocation of
the permit of such person, collector, or other business, which suspension or
revocation remains in effect at the time of application.



   (K)   Permits granted hereunder shall not be transferable or
assignable.



   (L)   The Director of Public Works may, in his discretion, issue a
reciprocal permit to any applicant who has obtained a permit from any town,
city or borough which is a party to a municipal solid waste delivery and
disposal contract with CRRA governing participation at the facility by that
town, city, or borough. The terms, conditions, and expiration date of such
permits shall be set at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.44  VIOLATIONS; NOTICE.



   (A)   Whenever the Director of Public Works has reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
subchapter, he shall give notice of such violation to the person responsible
therefor. Such notice shall be delivered either by hand or by certified mail
to the last known address of the permittee, shall include a statement of the
violation and shall allow a reasonable time to remedy the violation. If
corrective action is not taken within the time period allowed, the Director
of Public Works may take such action as is appropriate under § 94.45, and
may cause the violation to be corrected and shall bill the person for the
cost thereof.



   (B)   Whenever the Health Director finds that a situation exists
involving the collection, storage, transportation, or disposal of refuse
which endangers the public health, he may, as an emergency measure correct
the same without and  notice to the owner or occupier of the premises and
upon completion of the work, he shall determine the reasonable cost of the
work and bill the owner or tenant therefor. Such cost shall constitute a lien
on the property on which the corrective measure is taken. Upon recommendation
of the Health Director, the provisions of this division may be enforced by
the Director of Public Works who shall have all of the powers and authority
granted the Health Director by this division.



   (C)   Failure to pay any disposal fee established by this
municipality or by CRRA shall be considered a violation of this subchapter
after any invoice for payment remains outstanding for more than 30 days. As
soon as he becomes aware of it, the Director of Public Works shall give
written notice of this violation to the violator.



   (D)   Provisions of any false information, certifications or
documents shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see 94.99



§ 94.45  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS; APPEAL.



   (A)   A permit may be revoked because of a violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter or any of the various plans, rules, regulations
or contracts governing the use of the system. At the time the Director of
Public Works becomes aware of a violation he shall give notice as specified
in § 94.44(A). If the violation is not corrected within the specified
period, the Director of Public Works shall impose penalties and collect
damages as provided for in this subchapter and the collector contract.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall temporarily suspend a
permit if any portion of any valid bill from the municipality, CRRA, or the
company remains unpaid by the permittee 45 days after the billing date. He
shall revoke the permit for one year if the permittee has failed to pay the
bill in full within 60 days of the billing date. If the bill has not been
paid in full by the end of the one year revocation period, the Director of
Public Works shall permanently revoke any future permit rights.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works shall suspend the permit of any
permittee who is refused the right to use the facility or the residue
disposal site for so long as the permittee is refused the use of the facility
or the residue disposal site.



   (D)   The Director of Public Works shall revoke for one year the
permit of any person who violates the provisions of § 94.40(G), § 94.41(E)
or (F), or § 94.44(D).



   (E)   If a permittee should willfully, intentionally, or through
gross negligence deliver unacceptable waste to the system or the solid waste
disposal area, except such unacceptable waste as may be allowed by the
company or CRRA pursuant to Section 9.16 of the municipal contract, his
permit shall be permanently revoked.



   (F)   Upon revocation or suspension of a collector's permit, no
vehicle or container of the collector may be used for the collection or
storage of refuse within this municipality and no vehicle or container of the
collector shall be allowed access to the solid waste disposal area or to the
system until such permit has been reinstated or a new permit has been issued.



   (G)   Any person aggrieved by a decision to suspend or revoke a
permit may, within seven days of the date of such notice, appeal such
decision by submitting a written request for a hearing to the Director of
Public Works. If such suspension or revocation was for reasons other than
those specified in division (B), (C), (D) or (E) above, the suspension or
revocation shall not take effect until after the requested appeal hearing is
held. If the activity resulting in the suspension represents a hazard to
public health or safety, the suspension or revocation shall be effective
until the final determination of the appeal. The right of appeal shall not
apply to any suspension or revocation imposed under divisions (C), (D), or
(E) above.



   (H)   Upon the recommendation of the Mayor, the Legislative
Authority may by resolution appoint an Appeals Board to hear such appeals as
may be requested under this section.



   (I)   If any permittee notified of a violation shall request an
appeal hearing, the Appeals Board shall conduct a hearing within ten days of
the request. The Board shall render a ruling within five days after the final
day of the hearing, which ruling may sustain, modify, or reverse the decision
of the Director of Public Works. If the ruling of the Board is in favor of
the permittee, the permit shall be reinstated in accordance with the ruling.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)  Penalty, see 94.99



§ 94.46  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   This subchapter is authorized pursuant to Sections 7-148, 22a-220,
22a-220a, and 22a-221 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)



§ 94.47  CHARTER AUTHORITY.



   This subchapter shall become effective pursuant to Chapter III of the
Town Charter.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 94.01 or 94.02 shall
be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense. 



('66 Code, § 30-2)  (Am. Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 94.05 or 94.06  shall
be fined $100 for each violation. 



('66 Code, § 30-3)  (Am. Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 569, passed
1-5-09)



   (C)   In addition to any other penalties provided elsewhere in §§
94.35 through 94.47, any person violating any provision of these sections
shall be fined $50 for each separate violation.



(Ord. 286, passed 2-6-89; Am. Ord. 429, passed 12-4-00)



CHAPTER 95:  PARKS



Section



Brooksvale Recreation Park



   95.01   Recreation area designated



   95.02   Hunting and trapping prohibited; exceptions



   95.03   Development by town



   95.04   Violation prohibited



   95.05   Designation of Town Green District for wildlife habitat
preserve, bird sanctuary, and park, arts, historic and recreational areas, as
well as for public educational facility



   95.06   Development of a portion of the Town Green District for
wildlife habitat preserve, bird sanctuary and for park, arts, historic and
recreation purposes



   95.07   Development of a portion of the Town Green District for
public educational facility purposes



Park Regulations



   95.10   Director to formulate regulations



   95.11   Violation prohibited



   95.12     Establishment of Parks and Recreation Commission



Farmington Canal Commission



   95.20   Establishment of Commission



   95.21   Commission's organization



   95.22   Powers and duties



   95.23   Limitations



Town Center Park Commission



   95.30   Establishment of Commission



   95.31   Commission's organization



   95.32   Powers and duties



   95.33   Limitations



 



   95.99   Penalty



BROOKSVALE RECREATION PARK



§ 95.01  RECREATION AREA DESIGNATED.



   The area embraced within the Brooksvale Recreation Park in this town
shall be and the same is designated as a wildlife area, bird sanctuary and
recreation area. 



('66 Code, § 46-1)



§ 95.02  HUNTING AND TRAPPING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot
or molest in any manner any bird or any animal.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to destroy starlings or other birds (such
as jays or English sparrows) or predatory animals (such as wildcat or fox)
when such birds or animals are found to be congregating, a nuisance or menace
to health or property.  If any such are declared by qualified authorities to
be creating a public nuisance, and the Legislative Council be so informed,
appropriate action may be taken by duly constituted officials after a
thorough investigation.  Trapping or killing of animals or birds shall not
be resorted to unless Audubon Societies, bird clubs, garden clubs or humane
societies are unable to find a satisfactory alternative. 



('66 Code, § 46-1) Penalty, § 95.99(A)



§ 95.03  DEVELOPMENT BY TOWN.



   Nothing in §§ 95.01 to 95.04, inclusive, shall be construed as
preventing the town, through its representatives or commissions, from
constructing, reconstructing, leveling off areas, cutting down trees or in
any way from developing the area for recreational activities and purposes. 



('66 Code, § 46-2)



§ 95.04  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall violate any provision of §§ 95.01 to 95.06,
inclusive. 



('66 Code, § 46-3)  (Am. Ord. 326, passed 12-7-92)  Penalty, § 95.99(A)



§ 95.05  DESIGNATION OF TOWN GREEN DISTRICT FOR WILDLIFE HABITAT PRESERVE,
BIRD SANCTUARY, AND PARK, ARTS, HISTORIC AND RECREATIONAL AREAS, AS WELL AS
FOR PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL FACILITY.



   The area within the 79 acres, more or less, of land owned by the town
and commonly known as Meadowbrook and Meadowbrook South shall be and the same
is designated as open space to be used as a wildlife habitat preserve, a bird
sanctuary, and as park, arts, historic and recreational areas. Of this open
space area, at least 20 acres shall be preserved and maintained as a
permanent wildlife habitat preserve and bird sanctuary. The remaining 20% of
the town green district may be utilized for a public educational facility.



(Ord. 326, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 481, passed 12-16-02)



§ 95.06  DEVELOPMENT OF A PORTION OF THE TOWN GREEN DISTRICT FOR WILDLIFE
HABITAT PRESERVE, BIRD SANCTUARY AND FOR PARK, ARTS, HISTORIC AND RECREATION
PURPOSES.



   Nothing in §§ 95.01 through 95.05 shall be construed as preventing
the town from developing or redeveloping the 80% portion of the town green
district designated for open space use for a wildlife habitat preserve, a
bird sanctuary, or for park, arts, historic and recreational purposes and
access thereto. No construction shall be permitted for other than these
specified purposes in the area of the district designated for open space uses.



(Ord. 326, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 481, passed 12-16-02)



§ 95.07  DEVELOPMENT OF A PORTION OF THE TOWN GREEN DISTRICT FOR PUBLIC
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY PURPOSES.



   Nothing in §§ 95.01 through 95.05 inclusive shall be construed as
preventing the town from developing for public educational facility purposes
and access thereto the remaining 20% of the town green district that is not
designated for open space use. No construction shall be permitted for other
than public educational facility purposes and access thereto in this non-open
space area.



(Ord. 481, passed 12-16-02)



PARK REGULATIONS



§ 95.10  DIRECTOR TO FORMULATE REGULATIONS.



   The director of parks and recreation shall formulate all regulations
governing use by the public of parks and recreation facilities which are the
responsibility of the department of parks and recreation. Any such
regulations with no fiscal impact or monetary value to the town shall be
subject to approval by the Major and the Parks and Recreation Commission. Any
such regulations with any fiscal impact or monetary value to the town shall
be subject to approval by the Mayor, the Parks and Recreation Commission and
the Legislative Council. Within ten days of approval, each regulation shall
be filed with the clerk of the Legislative Council. 



(Effective 7-30-70) (Am. Ord. 478, passed 11-4-02)



§ 95.11  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall violate any regulation of the director of
parks and recreation. 



(Effective 7-30-70)



   (B)   No alcoholic beverage is allowed in any park or facility of
the department of parks and recreation.



   (C)   No pet is allowed in any park or facility of the department of
parks and recreation, except in areas designated by the director of parks and
recreation or his designee.



   (D)   No vehicle of any type is allowed in any park unless expressly
authorized by the director of parks and recreation or his designee.




   (E)   Unless otherwise expressly authorized, all park and recreation
facilities of the town shall be open from sunrise to sunset.





   (F)   No person shall be permitted in any park or recreational
facility of the town while it is closed.





   (G)   There shall be no hunting in, on or above any park or
recreational facility or land owned by the town.





   (H)   With the exception of a dedicated golf course facility, there
shall be no golfing in or on any park or recreational facility of the town.




(Ord. 317, passed 9-3-91; Am. Ord. 672, passed 4-18-16)



§ 95.12  ESTABLISHMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Services Commission shall consist of
seven members recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the
Legislative Council, who shall reside in the town. Commission members shall
serve without compensation.



   (B)   The seven appointed members shall serve three year terms;
however, in the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, a
successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the
Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any
member may be removed from the Commission as set forth in section 7-1:H of
the Charter.



   (C)   Powers. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be advisory
to both the Recreation division of the Arts, Recreation and Culture
Department as well as the Parks division of the Public Works Department. The
Commission shall study the parks and recreational facilities and programs of
the town, shall develop proposals as to the improvement of the facilities and
programs, make recommendations to the Director and Mayor concerning the
activities of the department, and aid the Directors in carrying out the
programs of the departments. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall set
the fees for the use of the town's parks and recreation facilities and
programs subject to the approval of the Legislative Council.



   (D)   The Commission shall be responsible for an annual park report.



(Ord. 618, passed 6-4-12)



FARMINGTON CANAL COMMISSION



§ 95.20  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Farmington Canal Commission shall consist of nine members
recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative Council, who
shall reside in the town. Commission members shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   The nine appointed members shall serve three-year terms;
however, in the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, a
successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the
Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any
member may be removed from the Commission by the Mayor for good cause, which
shall include failure to attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings in
a calendar year.



   (C)   The Commission shall confer and advise the Town Engineer, who
in consultation with the Parks and Recreation Director, shall serve as a
staff member of the Commission.



(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 410, passed
5-1-00)



§ 95.21  COMMISSION'S ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Farmington Canal Commission shall elect a Chairperson from
their membership.  The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to
govern its operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.



   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93)



§ 95.22  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Farmington Canal Commission shall perform all duties necessary to
effectuate the procurement, completion, and oversight of the Farmington Canal
project, including the following:



   (A)   Recommend improvements in the property to accomplish its
purpose as a linear park.



   (B)   To monitor compliance with state and federal laws and
regulations.



   (C)   To assess the availability of federal, state, and local funds;
and, monitor the procurement of such funds.



   (D)   Establish a budget for the Farmington Canal Linear Park.



   (E)   Make recommendations for the application foe and the
distribution of funding to the Mayor and Council.



   (F)   To monitor the planning, construction and maintenance of the
Farmington Canal Linear Park.



   (G)   To review all proposed purchases of rights-of-way along the
Farmington Canal Line; and, make, recommendations to the Mayor and
Legislative Council concerning any purchases.



   (H)   To report bi-monthly to the Mayor and Legislative Council
concerning a comparison of the Farmington Canal Line budget and actual
expenditures; progress of the planning, construction and maintenance;
possible changes needed; and an assessment of the other future needs as
related to the Park and its effect on ancillary town services after
conferring with department heads.



   (I)   To consider any other issue concerning the Farmington Canal
Line and make recommendations as such Commission deems appropriate.



(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93)



§ 95.23  LIMITATIONS.



   The Farmington Canal Commission shall have no authority to incur any
expenses without prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative Council. 
The Commission shall have no fiscal authority.



(Ord. 325, passed 12-7-92; Am. Ord. 336, passed 7-6-93)



TOWN CENTER PARK COMMISSION



§ 95.30  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Town Center Park Commission shall consist of five members
recommended by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Legislative Council, who
shall reside in the town. Commission members shall serve without
compensation. Membership shall include:



      (1)   Not more than three members from one political party.



      (2)   Two members who are appointed for three-year terms.



      (3)   Two members who are appointed for two-year terms.



      (4)   One member who is appointed for a one-year term.



      (5)   Thereafter all members shall be appointed for three-year
terms.



   (B)   The five appointed members shall serve three-year terms;
however, in the event of a vacancy in the Commission's membership, a
successor shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the
Legislative Council, to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. Any
member may be removed from the Commission by the Mayor for good cause, which
shall include failure to attend, without reasonable excuse, three meetings in
a calendar year.



   (C)   The Commission shall advise and formulate recommendations to
the Mayor, and Director of Parks and Recreation, the Arts Commission
Coordinator and the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)



§ 95.31  COMMISSION'S ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Town Center Park Commission shall elect a Chairperson from
its membership. The  Commission may adopt such rules and regulations to
govern its operation as it considers necessary to effectuate its purposes.



   (B)   A majority of all members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for conducting the Commission's business.



(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)



§ 95.32  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Town Center Park Commission shall perform all duties necessary to
effectuate the completion and oversight of the Town Center Park project,
including the following:



   (A)   Develop and recommend a comprehensive plan for the Town Center
Park.



   (B)   Develop and recommend policies for the operation of the Town
Center Park.



   (C)   Recommend improvement to the property to accomplish its
purpose as a town park.



   (D)   Assess the availability of federal, state and local funds and
monitor the procurement of such funds.



   (E)   Make recommendations for the application and the distribution
of funding to the Mayor and Council.



   (F)   Monitor planning, construction and maintenance of the Town
Center Park.



   (G)   Review and report to the Mayor and Legislative Council
concerning the budget, expenditures and progress of planning, construction
and maintenance of the Town Center park.



   (H)   Assess needs related to the Town Center Park and its effect on
ancillary town services after conferring with department heads.



   (I)   Consider any other issues concerning the Town Center Park and
make recommendations as such Commission deems necessary.



(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)



§ 95.33  LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Nothing within this subchapter shall be construed as
conferring any administrative authority over staff or operations of the Town
Center Park or its programs.



   (B)   The Town Center Park Commission shall have no authority to
incur any expenses without prior approval of the Mayor and the Legislative
Council. The Commission shall have no fiscal authority.



(Ord. 581, passed 9-8-09)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)    Whoever violates any provision  of §§ 95.02 or 95.04 shall
be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both. 



('66 Code, § 46-3)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 95.11 shall be fined not
more than $50. 



(Ord. 317, passed 9-3-91)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Sidewalks and Curbs



   96.01   Work permit required; fee; traffic control



   96.02   Application for work permit



   96.03   Issuance of work permit



   96.04   Maintenance



   96.05   Contractor to be licensed



   96.06   Supervision required



   96.07   Rules, regulations, specifications



   96.08   Violation prohibited



Sidewalk Construction



   96.10   General regulations



   96.11   Sidewalks in general



   96.12   Cement concrete sidewalks



   96.13   Bituminous concrete sidewalks



   96.14   Resurfacing cement concrete sidewalks with bituminous
concrete



   96.15   Driveway aprons



   96.16   Curbs, general



   96.17   Cement concrete curbs



   96.18   Granite or flagstone curb



   96.19   Bituminous curb



   96.20   Curb cuts to accommodate the physically handicapped



Snow and Ice Removal



   96.25   Definitions



   96.26   Responsibility for removal



   96.27   Notice of violations; enforcement



   96.28   Removal by town; collection of costs



   96.29   Penalties for offenses



   96.30   Promulgation of regulations



   96.31   Snow and ice, public sidewalks; liability



   96.32   Hearing procedure



Obstructing



   96.35   Prohibited



   96.36   Violation prohibited



 



   96.99   Penalty



SIDEWALKS AND CURBS



§ 96.01  WORK PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE; TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, repair, lay
or relay any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or combined curb and gutter upon
the public highways and streets of the town, or cause the work to be done or
commence with the construction of the work unless the person, firm, or
corporation shall have obtained a permit from the Legislative Council or its
designated agent; provided, that emergency permission may be granted for
commencement of the work upon oral notice which shall be followed immediately
by a written application for a permit as herein provided.



   (B)   The fee for each permit shall be $50.



   (C)   (1)   The use of a uniformed police officer(s) shall be
required for all sidewalk and curb work performed adjacent to roadways that
significantly restricts the roadway to traffic and creates a traffic hazard.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall determine that a traffic hazard
exists, due to the effect on traffic patterns and flow at the time of the
proposed work. The officer(s) shall be authorized by the Police Department
and the cost of same be charged directly to the permittee or company
performing such work.



      (2)   Where the officer(s) provides services to more than one
permittee, each permittee shall be responsible proportionately for such
expense. If the Police Department is unable to supply a uniformed police
officer(s) at any time, the permittee or company performing the work shall
then be required to provide a flag person for all such work.



      (3)   The Chief of Police or his/her designee may authorize
use of flag persons on a temporary basis when:



         (a)   The work is in an isolated area;



         (b)   Traffic is light to moderate;



         (c)   Work will be completed with minimum disruption,
generally within three hours;



         (d)   Work will be conducted on "secondary" or
"non-peripheral" roadways during non-peak traffic hours (0700 to 0900 and
1600 to 1800); or



         (e)   Work will be completed with minimal disruption
within 30 minutes.



      (4)   Police officer instructions/duties, responsibilities at
job sites shall be issued by the patrol bureau commander of the Police
Department with the approval of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. When
on duty, all police officers shall wear orange safety coats or traffic vests,
and shall utilize appropriate equipment, including but not limited to flags
and flashlights in executing their responsibilities.



      (5)   Public utilities or other entities responding to
emergency situations that may threaten public safety may utilize a traffic
control person until a police officer arrives at the location of the
emergency. If the on-duty shift commander determines a uniformed police
officer should be assigned to the location for the purpose of traffic control
and public safety, the public utility company or other entity shall bear the
cost of such traffic control.



(Adopted 4-24-68; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 417, passed 9-5-00;
Am. Ord. 461, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 591, passed 6-7-10)  Penalty, see §
96.99(A)



§ 96.02  APPLICATION FOR WORK PERMIT.



   Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the council
and shall contain information as may be deemed necessary by the council, or
its designated agent, and the form shall contain a provision that all work
contemplated shall be performed in compliance with all applicable laws and
ordinances of the town and any regulations relating thereto, and the form
shall contain a representation by the applicant that he shall indemnify and
save harmless the town from any and all damages to persons or property
resulting from, or caused by, any act or omission in the performance of the
work to be done.



(Adopted 4-24-68)



§ 96.03  ISSUANCE OF WORK PERMIT.



   (A)   Except in emergency, the existence of which shall be
determined by the town, a permit shall be issued only during those months of
the year seasonable for the construction or repair.



   (B)   All permits shall be maintained at the location of the work
authorized thereby and shall be exhibited on request to an authorized agent
of the Legislative Council.



(Adopted 4-24-68)



§ 96.04  MAINTENANCE.



   The owner, and every person, firm or corporation having the care or
custody of any building or parcel of land bordering upon any highway or
street in the town where there is any footway, sidewalk or curb, shall
maintain such footway, sidewalk or curb in a safe and convenient condition
for the use of the public and shall promptly repair all defects therein
endangering or incommoding public travel upon the same, and shall promptly
remove and correct any obstructions that may be placed or found thereon. If
the owner, person, firm or corporation having the care or custody of any such
building or parcel of land shall fail to repair the defects after written
order to do so, or fail to remove and correct the obstructions after written
notice to do so, the Legislative Council, or its designated agent, may cause
the repair or removal and correction to be performed, and the expense so
incurred shall be a lien in favor of the town upon the property until paid
and may be recovered in an action at law brought in the name of the town.



(Adopted 4-24-68)



§ 96.05  CONTRACTOR TO BE LICENSED.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall, as contractor or
otherwise, engage in the work of constructing, laying, relaying or repairing
sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or combined curbs and gutters upon the
public highways and streets of the town until licensed by the Legislative
Council, or its designated agent, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
License as a sidewalk, driveway apron and curb contractor may be issued to
any person, firm or corporation upon satisfactory evidence that the applicant
is fully responsible, suitable and competent for such purpose and has agreed
in writing to comply with the provisions of §§ 96.01 to 96.08, inclusive,
and the rules and regulations as may be adopted hereunder.



   (B)   Prior to issuance of a license as a sidewalk, driveway apron
or curb contractor, each applicant shall file with the Legislative Council or
its designated agent evidence of insurance coverage of not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate liability and property damage
and a satisfactory bond of a surety company acceptable to the Council, in the
sum of $10,000 conditioned that:



      (1)   The applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the town
of and from any and all claims and actions of every kind and description that
may be brought against the town, for or on account of any injuries or damages
received or sustained by any person caused by, or resulting from, the
construction or repair of a sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or combined curb
and gutter by the applicant, his servants, agents or employees, or of or from
any act or omission in performing the work;



      (2)   The applicant shall fully perform the work in accordance
with the provisions hereof and shall replace and restore that portion of any
highway or street in which the applicant, his servants, agents or employees
shall make any excavation in a manner and condition acceptable and
satisfactory to the Legislative Council, or its designated agent;



      (3)   The applicant shall comply in all respects with any
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof and with the
terms of the permit issued to him; and



      (4)   Shall pay all fines imposed upon him for violating any
provision hereof. Each application shall state the location of applicant's
place of business, the trade name of the business and shall contain such
other information as the council, or its designated agent, may require.



   (C)   The applicant shall give personal attention to the work to be
done under any permit issued to him hereunder and shall employ in the
performance of the work competent and responsible persons.



   (D)   No license, as herein provided, shall be required of an owner
who personally constructs, lays, relays or repairs any sidewalk, driveway
apron, curb or combined curb and gutter bordering on his own property,
provided a permit under §§ 96.01 to 96.03, inclusive, has been secured.



   (E)   All licenses shall expire on December 31, next following their
date of issuance, unless sooner revoked. Upon violation of any ordinance, or
rule or regulation adopted hereunder, any license may be suspended or revoked
upon such terms and for the period as the Legislative Council, or its
designated agent, may fix.  The fee for each license shall be $100 and the
license shall not be transferable.



   (F)   Neither issuance of the license by the Legislative Council, or
its designated agent, nor the establishment of specified design,
specifications or workmanship by the town engineer confers any liability upon
the town, or agency or department thereof, for the sufficiency or durability
of the work, nor does the town in any manner guarantee workmanship performed
under the license, nor does the issuance of the license or the establishment
of the designs and specifications invalidate the legal obligations of the
property owner to construct, reconstruct, and maintain sidewalks, driveway
aprons and curbs in a manner satisfactory to the Legislative Council. 



(Adopted 4-24-68; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 590, passed 6-7-10) 
Penalty, see § 96.99 (A)



§ 96.06  SUPERVISION REQUIRED.



   The Legislative Council, or its designated agent, shall give grades and
lines work and shall supervise the construction, laying, relaying, and repair
of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs, or combined curbs and gutters and all
other work of a similar nature to be performed on the public highways and
streets of the town, but the supervision shall not relieve the contractor
from his obligation to perform the work strictly in accordance with the
provisions hereof and the provisions of other laws or ordinances relating to
sidewalks and curbs.



(Adopted 4-24-68)



§ 96.07  RULES, REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS.



   The Legislative Council or its designated agent shall adopt from time
to time reasonable rules, regulations, and specifications for the
construction of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs, and combined curbs and
gutters.  No sidewalks other than cement concrete may be laid or constructed
upon the public highways or streets of the town. 



(Adopted 4-24-68)



§ 96.08  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any provision of §§
96.01 through 96.08. 



(Adopted 4-24-68)  Penalty, see § 96.99 (A)



SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION



§ 96.10  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Notice for line and grade:



      (1)   Request for permit, line, and grade must be made of the
engineering department not less than 24 hours before starting construction.



      (2)   Any deviation from line and grade from the standard
cross section must receive prior approval from the Legislative Council.



   (B)   Line and grade.  The engineering department shall mark on the
ground the line and grade which shall govern all work, etc., and no walk,
driveway apron, or curb contractor shall commence work on a public highway
until a permit has been obtained and the line and grade have been marked. 
The surveyor's stakes marking line and grade shall not  be  removed  until
the time as the inspector has verified that the line and grade has been
complied with.  In no case will the stakes be deviated from unless approved
by the Legislative Council.



   (C)   Notice before starting work. Notice must be given at the
office of the engineering department not less than 24 hours before starting
any work, stating time, place, and character of such construction.



   (D)   Seasonal work:



      (1)   Permits will be issued for cement concrete work and
bituminous concrete work to be performed between April l, and December l.



      (2)   Construction work will be restricted to weather
limitations - that the bituminous material shall not be applied on a wet
surface, or when temperature is below 60°F. in the shade and rising, or when
weather conditions are otherwise unfavorable:



         (a)   Cement concrete shall not be applied when
temperature is below 40°F. in the shade and falling.



         (b)   No material shall be applied on ground which
contains any thickness of frost.



      (3)   Emergency permits may be issued by authority or the
Legislative Council at other times subject to meeting specialized
requirements as may be established by the engineering department in each
specific case.



   (E)   Cleanup.  All excess material shall be removed from the
project, and adjacent side cleaned up in a workmanlike manner immediately
after the end of the curing period of cement concrete work or immediately
after completion of placing of bituminous concrete, granite or flagstone.



   (F)   Failure to meet requirements. Failure on the part of the
contractor or owner to fully meet the general or specific requirements as
herewith set forth may result in nonacceptance of the work by the town and in
revocation of existing license and refusal to issue future permits to the
contractor.



   (G)   Responsibility of the property owner:



      (1)   By ordinance, the property owner is responsible for the
construction and maintenance of sidewalks, driveway aprons and curbs.



      (2)   By adoption of these rules, regulations and
specifications pertaining thereto, nothing shall be construed to relieve the
property owner of his legal obligations.



      (3)   The specifications are in keeping with good practice.
Inspection of the work and adherence thereto is the responsibility of the
property owner, and no claim against the town shall be honored by the town
for failure of the work involved to meet the expectations of the property
owner or contractor either present or future.



('66 Code, § 59-9)



§ 96.11  Sidewalks in general.



   (A)   Sidewalks may be constructed or reconstructed of either cement
concrete or of bituminous concrete in accordance with the specifications
pertaining thereto.



   (B)   But, upon election by the owner of his choice of material for
the sidewalk, the entire sidewalk fronting his property shall be of one
continuous type of material. No patching will be permitted of the other type
of material.



   (C)   Unless otherwise required all sidewalks shall be a minimum of
4 feet 6 inches wide on the surface.



   (D)   All sidewalks shall, unless otherwise impracticable, have a
slope of a minimum 1/4 of an inch per foot of width, pitching to the street.



   (E)   At driveways, sidewalk materials, design and construction
shall conform to specifications for driveway aprons.



('66 Code, § 59-10)



§ 96.12  Cement concrete sidewalks.



   (A)   Cement concrete sidewalks. These sidewalks shall consist of a
minimum of 4 inches finished thickness of cement concrete on a foundation
course of a minimum of 4 inches compacted thickness. Top course and
foundation shall be of the same width.



   (B)   Excavation. Excavation, including removal of all existing
sidewalk, shall be made to the required depth and width below finished grade.
All soft and yielding or other unsuitable materials shall be promptly removed
from the street. Under certain conditions, if approved by the engineering
department, existing sidewalk may remain and be resurfaced.



   (C)   Foundation:



      (1)   The excavation shall be filled with good cinders,
gravel, broken stone or other suitable material which meets the approval of
the engineering department, well tamped or rolled to a minimum of 4 inches
compacted thickness. Cinders shall be moderately coarse, gritty and free from
large lumps and powdery material.



      (2)   When gravel is used, it shall conform to the latest
revision of requirements of Article 2.10.02 for gravel fill of the latest
revision of Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental
Construction, Connecticut State Highway Department. This foundation shall be
thoroughly compacted.



   (D)   Forms for cement concrete. Forms shall be of metal or wood;
straight, free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist springing from
the pressure of concrete. Forms shall be of a depth equal to the depth of the
sidewalk. Forms shall be securely staked, braced and held firmly in place to
the required line and grade and shall be sufficiently tight to prevent
leakage of mortar. All forms shall be cleaned and oiled or wetted before
concrete is placed against them.



   (E)   Expansion and contraction joints. Contraction and expansion
joints must be placed in sidewalk construction. Contraction joints will not
be spaced more than 5 foot intervals. Expansion joints must be placed
wherever the sidewalk meets another walk, driveway, building, wall,
merestone, catch basin or any rigid object. Expansion joints must consist of
premolded asphaltic material 1/2 inch minimum thickness and as wide as the
depth of the walk. In any case, expansion joints will not exceed 50 foot
intervals.



   (F)   Composition of mix. The mixture shall consist of one part
cement, 2 parts sand and 3 parts trap rock proportioned, mixed, placed, etc.,
in accordance with the latest revision of § 6.01 for Class -A- Concrete of
the latest revision of Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and
Incidental Construction, Connecticut State Highway Department.



   (G)   Materials:



      (1)   Cement shall be air-entraining portland cement with 6 +
1 % air content by volume. Portland cement shall conform to the latest ASTM C
175 Type 1A.



      (2)   Concrete aggregates shall conform to tentative
specifications for Concrete Aggregates ASTM C 33, and shall meet the
requirements of Article 6.01.02 except that the trap rock shall consist of
commercial 3/4 inch sized aggregate.



   (H)   Water. Water shall conform to requirements of Article 4.01.02
and not more than 6 gallons per sack of cement shall be permitted in the mix.
Water used in mixing concrete shall be clean and free from deleterious
amounts of acids, alkalies or organic materials. The amount of water added
shall in no case produce a slump of more than 4 inches. Concrete producing
more than a 4 inch slump will be rejected.



   (I)   Measuring and mixing for cement concrete mixture:



      (1)   All stone, sand and cement used in cement concrete
walks, aprons and curbs and combined curbs and gutters shall be accurately
measured in a manner satisfactory to the engineering department.



      (2)   A bag of cement containing 94 pounds may be taken as one
cubic foot in proportioning mixtures.



      (3)   The cement concrete shall be thoroughly mixed by machine
in a manner satisfactory to the engineering department. The concrete shall be
mixed only in the quantity required for immediate use. Retempering concrete
shall not be permitted. Hand mixing will be permitted only for patching.



      (4)   Concrete shall be mixed in the approved batch mixer for
a period of not less than 1 1/4 minutes after all materials except a part of
the water are in the drum, during which time the drum speed shall be not less
than 14 nor more than 20 revolutions per minute. Any concrete which has been
mixed for less than the required time or more than 30 minutes or has
developed initial set will be rejected. If a project is of such a nature that
concrete cannot be poured within the 30 minutes, smaller loads must be
ordered. Under no circumstances will a mixing truck be allowed to remain on a
project more than 30 minutes. No mixer will be allowed on a project from
another project. For small load requirement. new loads will be ordered unless
all concrete can be deposited within 30 minutes.



   (J)   Transporting of cement concrete mixtures. The transporting of
cement concrete mixtures shall conform to the requirements of §§ 6.01.01
and 6.01.03 of the latest revision of Standard Specifications for Roads,
Bridges and Incidental Construction, Connecticut State Highway Department.



   (K)   Placing cement concrete. The properly proportioned and mixed
concrete shall be placed in one course in accordance with § 6.01.



   (L)   Finishing cement concrete. The surface of the concrete shall
be finished with a wood float or by other approved means. The surface shall
not be overfloated, thereby causing segregation in the mix. The outside edges
of the slab and all joints shall be edged with a 1/4 inch radius edging tool.
Each slab shall be divided into 2 or more sections by forming dummy joints
with a jointing tool as directed. No floating or edging shall be accomplished
on a wet surface.



   (M)   Protecting cement concrete work. The contractor shall protect
the work, during the construction, by suitable barricades to protect the
public and from damage from any and all causes. In extremely hot weather, the
cement concrete shall be protected from the direct rays of the sun. The
finished work shall be protected from rains until it has hardened
sufficiently to eliminate danger from this source. In cold weather the work
shall be protected from freezing. The work shall be barricaded to prevent
damage from traffic until such time as the cement concrete has set
sufficiently to sustain the traffic. Barricades shall not be permitted for
more than 48 hours without written consent of the engineering department and
if not removed upon notice to do so will be removed forthwith at the expense
of the owner or contractor.



   (N)   Curing. Ali cement concrete sidewalk shall be cured by either
of the following methods:



      (1)   Apply a fine spray of a colorless membrane curing
compound. The compound shall be acceptable to the engineer and shall be
sprayed with approved equipment.



      (2)   Wet burlap coverings, hay or straw or other approved
covers, kept wet and retained in position for a minimum of 5 days.



('66 Code, § 59-11)



§ 96.13  Bituminous concrete sidewalks.



   (A)   Bituminous concrete sidewalks. These sidewalks shall consist
of 2 inches compacted thickness of bituminous concrete on a foundation course
of 4 inches compacted thickness. The foundation course shall be at least 2
inches wider on each edge than the finished width of the bituminous concrete.



   (B)   Excavation. Excavation shall be the same as described under
excavation for cement concrete sidewalks except that the width shall be 2
inches wider on each edge making an overall width 4 inches wider.



   (C)   Foundation. The foundation shall be the same as described
under foundation for cement concrete sidewalks except that the width shall be
2 inches wider on each edge making an overall width 4 inches wider.



   (D)   Forms for bituminous concrete:



      (1)   Forms shall be of metal or wood; straight, free from
warp and of sufficient strength to resist springing from the impact of the
roller. If of wood, they shall be of 2 inch surfaced plank except that at
sharp curves thinner material may be used; if of metal, they shall be of an
approved section. All forms shall be of a depth equal to the depth of the
sidewalks and shall be securely staked, braced and held firmly to the
required line and grade. All forms shall be cleaned and oiled each time they
are used.



      (2)   Forms may be omitted upon approval of the engineering
department in which case the bituminous concrete must be spread to a width
slightly greater than required after which a chalk line shall be marked and
both edges cut to a straight line giving full required width. Patching edges
will not be permitted.



   (E)   Composition of mix. The mixture of the bituminous concrete
shall meet the requirements of the latest revision of Articles 4.06.02 and
4.06.03, Dense Graded Bituminous Concrete Pavement, of the Standard
Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, Connecticut
State Highway Department. No mixing will be permitted at the site.



   (F)   Materials. Bituminous material, namely asphalt cement, coarse
aggregate, fine aggregate, mineral filler, shall meet the latest revision of
requirements of Article 4.03.02 of the above stated document.



   (G)   Mineral filler. The mineral filler used in the mix and for
dusting shall meet the latest revision of requirements of Article 4.03.02 of
the above stated document.



   (H)   Measuring and mixing bituminous concrete mixture. The
measuring or weighing of all materials and mixing shall be done in a
commercial plant which has been approved by the state highway department and
in accordance with Article 4.03.03 of the above stated document.



   (I)   Transporting of bituminous concrete mixtures. Such shall be
done in accordance with the latest revision of Article 4.03.03-7 of the above
stated document, except that maximum haul allowed shall not exceed 20 miles.



   (J)   Placing of bituminous concrete:



      (1)   The bituminous concrete may be spread either by machine
or by hand.



      (2)   If a machine is used the machine must be an approved
mechanical spreader into which the material is dumped and the machine must be
capable of spreading the full width and striking off the material to the
appropriate loose depth.



      (3)   When hand methods are used the mixture upon arrival
shall be dumped on approved steel dump sheets outside the area on which it is
to be spread and shall then immediately be distributed into place by means of
suitable shovels and spread with metal lutes in a uniform layer of
appropriate loose depth. Under no circumstances shall rakes be used.



   (K)   Compacting bituminous concrete:



      (1)   Compaction may be obtained by machine roller, hand
roller or a vibratory compactor.



      (2)   When a hand roller is used, it shall weigh not less than
500 pounds and the bituminous concrete must be laid in 2 equal courses of one
inch compacted depth each course.



      (3)   When a machine roller is used it shall weigh from 3 to 5
tons. The bituminous concrete may be laid in one course of 2 inch compacted
depth.



      (4)   Vibratory compactors will only be permitted upon
approval of the engineering department.



   (L)   Protecting bituminous concrete work. The contractor shall
protect the work during the construction by suitable barricades to protect
the public and from damage from any and all causes. Traffic shall be excluded
for at least 6 hours or until the work has properly hardened by cooling.
Barricades shall not be permitted for more than 48 hours without consent of
the engineering department and if not removed upon notice to do so will be
removed forthwith at expense of owner or contractor.



   (M)   Sealing bituminous concrete sidewalks. Where the owner has
selected to use bituminous concrete material for sidewalk surface, an
approved blacktop sealer shall be applied in 2 coats within one month of the
completion of the sidewalk.



('66 Code, § 59-12)



§ 96.14  Resurfacing cement concrete sidewalks with bituminous concrete.



   (A)   Foundations



      (1)   Where old cement concrete sidewalks exist in acceptable
condition as a base and where the present elevation is satisfactory grade so
that a topping of at least one inch compacted thickness of bituminous
concrete can be placed thereon, the old cement concrete sidewalk may be
acceptable in place of the gravel base as previously described.



      (2)   Where old cement concrete sidewalks have heaved
appreciably such slabs which have heaved must be thoroughly broken up with no
pieces larger than 3 inches in any dimension. The material shall then be
brought to proper grade with interstices filled with gravel and used in place
of the 4 inch gravel base as previously described. In such cases a bituminous
concrete top of 2 inches shall be required.



   (B)   Bituminous concrete. The same specifications shall apply as
noted under "bituminous concrete sidewalks" with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Foundation as noted above under resurfacing.



      (2)   Thickness of bituminous concrete to be not less than one
inch compacted thickness.



      (3)   Bituminous concrete to be compacted by a roller weighing
not less than 500 pounds nor more than 1,000 pounds.



('66 Code, § 59-13)



§ 96.15  Driveway aprons.



   (A)   Driveway aprons shall be constructed of cement concrete or
bituminous concrete and in accordance with specifications pertaining to
cement concrete sidewalks and bituminous concrete sidewalks except as to
their width, which must be approved, and the depth of the pavement shall be
increased by one inch thickness of cement concrete making a total thickness
of 5 inches or increased by 2 inch thickness of bituminous concrete making a
total thickness of 4 inches. In the latter case this shall constitute an
additional course and be laid accordingly. The foundation of gravel, cinders
or other approved material shall be increased from 4 inches' compacted
thickness to 6 inches' compacted thickness.



   (B)   Sidewalks across driveways shall be constructed to the
specifications for driveway aprons.



('66 Code, § 59-14)



§ 96.16  Curbs, general.



   (A)   No curbs shall be placed except cement concrete, granite,
flagstone or bituminous concrete.



   (B)   Bituminous concrete curbs will only be permitted at such
locations as approved by the legislative council.



   (C)    All curbs shall conform to the specifications, design and
construction as specified for the specific type.



('66 Code, § 59-15)



§ 96.17  Cement concrete curbs.



   (A)   Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and
the subgrade or base upon which the curbing is to be set shall be compacted
to a firm, even surface.



   (B)   Dimension of curbs. Concrete curbs shall be not less than 18
inches deep, 6 inches wide at the top and 9 inches wide at the bottom,
battered on pavement side. The 2 top edges shall be rounded off in a suitable
manner.



   (C)   Forms. Either 1 1/2 inch plank or approved steel forms must be
used on both sides of the curb for the entire depth. The forms shall be
smooth and clean, well oiled and perfectly tight, and special precautions
shall be taken to prevent leaking at the ends of forms.



   (D)   Mixture. All references to mixture under § 96.12 of this
chapter, shall apply here. Also refer to the latest revision of § 6.01,
Class "A" Concrete, Standard Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental
Construction, state highway department.



   (E)   Placing of cement concrete:



      (1)   Cement concrete shall be placed only on a moist
subgrade. Cement concrete shall not be placed on a soft, muddy or frozen
subgrade.



      (2)   The cement concrete shall be placed in the forms, struck
off with a template, compacted by approved means and finished to a smooth,
even surface. Care should be taken to spade well along the forms to prevent
honeycombing.



      (3)   The cement concrete curbing shall be constructed in
sections having a uniform length of approximately 10 feet, unless otherwise
directed. No section less than 6 feet shall be permitted.



      (4)   All sections shall be separated by a standard 1/2 inch
specially prepared asphaltic joint filler.



   (F)   Curing and protection. After the surface of the cement
concrete curb has been given its final finish, it shall be protected by
completely covering it with moist mats of size and quality as approved by the
engineering department or by use of burlap. The mats and the burlap must be
kept saturated for a minimum of 10 days in June, July, August or a minimum of
7 days in other months.



   (G)   Removal of forms. Forms shall not be removed from freshly
placed cement concrete until it has set for at least 12 hours. They shall be
carefully removed and in such manner that no damage shall be done to the curb
or adjacent pavement. Immediately after the forms have been removed the
joints shall be thoroughly cleaned and all honeycombed areas pointed up.



   (H)   Back filling. No material shall be placed against the curb
until such time as it can be tamped thoroughly without injury to the curb,
after which time the material shall be deposited in thin layers and
thoroughly compacted. No large pieces of stone or gravel shall be within 2
inches of the curb.



('66 Code, § 59-16)



§ 96.18  Granite or flagstone curb.



   (A)   Size. Stones shall not be less than 4 feet long, 16 inches
wide and 4 inches thick. The stone shall be fine-grained and free from seams.
The top face and front face to a depth of 10 inches shall be dressed. The top
shall be 4 inches wide and on a batter such that the inner edge shall be 1/4
inch above the outer edge. The ends shall be square and trimmed to lie with
closed joints. The bottoms of the stones shall be flat and of full width as
no sharp wedge-shape stones will be permitted.



   (B)   Finish. The quality and finish shall be satisfactory to the
engineering department.



   (C)   Excavation. Excavation shall be made to a depth necessary to
obtain a suitable base below the finished grade of the top of the curb. After
the curb is set to line arid grade, the space on both sides of curb shall be
filled with suitable material and thoroughly tamped.



('66 Code, § 59.17)



§ 96.19  Bituminous curb.



   (A)   Excavation. Excavation shall be made to the required depth of
curb, including depth for suitable base under the curb, and the subbase under
the base shall be compacted to a firm, even surface.



   (B)   Base course. This curb shall only be installed on a
constructed base of a minimum of 4 inches crushed trap rock, with the
interstices filled with approved sand and a minimum of 2 inches of bituminous
concrete material. This width shall be wide enough to accommodate the wheels
of the laying machine. In no case shall this dimension be less than 3 feet.
Below this construction shall be a suitable material



   (C)   Materials for the bituminous curb. Materials for this work
shall conform .to materials as specified for bituminous concrete walks.



   (D)   Construction of curb:



      (1)   The dimension and details of the curb shall conform with
existing standards on file in the engineering department.



      (2)   This curb, except for sections under 20 feet in length,
shall be installed by utilizing an approved mechanical spreader and screeder
machine, and the operator of the machine shall be experienced in this type of
work.



      (3)   Prior to arrival of the mixture on the work, the surface
of the pavement or the prepared foundation where the bituminous concrete lip
curbing is to be installed shall have been cleaned of all loose and foreign
material. The surface shall be perfectly dry and clean at the time the mix is
placed and shall be coated with an RC-2 or other approved bitumen just before
arrival of the mixture.



      (4)   Upon arrival at the site, the mixture shall be deposited
directly in place or on platforms outside the area on which it is to be
spread and shall then be immediately distributed into place by suitable
means. The mixture shall be kept clean and free from dirt and foreign
materials at all times. It shall be compacted to the required cross section
by the use of suitable iron tampers weighing not less than 12 pounds and
having a bearing area not exceeding 50 square inches, or by means of a roller
weighing not less than 150 pounds per foot of tread. The surface of the lip
curbing shall be tested with a 10 foot straight edge laid parallel with the
center line of the road and any variations from a true profile exceeding 1/4
inch shall be satisfactorily corrected.



      (5)   After the completion of the lip curbing, traffic shall
be kept at a safe distance for a period of not less than 24 hours and until
the curbing has set sufficiently to prevent injury to the work.



(66 Code. § 59.18)



§ 96.20  Curb cuts to accommodate the physically handicapped.



   All curbs constructed or replaced on or after August 3, 1976 shall be
designed with cuts at all pedestrian crosswalks to provide adequate and
reasonable access for the safe and convenient movement of physically
handicapped persons. Such cuts shall meet the following specifications: the
cut shall be at least 36 inches wide; the cut shall have a surface that is
textured and non-slip; and the cut shall have a slope not greater than 4
degrees 50 minutes and shall be beveled at the bottom.



(Adopted 8-3-76)



SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL



§ 96.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "PERSON RESPONSIBLE."  The owner, tenant, occupant or other entity,
either corporate or personal, who is responsible under the law for
maintenance of the premises.



   "POLICE CHIEF."  The Hamden Chief of Police or any person authorized
to act as a representative of the Chief of Police.



   "PREMISES."  Any lot or part thereof or parcel of land or plot of
land, either occupied or unoccupied, by any dwelling or non-dwelling
structure.



   "SIDEWALK."  Any walk or path along the side of a street or public
facility which is reserved by custom for the use of pedestrians.



   "TOWN ENGINEER."  The Hamden Town Engineer or any person authorized to
act as a representative of the Town Engineer.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



§ 96.26  RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.



   (A)   All snow, ice and sleet shall be removed from the sidewalks of
the town by the person responsible for the premises adjoining and fronting
every such sidewalk within 24 hours after the cessation of any storm during
which such snow, ice and sleet was precipitated.



   (B)   In the event that such snow, ice and sleet cannot be removed
after reasonable effort, the person responsible shall, within 24 hours after
the cessation of any storm during which such snow, ice and sleet was
precipitated, cause an abrasive substance, such as sand, to be spread on such
sidewalk at intervals of time frequent enough and in quantities sufficient to
ensure that such sidewalk is safe for pedestrian travel.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



§ 96.27  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any individual who wishes to file a complaint alleging a
violation of § 96.26 shall contact the Town Engineer.  The Town Engineer
shall inspect the premises and if warranted, shall cause to be left written
notice that a violation of § 96.26 has occurred and that any further delay
in compliance shall result in a penalty. Such notice may be attached in a
conspicuous place on any such premises where the sidewalk or adjacent
sidewalk has been found to be in violation of § 96.26 or delivered either by
hand or certified mail.



   (B)   Not more than 24 hours (excluding weekends and holidays) after
a notice of violation is delivered as set forth in division (A) hereof, the
Town Engineer shall inspect such sidewalk and if warranted, shall contact the
Police Chief who shall cause to be left written notice that a violation has
occurred and that a penalty has been incurred.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



§ 96.28  REMOVAL BY TOWN; COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   (A)   If after notice as set forth in § 96.27 hereof, the Town
Engineer determines that the person responsible for a premises adjoining and
fronting a sidewalk has neglected to either remove said accumulation or
otherwise restore said sidewalk to a safe condition as required under §
96.26, the Mayor may cause the accumulation to be removed or abrasive
material to be spread by employees of the town in order to return the
sidewalk to a safe condition, at the expense of the owner of the premises.



   (B)   Notice of the actions described in division (A) hereof and a
bill for the expense of materials and services rendered shall be delivered by
hand or certified mail from the Town Attorney's Office to the person
responsible within ten business days of the actions.  Payment, in the form
of a certified check or money order made payable to "Treasurer, Town of
Hamden," shall be made in person or remitted by mail to the Finance
Department, Memorial Town Hall, Hamden, CT 06518.



   (C)   Any unpaid expenses shall become a lien upon the premises
adjoining and fronting such sidewalk upon the filing of a certificate of lien
to be recorded in the Town Clerk's Office within 60 days from the date upon
which the letter by the Town Attorney's Office is delivered to the owner of
the premises.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



§ 96.29  PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES.



   (A)   Any person responsible for a premises adjoining and fronting
any sidewalk which is found to be in violation of § 96.26, shall be liable
for a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $100. Each 24 hour period that
said sidewalks are not cleared or in a safe condition for public travel shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Payments for said fines in the form of a certified check or
money order made payable to the "Treasurer, Town of Hamden," may be made in
person or remitted by mail to the Finance Department, Memorial Town Hall,
2372 Whitney Avenue, Hamden, CT 06518.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



§ 96.30  PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The Legislative Council may adopt regulations consistent with this
subchapter which thereafter shall have the effect of an ordinance.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



§ 96.31  SNOW AND ICE, PUBLIC SIDEWALKS; LIABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of § 7-163a of the Connecticut General
Statutes are hereby adopted, and are set forth in divisions (B) and (D)
hereof.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 13a-149 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or any other General Statute or Special Act, the
Town of Hamden shall not be liable to any person injured in person or
property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk unless
the town is the owner or person in possession and control of the land
abutting such sidewalk, other than land used as highway or street, provided
that the Town of Hamden shall be liable for its affirmative acts with respect
to such sidewalk.



   (C)   The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting
a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the
presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk toward the portion of the sidewalk
abutting his property as the town had prior to the effective date of this
section adopted, pursuant to the provisions of § 7-163a of the Connecticut
General Statutes, and shall be liable to persons injured in person or
property where a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury.



   (D)   No action to recover damages for injury to the person or to
property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public sidewalk against a
person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting a public
sidewalk shall be brought but within two years from the date when the injury
is first sustained.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



§ 96.32  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
other than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to
conduct the hearings authorized by this section.



   (B)   The Town Attorney, at any time within twelve months from the
expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines,
penalties, costs or fees for any citation issued under this subchapter, shall
send notice to the property owner.  Such notice shall inform the owner and
other person cited:



      (1)   Of the allegations against him/her and the amount of the
fines, penalties, costs or fees due;



      (2)   That he/she may contest his/her liability before a
citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice
within ten days of the date thereof;



      (3)   That if he/she does not demand such a hearing, an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him/her; and



      (4)   That such judgment may issue without further notice.



   (C)   If the person who is sent notice pursuant to division (B) of
this section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may,
without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties,
costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by
the town.  Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or
criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the
payment.  Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a
hearing within ten days of the date of the first notice provided for in
division (B) of this section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and
the designated town official shall certify such person's failure to respond
to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess
the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for herein and shall follow the
procedures set forth in division (E) of this section.



   (D)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing.  Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing
of notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any
reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. 
An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by
the issuing town official shall be filed and retained by the town, and shall
be deemed to be a business record within the scope of § 52-180 of the
Connecticut General Statutes and evidence of the facts contained therein. 
The presence of the issuing official shall be required at the hearing if such
person so requests in writing at least 48 hours prior to hearing.  A person
wishing to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing and may
present evidence in his/her behalf. A designated municipal official, other
than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the
municipality.  If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter
an assessment by default against him upon a finding of proper notice and
liability under the applicable provision(s) of  this subchapter.  The
hearing officer may accept from such person copies of police reports,
investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents by mail and
may determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. 
The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with
such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate.  Rules of the
Superior Court regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly
applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.  The
hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of the hearing. If
he determines that the person is not liable, he/she shall dismiss the matter
and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly.  If he/she
determines that the person is liable for the violation, he/she shall
forthwith enter ,and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such
person as provided by this subchapter and provide the person with a written
determination at the hearing.



   (E)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the
hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than
12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West
Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. 
The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of
assessment. Within such 12-month period, assessments against the same person
may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment.  The clerk shall 
enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and appropriate
court costs against such person in favor of the town.  Notwithstanding any
other provision of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment,
when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money
judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further
notice to such person.



   (F)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal.  An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
§ 52-259 of the Connecticut General Statutes, with the Clerk of the Superior
Court, Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which
shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the
judges of the superior court.



(Ord. 355, passed 5-1-95)



OBSTRUCTING



§ 96.35  PROHIBITED.



   No person shall plow, plant or cultivate within the fence lines of any
of the streets of the town so as to in any way fill up or obstruct the drains
or gutters of the streets.  Nor shall any person place or leave any
obstruction in any of the streets of the town or in or upon any footpath or
sidewalk along the streets, except as hereinbefore provided. 



('66 Code, § 59-25)  Penalty, see § 96.99(B)



§ 96.36  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation, knowingly or willfully, shall violate
any provision of § 96.35. 



('66 Code, § 59-26)  Penalty, see § 96.99(B)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of§§ 96.01, 96.05 or 96.08
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $25 for each offense.  Each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 



(Adopted 4-24-68)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of§§ 96.35 or 96.36 shall
forfeit and be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense. 



('66 Code, § 59-26)







 







 







 







 



CHAPTER 97:  MISCELLANEOUS



Section



Excavations



   97.01   Permits required



   97.01b   Excavation permit fees; notice required



   97.02   Insurance/bond



   97.03   Excavations



   97.04   Restoration; temporary patching



   97.04A   Restoration; permanent patching



   97.05   Maintenance of temporary patch



   97.06   Protection of



   97.07   Violation of regulations prohibited



   97.08   Interpretations



   97.09   Abandonment prohibited; notice to fill; lien



   97.10   Violation prohibited



Construction of Wells



   97.15   Permit required



   97.16   Contents of application



   97.17   Final report



   97.18   Use of water



   97.19   Permit fee



   97.20   Supplementary rules and regulations



   97.21   Violation prohibited



Construction Contracts



   97.35   Wages to be stated in contract



 



   97.99   Penalty



EXCAVATIONS



§ 97.01  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall make any opening, excavation or
perform construction work of any kind within or through any street or roadway
or adjacent to streets and roadways that significantly alter the conditions
and appearances of streets and roadways in the town, except under the control
and direction of the Town Engineer and after a receipt of a permit issued by
the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall have the authority to grant the
permits on the terms and conditions for the excavation and backfilling of the
excavations in any street or highway, and for the replacement of pavements
removed as hereinafter provided. Permits shall be issued in compliance with
the terms hereof, and a fee as set by the Legislative Council will be charged
for each permit, according to § 97.01b.



('66 Code, § 22-1; Am. Ord. 312, passed 1-7-91; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)



§ 97.01b  EXCAVATION PERMIT FEES; NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Town Engineer will collect a permit fee for excavation
work based on the following schedule:



      (1)   For each excavation up to 200 square feet:  $95.



      (2)   For each excavation in excess of 200 square feet, and up
to one block in length: $150.



      (3)   For each additional block or part of an additional
block:  $150.



   (B)   In addition, at least 24 hours prior to beginning any
excavation work, the permittee shall contact the Town Engineer's office at
(203) 287-7040 to inform of the specific date when excavation will begin and
its expected duration on any street or roadway in town.



(Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01; Am. Ord. 463, passed 6- 3-02)



§ 97.02  INSURANCE/BOND.



   (A)   No permit for excavating in any street or highway in the town
shall be granted until the applicant files with the Town Engineer evidence of
general liability insurance coverage, including property damage, of not less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 in the aggregate and a performance
bond in the minimum amount of $10,000. The amount of such performance bond
may be increased on larger projects as required by the Town Engineer and
shall require that the applicant fill all excavations and restore the street
or highway to a condition as approved by the Town Engineer as hereinafter
specified. The insurance coverage and performance bond shall further require
that the applicant save and indemnify the town from any and all liability,
damages and costs that may in any manner be incurred by the applicant's
excavation work and the backfilling thereof, as well as the applicant's
replacement of the paving thereafter. All performance bonds required by this
chapter shall be for the period of the calendar year, and renewals shall be
filed with the Town Engineer before January 1 of each year. All insurance
coverage shall be for the expected duration of the excavation, backfilling
and replacement paving work, plus for such additional time as required by the
Town Engineer, which shall be no less than 90 days after completion of the
applicant's work.



   (B)   Contractors and public service corporations may dispense with
the filing of a separate bond for each excavation by filing annually with the
Town Engineer the proper evidence of insurance coverage hereinbefore provided
for, conditioned, however, that an application must be made for a permit for
each separate excavation. Evidence of insurance coverage and performance bond
satisfactory to the Town Engineer shall be presented, and the performance
bond shall be in the amount approved by the Town Engineer.



('66 Code, § 22-2; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01; Am. Ord. 589, passed 6-7-10)



§ 97.03  EXCAVATIONS.



   The provisions of this section shall apply to excavations and all other
construction work and repairs on public streets that restricts roadway
traffic, including work performed adjacent to public streets.



   (A)   The use of power machinery for excavation shall be allowed
only by special permission, in writing, of the director of public works. The
contractor shall, at all times, take all proper precautions to safeguard any
sewer lines, water mains, electrical conduits, telephone conduits, gas mains,
gas lines or other appurtenances encountered in excavation and shall properly
maintain the installations so as to provide uninterrupted service of the
same. In locations where the use of power equipment will endanger such
installations the work of excavation must be provided by hand labor.



   (B)   Excavations must be made in open cut and no tunneling will be
allowed except by special written permission from the director of public
works. Trenches shall be braced and sheeted when and as ordered by the
department of public works.



   (C)   The use of a uniformed police officer(s) shall be required for
all excavations, construction work and repairs on public streets, road
closures and work performed adjacent to roadways that significantly restrict
said roadway to traffic and create a traffic hazard, or when construction is
performed upon any part of town or state roadways, when deemed a hazard by
the Chief of Police or his/her designee, due to the effect on traffic
patterns and flow at the time of the work, for the purpose of traffic control
and public safety. Such officer(s) shall be authorized by the Police
Department and the cost of same be charged directly to the permittee or
company performing such work. Where such officer(s) provides services to more
than one permittee, each permittee shall be responsible proportionately for
such expense.



   (D)   (1)   Police officer instructions/duties, responsibilities
at job sites shall be issued by the patrol bureau commander of the Police
Department, with the approval of the Chief of Police or his/her designee.



      (2)   When on duty, all police officers shall wear orange
safety coats or traffic vests, and shall utilize appropriate equipment,
including but not limited to flags and flashlights in executing their
responsibilities.



   (E)   Public utilities or other entities responding to emergency
situations that may threaten public safety may utilize a traffic control
person until a police officer arrives at the location of the emergency. If
the on-duty shift commander determines a uniformed police officer should be
assigned to the location for the purpose of traffic control and public
safety, the public utility company or other entity shall bear the cost of
such traffic control.



   (F)   No excavations shall be made in a street that has been
reconstructed or resurfaced within the last five years. When excavations are
deemed unavoidable by the Director of Public Works or his designee, they will
be subject to special restoration requirements according to standard detail
regulations as established and promulgated by the Director of Public Works,
with the advice of the Town Engineer as needed.



('66 Code, § 22-3; Am. Ord. 418, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)



§ 97.04  RESTORATION; TEMPORARY PATCHING.



   (A)   All excavations made under permit, within the street lines,
provided for in §§ 97.01 to 97.10, inclusive, shall be backfilled with
bank-run gravel as approved by the Director of Public Works. All excavations
shall be backfilled and compacted or suitably covered to the satisfaction of
the Director of Public Works or his designee at the end of each workday,
unless suitable alternatives have been previously approved by the Director of
Public Works or his designee. The contractor shall be responsible for the
cost of repairs due to settlement or use of improper backfill material.
Improper backfill shall be re-excavated and temporarily patched in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter. In the event of the failure of a
temporary patch, the contractor will be notified and will repair the same
within 24 hours of notification. Upon failure to comply with this provision
or for emergency situations when the public is at risk, the Director of
Public Works or his designee may direct the repair to be done and will bill
the contractor. The contractor shall be liable for the full expense of such
work, with such expense to be paid within 45 days of billing. Delinquent
payments will be charged against the performance bond.



   (B)   Material removed from the excavations may be used for backfill
upon written permission of the Director of Public Works or his designee. In
all cases when the material used for backfill is that which was excavated
from the trench, the backfilling must be done in properly compacted layers of
two feet for the entire depth of the trench. All muck, clay, frozen earth or
other deleterious material shall be replaced with bank-run gravel. When
bank-run gravel is used for backfilling, all materials removed from the
excavation shall be removed from the site and properly disposed of by the
contractor. All ditches within the travelway of any street or highway shall
be sealed immediately by the contractor with a suitable patching material
approved by the Department of Public Works.



   (C)   For utility companies or those companies that have a full
permanent paving schedule as determined by the Town Engineer, the trench
shall be placed in kind as a minimum. The trench shall be properly backfilled
and sealed with a temporary patch for a period not to exceed 180 days.
Pavement shall be restored to conform to Section 4.01 "Bituminous Concrete"
of Form 814A - State of Connecticut, Department of Transportation, Standard
Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, as may be
amended from time to time. For those streets or roadways having a concrete
base or surface, the trench shall be temporarily backfilled as specified
above. The backfill shall be brought to a level to allow for the replacement
of the concrete to the thickness of the original contract or as directed by
the Director of Public Works or the State of Connecticut, as applicable.



   (D)   Concrete placed in any trench shall be allowed to cure for not
less than 72 hours. During the curing period, all excavations shall be
properly protected by barricades and warning lights furnished and maintained
by the contractor. If the concrete is a base material, the top surface shall
be of bituminous concrete or other paving material approved by the Department
of Public Works, with a minimum compacted thickness of three inches, properly
joined and sealed to the existing pavement. The sides of all excavations and
patches shall be cut in a straight line where joined to the old pavement. If
the concrete is the finished paving material, the concrete shall be screened
and rubbed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.



   (E)   In case of any question, Section 4.01 "Concrete Pavement" of
Form 814A - State of Connecticut, Department of Transportation, Standard
Specifications for Roads, Bridges and Incidental Construction, as may be
amended from time to time, may govern.



('66 Code, § 22-4; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)



§ 97.04A  RESTORATION: PERMANENT PATCHING.



   (A)   Only utility companies or those companies that have a
permanent paving schedule as determined by the Town Engineer shall be exempt
from this section.



   (B)   After a proper settling period, beyond the maintenance period
established pursuant to § 97.05, all temporary patches shall be made
permanent by the town or its contract designee as directed by the Director of
Public Works.



   (C)   The Town Engineer shall establish and collect permanent patch
restoration fees to cover all costs associated with restoring and maintaining
sections of the streets and roadways that were excavated and temporarily
patched, consistent with this chapter. The fee shall be collected at the time
of the application for a permit issued under this chapter. The town shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section when it performs its own work.



      (1)   The permanent patch restoration fee for each excavation
shall be a minimum cash deposit in the amount of $900, in the form of cash,
money order or certified check to cover the cost of all repairs relating to
permanent patching made by the town or a contractor engaged by the town. This
deposit shall also cover the cost of any repairs which might occur because of
settlement of the trench after the period in which the contractor is
responsible pursuant to § 97.05. The Town Engineer may require an amount in
excess of the minimum required if he/she deems it necessary to cover a larger
project or several anticipated excavations.



      (2)   The Town Engineer may also adjust the restoration fee
amount to include a surcharge for administration and inspections.



      (3)   The monies collected shall be deposited in a special
account and utilized to cover expenses incurred by the town for restoration
work caused by the issuance of permits under this chapter and for similar
pavement repairs.



   (D)   The permittee shall also reimburse the town for any and all
costs the town may incur in replacement or repair of traffic controls or
pavement markings disrupted, damaged or removed by work performed under an
excavation permit.



   (E)   The permittee and persons liable under § 97.06 may be billed
by the town for all patching items and protection measures not done by the
permittee. If billed by the town, there will be an additional percentage
charge for administration and handling costs.



   (F)   All invoices shall be paid no later than 45 days from the date
of billing. A monthly service charge of $25 will be imposed on accounts 45
days past due.



   (G)   When a permittee under this section excavates 50% or more of
the width of the existing paved surface of a street, the Director of Public
Works or his designee may direct that the entire area of the existing
pavement be milled and/or resurfaced.



   (H)   The expense of restoration work performed by the town or its
agents shall be drawn from the restoration fee or, if the restoration fee is
insufficient, collected from the permittee or its surety by any proper action.



(Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01; Am. Ord. 462, passed 6- 3-02)



§ 97.05  MAINTENANCE OF TEMPORARY PATCH.



   The contractor shall guarantee to maintain the repaired excavation for
a period of 180 days after its acceptance by the town, and in the event that
it is necessary to make any repairs to the excavation or restoration of the
pavement during this 180-day period, this guarantee shall be extended to
include a period of 30 days from the date of the repair work.



('66 Code, § 22-5; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)



§ 97.06  PROTECTION OF.



   All excavations shall be properly protected by barricades, danger
warning signs, and during the night season by proper flares or red warning
lights. It shall be one of the conditions of the permit and the duty of the
contractor to maintain these warning signs and lights at all times that the
excavation is open or as hereinbefore specified. In the event that it is
necessary to excavate across the entire width of any street or highway, only
1/2 of the street or highway must be excavated at one time and the same shall
be properly restored for the safe passage of vehicular traffic before the
remaining 1/2 of the street is excavated. In the event of the above, it shall
be one of the conditions of the permit and the duty of the contractor to
maintain proper safety facilities to safely regulate both pedestrian and
vehicular traffic at the site, which procedure must be approved by the public
works department and the police department. In the event of an emergency when
it shall be necessary to close the entire street or highway, the department
of public works, the police department and the fire department shall be
notified at once of the action to close the street or highway.



('66 Code, § 22-6)



§ 97.07  VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   If any person, firm or corporation does not abide by all of
the provisions of this chapter, the town, by action of the Town Engineer, has
the authority to refuse the contractor any permits for excavation work for
any length of time deemed necessary.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not more than $100 for each such offense. Each
day that the violation of these regulations continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense for the purpose of the penalty.



   (C)   The cancellation of the bond or insurance shall automatically
void any permit which has been issued.



   (D)   In the case of an emergency, if the contractor or any of his
representatives are not available, the town has the right to repair any
defect to eliminate any hazard or remove any emergency condition which it may
deem necessary, and the contractor shall reimburse the town for any costs
incurred in the completion of the same.



('66 Code, § 22-7; Am. Ord. 418, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-5-01)



§ 97.08  INTERPRETATION.



   In the event of any question as to the interpretation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, with the exception of the use of police officers,
which is in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police or his/her designee,
the decision of the Town Engineer or the Department of Public Works, as
applicable, shall be final.



('66 Code, § 22-8)  (Am. Ord. 418, passed 9-5-00; Am. Ord. 432, passed
2-5-01)



§ 97.09  ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; NOTICE TO FILL; LIEN.



   The abandonment by the owner or the person, firm, or corporation having
control of any parcel of land situated in the town, of any cesspool, well,
dry well, spring or excavation located on the land that is or that may become
a hazard to life and limb is prohibited. If any owner or the person, firm, or
corporation having the control of any such parcel of land shall fail or
neglect to cover or fill in and grade the abandoned cesspool, well, dry well,
spring or excavation within 48 hours of the receipt of notice to do so from
the Legislative Council or its agent, then the Legislative Council shall
cause the abandoned cesspool, well, dry well, spring or excavation to be
covered or filled in and graded, and the expense so incurred shall be a lien
in favor of the town upon such property until paid, and the amount of the
expense may be recovered in an action in the name of the town.



('66 Code, § 22-12)



§ 97.10  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any provision of § 97.09.



('66 Code, § 22-13)  Penalty, see § 97.99 (A)



CONSTRUCTION OF WELLS



§ 97.15  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct,
dig, drive, or drill a well or cause to be constructed, dug, driven, or
drilled a well in the town without first obtaining a written permit from the
director of health or his duly appointed inspector.



('66 Code, § 70-1)  Penalty, see § 97.99(B)



§ 97.16  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   Applications for a permit shall be in writing, shall be in the name of
the owner of the premises where the well is to be constructed, or his agent,
and shall contain the information as may be required by the director of
health on a form provided by the town health department.



('66 Code, § 70-2)



§ 97.17  FINAL REPORT.



   Within 10 days after the completion of construction of any well, the
owner or his agent shall file a final report with the town health department
giving the depth and size of the well, pumping facilities, and other
pertinent information that may be required by the director of health or his
duly appointed inspector. 



('66 Code, § 70-3)



§ 97.18  USE OF WATER.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall use or permit to be used any
water from any well for any purpose other than that set forth in the
application, without written permission of the director of health or his duly
appointed inspector. 



('66 Code, § 70-4)  Penalty, see § 97.99 (B)



§ 97.19  PERMIT FEE.



   For every permit issued hereunder there shall be paid to the town
health department, for the use of the town, a permit fee in the amount of
$5. 



('66 Code, § 70-5; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78)



§ 97.20  SUPPLEMENTARY RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The director of health shall be authorized from time to time to make
such additional or supplementary rules and regulations relating to the
construction of new wells as it may deem necessary.



('66 Code, § 70-6)



§ 97.21  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any provisions of §§
97.15 to 97.21, inclusive.



('66 Code, § 70-7) Penalty, see § 97.99 (B)



CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS



§ 97.35  WAGES TO BE STATED IN CONTRACT.



   (A)   The advertised specification for every public works project by
the Town of Hamden that is 90% or more of the amount set forth by the
Connecticut General Statues, as may be amended, for new construction and/or
that is 90% or more of the amount set forth by the Connecticut General
Statutes, as may be amended, for remodeling, refinishing, refurbishing,
rehabilitation, alteration or repair work, and which requires or involves the
employment of mechanics, laborers or workmen employed upon the work
contracted to be done, shall contain a provision stating the minimum wages to
be paid various classes of laborers, mechanics and workman shall be based
upon the wages established by the State through its Department of Labor to be
prevailing for the corresponding classes of mechanics, laborers or workmen
employed on projects of a character similar to the contract work in the town.



   (B)   Every contract based upon these specifications shall contain a
stipulation that the contractor or his subcontractor shall pay all mechanics,
laborers or workmen employed directly upon the site of the work,
unconditionally and not less often than once a week, and without subsequent
deduction or rebate on any account, the full amount accrued at time of
payment, computed at wage rates not less than those stated in the advertised
specifications, regardless of any contractual relationship which may be
alleged to exist between the contractor or subcontractor and such laborers,
mechanics and workmen, and that the scale of wages to be paid shall be posted
by the contractor in a prominent and easily accessible place at the site of
the work.



   (C)   Every contract based upon these specifications shall further
stipulate that there may be withheld from the contractor so much of accrued
payments as may be considered necessary by the town to pay to laborers,
mechanics and workmen employed by the contractor or any subcontractor on the
work difference between the rates of wages required by the contract to be
paid laborers, mechanics or workmen on the work and the rates of wages
received by such laborers, mechanics or workmen and not refunded to the
contractor, subcontractor or other agents.



   (D)   Every contract based upon these specifications shall contain
the further provision that in the event it is found by the town that any
laborer, mechanic or workmen employed by the contractor or any subcontractor
directly on the site of the work covered by the contract has been or is being
paid a rate of wages less than the rate of wages required by the contract or
be paid as aforesaid the town may, by written notice to the contractor,
terminate the contract, terminate the contractor's right to proceed with the
work or such part of the work as to which there has been a failure to pay
said required wages and to prosecute the work to completion by contract or
otherwise, and the contractor and his sureties shall be liable to the town
for any excess cost occasioned the town thereby.



(Ord. 295, passed 6-5-89; Am. Ord. 602, passed 3-7-11)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of § 97.10 shall be fined not
more than $100 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. Each day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense.



('66 Code, § 22-13)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of § 97.15, 97.18 or 97.21
shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50.



('66 Code, § 70-7)



CHAPTER 98:  SCENIC ROADS



Section



   98.01   Statement of purpose



   98.02   Designation of scenic road



   98.03   Designation procedure



   98.04   Treatment of scenic roads



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to help preserve the town's natural
beauty and rural character by enabling the Legislative Council, with the
consent of abutting property owners, to preserve scenic, rural roads.



(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86)



§ 98.02  DESIGNATION OF SCENIC ROAD.



   (A)   The Legislative Council shall consider only those town roads
which meet the criteria for scenic road status set forth at Conn. Gen. Stat.
§ 7-149a.  Each must be a town road which is free from intensive commercial
development and intensive vehicular traffic and meet at least one of the
following criteria:



      (1)   It is unpaved,



      (2)   It is bordered by mature trees or stone walls,



      (3)   The traveled portion is no more than 20 feet in width,



      (4)   It offers scenic views,



      (5)   It blends naturally into the surrounding terrain, or



      (6)   It parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes or
ponds.



   (B)   Additionally, it must be nominated for scenic road status by a
petition signed by owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the road or
portion of the road.



(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86)



§ 98.03  DESIGNATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   When a highway or road is to be considered for designation as
a scenic road the Legislative Council shall schedule a public hearing on the
proposal.  Hearing notices and deadlines shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the by-laws of the Council.  Additionally, the Council shall
notify the Public Works Director and owners of lot frontage abutting the
highway or portion of a highway, of the proposed designation and the
scheduled public hearing.



   (B)   Following the Public Hearing, the Legislative Council shall
vote on the proposed designation.  The designation shall become effective
upon the approval of the Legislative Council and upon the filing of the
petition, signed by a majority of abutting landowners (§ 98.02 above), with
the Town Clerk.



   (C)   The scenic road designation may be rescinded by the
Legislative Council by using the same procedures and by having the written
concurrence of the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the
highway.  In the event that the designation can be shown to create a threat
to the health, safety, or general welfare of the citizens of the town, then
the designation may be rescinded without the concurrence of abutting property
owners.



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by a designation of a highway or road or
portion of a highway or road as a scenic road pursuant to this chapter may
appeal such designation in the manner and utilizing the same standards of
review provided for appeals in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 8-28.



(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86)



§ 98.04  TREATMENT OF SCENIC ROADS.



   (A)   No highway or road which has been designated as a scenic road
under this chapter shall be altered or improved, including but not limited
to, widening of the right-of-way or of the traveled portion of the highway,
paving, changes of grade, straightening, removal of stone walls and removal
of mature trees, except for good cause as determined by the Legislative
Council.  The Council shall state the reasons for such future alterations
and improvements in its minutes.



   (B)   Any highway or portion of any highway designated as a scenic
road shall be maintained by the town, in good and sufficient repair and in
passable condition.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a
person owning or occupying land abutting a scenic road from maintaining and
repairing the land which abuts the scenic road if such maintenance or repair
occurs on land not within the right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic
road.



(Ord. 251, passed 4-7-86)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of § 98.04 shall be fined the sum of
$90 each day said violation continues such constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 281, passed 11-14-88)



CHAPTER 99:  FAIR HOUSING; HOUSING PARTNERSHIP



Section



Fair Housing



   99.01   Statement of policy



   99.02   Fair Housing Officer; goals and objectives



   99.03   Equal opportunity and fair housing review criteria



   99.04   Review for equal opportunity



   99.05   Fair housing review criteria



   99.06   Actions to use minority and women's business firms



Housing Partnership



   99.15   Housing Partnership created



   99.16   Responsibilities of town



   99.17   Duties of Partnership



   99.18   Expenses of Partnership



FAIR HOUSING



§ 99.01  STATEMENT OF POLICY.



   It is the policy of the town to affirmatively promote maximum choice in
the purchase or rental of public or private housing  without regard for
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, family characteristics, or economic status; to
eliminate or substantially mitigate any practices or activities, public or
private, intentional or accidental, which restrict access to housing through
discriminatory means; and to encourage the deconcentration of racial, ethnic,
and economic groups throughout the town and region.



(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)



§ 99.02  FAIR HOUSING OFFICER; GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Fair Housing Officer appointed. In order to carry out the fair
housing policy of the town, the Mayor shall appoint a Fair Housing Officer.
The Fair Housing Officer shall be assigned to the Office of Housing and
Community Development (OHCD) and shall report to the Community Resources
Development Director or his designee. The Fair Housing Officer shall prepare
and carry out an annual plan in accordance with the goals and objectives set
forth in division (B) below. At least annual by the Fair Housing Officer
shall report to the Mayor and the Legislative Council on his progress in
meeting the goals and objectives. The annual report shall include recommended
actions by municipal departments that would lead to increased compliance with
the Fair Housing Program.



   (B)   Goals and objectives.



      (1)   Education.  Education goals and objectives shall be as
follows:



         (a)   To provide educational, counseling, information,
and referral services from a centralized location;



         (b)   To develop written materials for all segments of
the housing market, that is financial and insurance institutions, real estate
agents, landlords/owners, and tenants/purchasers;



         (c)   To secure and disseminate affirmative marketing
agreements with banks, real estate agents, landlords, and management
companies;



         (d)   To provide counseling and referral services for
all housing-related matters;



         (e)   To publish an annual survey of housing assistance
and resources;



         (f)   To promote regional and local fair housing
initiatives such as the creation of a Community Housing Resource Board;



         (g)   To counsel all owners of multi-family housing who
receive any governmental assistance;



         (h)   To do outreach in cooperation with schools, civic
and religious organizations, and the media; and



         (i)   To conduct workshops for all segments of the
housing markets.



      (2)   Planning and analysis.  Planning and analysis goals and
objectives shall be follows:



         (a)   In accordance with 24 CFR Section 570.904(c)(1),
to conduct an annual review of impediments to Fair Housing choice is
reflected in: the sale or rental of dwellings; the provision of housing
brokerage services; the provision of financing and insurance; public policies
and actions affecting the approval of sites and other building requirements;
and administrative policies concerning community development and housing
activities. There has been a finding of housing discrimination by a court,
HUD, or CHRO, the analysis shall include steps which the own shall take to
assist in remedying the discriminatory condition;



         (b)   In conjunction with HUD and CHRO, to develop
mechanism for reporting discrimination complaints and discriminatory
practices;



         (c)   To review existing state and federal laws to
determine need for town ordinances and town support of additional state or
federal legislation; and



         (d)   Through organizations such as the Fair Housing
Association of Connecticut and the Connecticut Housing Coalition to monitor
fair housing, landlord-tenant, and housing production developments on the
regional, state and national level.



      (3)   Monitoring and enforcement.  Monitoring and enforcement
goals and objectives shall be as follows:



         (a)   To monitor throughout town and region
discriminatory practices including, but not limited to refusal to deal;
imposition of discriminatory terms and conditions; discriminatory
advertising; institutional disinvestment or redlining; blockbusting or racial
steering; and discrimination against minority real estate agents.



         (b)   To investigate complaints of discriminatory
practices in the town, refer complaints to appropriate agencies, and assist
complainants in obtaining satisfactory relief.



         (c)   To, in conjunction with HUD or CHRO, conduct
investigations or testing where discrimination is suspected.



(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)



§ 99.03  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND FAIR HOUSING REVIEW CRITERIA.



   Where the criteria in this section are met, the Department will presume
that the recipient has carried out its CDBG-funded program in accordance with
civil rights certifications and civil rights requirements of the act relating
to equal employment opportunity, equal opportunity in services, benefits, and
participation, and is affirmatively furthering fair housing unless:



   (A)   There is evidence which shows, or from which it is reasonable
to infer, that the recipient, motivated by considerations of race, color,
religion where applicable, sex, national origin, age, or handicap, has
treated some persons less favorably than others;



   (B)   There is evidence that a policy, practice, standard, or method
of administration, although neutral on its face, operates to deny or affect
adversely in a significantly disparate way the provision of employment or
services, benefits or participation to persons of a particular race, color,
religion where applicable, sex, national origin, age, or handicap, or fair
housing to persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, or national
origin; or



   (C)   Where the Secretary required a further assurance pursuant to
CFR Section 570.304 in order to accept the recipient's prior civil rights
certification, the recipient has failed to meet any such assurance.



§ 99.04  REVIEW FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY.



   CFR Section 570.601(d) sets forth the general requirements for title VI
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 570.602 sets forth the general
requirements for Section 109 of the act. Together these provisions prohibit
discrimination in any program or activity funded in whole or in part with
funds made available under this part.



   (A)   Review for equal employment opportunity. The Department will
presume that a recipient's hiring and employment practices have been carried
out in compliance with its equal opportunity certifications and requirements
of the act. This presumption may be rebutted where, based on the totality of
circumstances, there has been a deprivation of employment, promotion, or
training opportunities by a recipient to any person within the meaning of
Section 109 of the act. The event to which persons of a particular race,
gender or ethnic background are represented in the workforce may in certain
circumstances be considered, together with complaints, performance reviews,
and other information.



   (B)   Review of equal opportunity in services, benefits and
participation. The Department will presume a recipient is carrying out its
programs and activities in accordance with the civil rights certifications
and requirements of the act. This presumption may be rebutted where, based on
the totality of circum stances, there has been a deprivation of services,
benefits, or participation in any program or activity funded in whole or in
part with block grant funds by a recipient to any person within the meaning
of Section 109 of the act. The extent of which persons of a particular race,
gender, or ethnic background participate in a program or activity may in
certain circumstances be considered, together with complaints, performance
reviews, and other information.



(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)



§ 99.05  FAIR HOUSING REVIEW CRITERIA.



   Section 570.601(b) sets the general requirements for Title VIII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968 and the grantee's certification that it will
affirmatively further fair housing. In reviewing a recipient's actions in
carrying out its housing and community development activities in a manner to
affirmatively further fair housing in the private and public housing sectors,
absent independent evidence to the contrary, the Department will consider
that a recipient has taken such actions in accordance with its certification
if the recipient meets the following review criteria:



   (A)   The recipient has conducted an analysis to determine the
impediments to fair housing choice in its housing and community development
program and activities. The term "FAIR HOUSING CHOICE" means the ability of
persons, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, of
similar income levels to have available to them the same housing choices. 
This analysis shall include a review for impediments to fair housing choice
in the following areas:



      (1)   The sale or rental of dwellings;



      (2)   The provision of housing brokerage services;



      (3)   The provision of financing assistance for dwellings;



      (4)   Public policies and actions affecting the approval of
sites and other building requirements used in the approval process for the
construction of publicly assisted housing;



      (5)   The administrative policies concerning community
development and housing activities, such as urban homesteading, multi-family
rehabilitation, and activities causing displacement, which affect
opportunities of minority households to select housing inside or outside
areas of minority concentration; and



      (6)   Where there is a determination of unlawful segregation
or other housing discrimination by a court or a finding of noncompliance by
HUD regarding assisted housing within a recipient's jurisdiction, an analysis
of the actions which could be taken by the recipient to help remedy the
discriminatory condition, including actions involving the expenditure of
funds made available under this part.



   (B)   Based upon the conclusions of the analysis in division (A)
above, the recipient has taken lawful steps, consistent with this part,
relating to housing and community development to overcome the effects of
conditions that limit fair housing choice within the recipient's
jurisdiction. Such actions may include:



      (1)   Enactment and enforcement of an ordinance providing for
fair housing consistent with the federal fair housing law;



      (2)   Support of the administration and enforcement of state
fair housing laws providing for fair housing consistent with federal fair
housing law;



      (3)   Participation in voluntary partnerships developed with
public and private organizations to promote the achievement of the goal of
fair housing choice (including implementation of a locally developed and
HUD-approved New Horizons comprehensive fair housing plan);



      (4)   Contracting with private organizations, including
private fair housing organizations, where such support will bring about
actions consistent with Titles VI and VIII, to address the impediments
identified in the analysis described in division (A) above;



      (5)   Activities which assist in remedying findings or
determinations of unlawful segregation or other discrimination involving
assisted housing within the recipient's jurisdiction; or



      (6)   Other actions consistent with law determined to be
appropriate based upon the conclusions of the analysis.



(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)



§ 99.06  ACTIONS TO USE MINORITY AND WOMEN'S BUSINESS FIRMS.



   The Department will review a recipient's performance to determine if it
has administered its activities funded with assistance under this part in a
manner to encourage use of minority and women's business enterprises
described in Executive Orders 11625, 12432, and 12138, and 24 CFR 85.36(e).
In making this review, the Department will determine if the grantee has taken
actions required under 24 CFR 85.36(e), and will review the effectiveness of
those actions in accomplishing the objectives of 24 CFR 85.36(e) and the
Executive Orders. No recipient; is required by this section to attain or
maintain any particular statistical level of participation in its
contractor's activities by race, ethnicity, or gender of the contractor's
owners or managers.



(Ord. 292, passed 5-1-89)



HOUSING PARTNERSHIP



§ 99.15  HOUSING PARTNERSHIP CREATED.



   There is hereby created the Hamden Housing Partnership, appointed by
the chief elected official of the municipality. The Partnership shall consist
of the following members:



   (A)   The chief elected official of the town:



   (B)   Representatives of the Planning Commission, Zoning Commission,
Inland Wetlands Commission, Housing Authority, and any local community
development agency, not to exceed three in number;



   (C)   Representatives of the local business community, such as local
bankers, realtors, and developers, not to exceed three in number;



   (D)   Representatives of public interest groups, such as housing
advocates, members of the clergy, members of local civic groups and
representatives of local nonprofit corporations, not to exceed three in
number; and



   (E)   Local urban planning, land use and housing professionals, not
to exceed three in number.



(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)



§ 99.16  RESPONSIBILITIES OF TOWN.



   The responsibilities of the municipality, in order to receive initial
designation under the State Housing Partnership program, shall include the
following:



   (A)   Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that the Town
Housing Partnership has been formed in accordance with P.A. 88-305; and



   (B)   Submit evidence to the Commissioner of Housing that sufficient
local resources have been committed to the Town Housing Partnership.



(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)



§ 99.17  DUTIES OF PARTNERSHIP.



   Duties of the Town Housing Partnership, in order to receive development
designation under the State Housing Partnership Program, shall include the
following:



   (A)   To examine and identify housing needs and opportunities in the
community;



   (B)   To explore the availability of any state, municipal or other
land that is suitable for the development of affordable housing;



   (C)   To review applicable zoning regulations to determine whether
such regulations restrict the development of affordable housing in the
community;



   (D)   To identify any necessary changes to such regulations;



   (E)   To establish priorities and develop a long-range plan to meet
identified housing needs in the community consistent with regional housing
needs;



   (F)   To establish procedures for the development of a written
proposal to achieve such priorities in accordance with said plan; and



   (G)   To start an activity, development or project designed to
create additional affordable housing in the town.



(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)



§ 99.18  EXPENSES OF PARTNERSHIP.



   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the
municipality in carrying out any Partnership activities authorized by this
resolution without prior approval by the legislative body nor shall any
person have any right to bind the municipality by contract, agreement, or
otherwise without a prior specific approval of the legislative body.



(Ord. 293, passed 5-1-89)



CHAPTER 100:  EMERGENCY ALARMS



Section



   100.01   Intent; purpose



   100.02   Definitions



   100.03   Requirements



   100.04   Exceptions



   100.05   Notification of fine; suspension



   100.06   Promulgation of regulations



   100.07   Disclaimer of liability



   100.08   Appeal; hearing procedure for citations



   100.09   Enforcement



 



   100.98   Severability



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  INTENT; PURPOSE.



   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide minimum
standards and regulations applicable to users and installers of residential
and commercial burglar, fire, hold-up, medical, and automatic dialer systems
within the town, to promote the responsible use of alarm systems to prevent
unnecessary emergency response to false alarms and thereby protect the
emergency response capacity of the town from misuse.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)



§ 100.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALARM SYSTEM."  An assembly of equipment and devices (or a single
device, such as a solid state unit, which may operate from a 110 volt AC
line) arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring the urgent
attention of and to which the Hamden Police and/or Fire Department personnel
and equipment are expected to respond. This includes, but shall not be
limited to, all burglar alarms, fire alarms, hold-up alarms, medical alarms
and automatic telephone dialing devices. This does not include any alarm
systems or smoke detectors which do not signal outside an alarmed premise or
an alarm system on motor vehicles.



   "ALARM USER."  Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind which owns, controls or
occupies any building, dwelling, structure, property or facility wherein an
alarm system is maintained.



   "AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICE." An alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or
otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.



   "BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM."  An alarm system signaling the entry or
attempted entry into the area protected by the system.



   "CENTRAL COMMUNICATIONS CENTER."  The police and fire communications
area, other facilities which have communications equipment and the
Police/Fire Department dispatchers.



   "FALSE ALARM."



      (1)   An alarm system activated in the absence of an
emergency, whether willfully or by inadvertence, negligence, or an
unintentional act, including the malfunction of the alarm system to which the
Police Department and/or the Fire Department responds. The definition
excludes alarm(s) caused by the Central Communications Center receiving
equipment if the alarm is directly connected to the alarm board; testing or
repairing of telephone or electrical lines or equipment outside the protected
premises; acts of God, such as earthquake, flood, windstorm, thunder,
lightning or violent weather conditions; or an attempted illegal entry where
there is visible evidence of a crime in progress, or in the case or an
emergency medical alarm, an actual medical emergency requiring police, fire
and/or medical personnel. If doubt exists as to the cause of the false alarm,
the Police Chief and in cases of fire and/or medical alarms, the Fire Chief
shall have the final decision regarding the circumstances of the activation.



      (2)   Multiple alarms received by the Police and/or Fire
Department before the systems can be deactivated within a reasonable period
of time.



      (3)   This definition also includes the intentional activation
of a hold-up alarm for other than a hold-up in progress, the intentional
activation of a burglar alarm for other than a burglary, the intentional
activation of a medical alarm for other than a medical emergency, or the
intentional activation of a fire alarm for other than a fire or hazard.
Circumstances in which the activator reasonably believed that an emergency
situation existed shall not constitute a false alarm. False fire alarms shall
not mean alarms transmitted because of a water main break or similar cause
that occurs outside of the protected property.



   "FIRE ALARM SYSTEM."  A signal or message from a person or other
device indicating the existence of a fire or other emergency which requires
Fire Department action.



   "FIRE CHIEF." The Fire Chief for the Town of Hamden or a designated
representative.



   "HOLD-UP ALARM SYSTEM."  An alarm system signaling a robbery or
attempted robbery.



   "MEDICAL ALARM SYSTEM."  An alarm system signaling a medical or other
emergency which requires Police or Fire Department action.



   "POLICE CHIEF."  The Chief of Police for the Town of Hamden or a
designated representative.



   "PROTECTED PREMISES." The structure, dwelling or property on which an
alarm system is located.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed
5-3-10)



§ 100.03  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any alarm user installing an alarm system within the Town of
Hamden shall register with the Hamden Police Department or in cases of a fire
and/or medical alarm system the Hamden Fire Department at least 60 days after
the installation date of the alarm system.



   (B)   All existing alarm systems shall be registered with the Hamden
Police Department or in cases of a fire and/or medical alarm system, the
Hamden Fire Department, within 60 days of the effective date of Ordinance No.
584.



   (C)   At the time of registration, an alarm user shall be informed
and execute a consent, in such a form as may be prescribed by the town, that
the registration of an alarm user's system may be suspended and that the
alarm user shall pay to the town for false alarms as described below.



   (D)   At the time of registration, the Police Department or in the
case of a fire and/or medical alarm system, the Fire Department shall be
furnished, in writing the following information: name, address and telephone
number of the alarm user; other person(s) authorized in an emergency to gain
access to the protected area; and the alarm company who installed the system,
is maintaining the system, or who monitors the system. It shall be the
responsibility of each alarm user to notify, in writing, the Police
Department or in the case or a fire and/or medical alarm system, the Fire
Department, with any changes.



   (E)   The registration of an alarm user's alarm system may be
suspended by the Police Chief during any one calendar year if the system has
generated 12 or more false alarms and no verifiable effort has been made by
the alarm user to eliminate the false alarm.



   (F)   No person, firm or corporation shall install an automatic
telephone dialing device used with an alarm system within the town,
terminating at the Town of Hamden Central Communications Center, after the
effective date of Ordinance No. 584.



   (G)   Automatic telephone dialing devices in existence as of the
effective date of Ordinance No. 584 shall be programmed to a special
telephone number, which shall be designated by the Police Chief or in the
case of a fire and/or medical alarm system, by the Fire Chief, within 60 days
of the effective date of this chapter.



   (H)   All alarm systems, as defined in this chapter, which sound an
audible signal which may be heard outside of the protected premises, shall be
equipped with a device which shall limit the duration of the audible signal
to not more than 30 minutes in accordance with Section 22a-69-5.1 of the
Administrative Regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection of
the State of Connecticut.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to alarm systems owned or controlled by
any federal, state or local government.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)



§ 100.05  NOTIFICATION OF FINE; SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall notify the alarm user by mail of any
false alarm fine or suspension of registration. Within 15 days of mailing the
notice, the alarm user may file a written appeal of the charge with the
Police Chief. The notice of appeal shall contain information to show that the
alarm giving rise to the fine or suspension of registration was not a false
alarm within the meaning of this chapter. The notice of appeal shall also
contain a return address to which the Police Chief shall send notice of
his/her decision.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall consider the information filed by the
alarm user, reaffirm or rescind the false alarm charge and, within 15 days of
receipt of the appeal, notify the subscriber of the decision by mail.



   (C)   The Police Chief may designate one or more subordinates to
perform the duties under divisions (A) and (B) above.



   (D)   Any alarm user may appeal the decision of the Police Chief in
accordance with § 100.08.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)



§ 100.06  PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The Police Chief may promulgate rules and regulations to implement this
chapter.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)



§ 100.07  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The Town of Hamden shall not be liable for any defects in operation of
any signal line system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately
upon receipt of an alarm from such source, for any failure or neglect of any
person in connection with the installation, operation, disconnection or
removal of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals, or the relaying of
such signals or messages.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)



§ 100.08  APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE FOR CITATIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
other than police officers, employees, or persons who issue citations, to
conduct the hearings authorized by this section.



   (B)   If any alarm user who is sent notice pursuant to § 100.05
wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without
requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine(s) admitted to, in
person or by mail, to an official designated by the town. The payment shall
be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the
conduct of the person or other person making the payment.  Any person who
does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten days of the
date of the notice provided for in § 100.05 shall be deemed to have admitted
liability, and the designated town official shall certify the person's
failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall
thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for
herein.



   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be held
not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing of
notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any
reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or continuance. An
original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the
issuing town official or police officer shall be filed and retained by the
town, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The
presence of the issuing official or police officer shall be required at the
hearing if the person so requests. A person wishing to contest his/her
liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his/her
behalf. A designated municipal officer, other than the hearing officer, may
present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If the person fails to
appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against
him/her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable
provision(s) of this chapter. The hearing officer may accept from the person
copies of police reports, investigatory and citations reports, and other
official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of
the person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in
the order and form and with such methods of proof, as he/she deems fair and
appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be
strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of the
hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, he/she shall
dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. If
he/she determines that the person is liable for the violation, he/she shall
forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such
person as provided by this chapter.



   (D)   If the assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the
hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than
12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West
Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. The
certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of
assessment. Within the 12-month period, assessments against the same person
may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment.



   The clerk shall enter judgment in the amount of the record of
assessment and appropriate court costs against the person in favor of the
town. Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes, the
hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the
effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on the judgment may
issue without further notice to the person.



   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of the notice of the
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-259, with the Clerk of the Superior Court,
Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall
entitle the person to a hearing in accordance with the judges of the Superior
Court (Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-152c).



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed
5-3-10)



§ 100.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement and administration of this chapter shall be the
function of the Police Chief.



   (B)   A maximum of two false alarms from any one protected property
per calendar year shall be permitted.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the third false alarm from any one protected
property and for each false alarm thereafter during the calendar year, the
Police Chief shall assess a fee against the alarm user. Any police officer or
firefighter responding to an alarm which is determined to be false shall
promptly notify the Police Chief in writing, and shall leave written
notification of the false alarm at the scene of the alarm.



   (D)   An alarm user shall be notified in writing by the Police Chief
after the first false alarm recorded during any one calendar year so that
corrective steps may be taken to eliminate the false alarm signals.



   (E)   An alarm user shall be notified in writing for failure to
register an alarm system as required by § 100.03 so that corrective steps
may be taken to register the alarm system.



   (F)   An alarm user shall be notified in writing by the Police chief
after the second false alarm recorded during any one calendar year that any
further issuance of false alarms will incur a penalty and that the alarm
system should be inspected by a properly licensed alarm company.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed
5-3-10) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.98  SEVERABILITY.



   All provisions of the Town Code of Ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed and if for any reason any word, clause or paragraph or
section of this chapter shall be held to make the same unconstitutional, this
chapter shall not be hereby invalidated and the remainder of this chapter
shall continue in effect.  Any provision herein, which is in conflict with
the Connecticut General Statutes, is hereby repealed, it being understood
that the said General Statutes shall take precedence over this chapter.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 584, passed 5-3-10)



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any alarm user shall be fined $50 for the third false alarm,
$75 for the fourth false alarm, $100 for the fifth false alarm, $100 for the
sixth false alarm, $150 for the seventh false alarm, $200 for the eighth
false alarm and $250 for the ninth and each subsequent false alarm thereafter
transmitted from any one protected property within any one calendar year.
Such fine may be waived or suspended by the Police Chief if the cause of the
false alarm is beyond the control of the alarm user and/or if the alarm user
demonstrates a cooperative effort to resolve a recurring problem of
indeterminate cause; provided, however, that the waiver or suspension of fine
does not preclude suspension as provided in § 100.03(E), if such recurring
false alarms continue to present a public nuisance.



   (B)   Any alarm user shall be fined $100 for each of the following
violations:



      (1)   Failure to register an alarm system after written
notification as provided for in § 100.09(E);



      (2)   Use of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system in
violation of §§ 100.03(F) and (G);



      (3)   Use of an exterior audible alarm system in violation of
§ 100.03(H); and



      (4)   Failure to disconnect an alarm system upon suspension of
the system's registration.



   (C)   Fees and fines may be paid in person or remitted by mail in
the form of a check or money order made payable to "Treasurer, Town of
Hamden," and delivered to the Hamden Police Department, 2900 Dixwell Avenue,
Hamden, CT within ten business days of receipt of the bill from the town.



(Ord. 470, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 490, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 584, passed
5-3-10)



CHAPTER 101:  NOISE



Section



   101.01   Definitions



   101.02   Classifications of noise zones and districts



   101.03   Noise standards



   101.04   Exclusions



   101.05   Exemptions



   101.06   Equipment and measurement



   101.07   Appeal



   101.08   Enforcement



 



   101.99   Penalty



§ 101.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, Where terms
are not defined under the provisions of this chapter and are defined in the
noise regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection,
they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in those regulations.
Otherwise, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted
meanings or such meaning as the context herein may imply.



   "ANSI."  The American National Standards Institute or its successor
body. Any ANSI standard referred to in this chapter shall be deemed to
incorporate further revisions by reference.



   "CONSTRUCTION."  Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition for or of
public or private structures, utilities, rights-of-way or similar property.



   "DAYTIME HOURS."  The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., weekdays
and Saturday, and the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.



   "EMERGENCY."  Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual
or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action.



   "EMERGENCY SOUND SIGNAL."  An audible electronic or mechanical siren
or signal device attached to an authorized emergency vehicle or within or
attached to a building pole or other structure for the purpose of sounding or
testing an alarm relating to fire or emergency management.



   "EMITTER."  An individual or entity who is the owner or occupant of
the premises from which noise commences.



   "EXCESSIVE NOISE."  Emitter noise zone levels from noise sources
exceeding the standards set forth in § 101.03 beyond the boundary of the
emitter's noise zones.



   "IMPULSE NOISE."  Noise of short duration (generally less than one
second), especially of high intensity, abrupt onset and rapid decay, and
often rapidly changing spectral composition.



   "MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT."  All engine or motor-powered garden or
maintenance tools intended for repetitive use, including but not limited to
lawnmowers, riding tractors, blowers, and including equipment intended for
infrequent service work, including but not limited to chain saws, log
chippers or paving rollers.



   "MOBILE SOURCES OF NOISE."  Shall include, but are not limited to such
sources as automobiles, trucks and other vehicles used to transport
individuals or items along public rights-of-way.



   "NIGHTTIME HOURS."  The hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. weekdays
and Saturday, and the hours after 9:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. on Sunday.



   "NOISE ZONE."  An individual unit of land or a group of contiguous
parcels under the same ownership as indicated by public land records and, as
relates to noise emitters, includes contiguous publicly-dedicated streets and
highway rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way, water bodies and waters of the
state.



   "RECEPTOR."  An individual or entity who is the owner or occupant of
premises affected by or receiving noise.



   "SITE."  The area bounded by a property line on or in which a source
of noise exists.



   "SOUND LEVEL METER."  An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the
measurement of sound levels. The sound level meter shall conform to ANSI
Specifications for Sound Level Meters S1.4-1984 (1997).



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)



§ 101.02  CLASSIFICATION OF NOISE ZONES AND DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Noise zone classifications.  Noise zone classifications shall
be based on the designated use of any parcel or tract, based on the zoning
district in which a parcel is located as described on the Zoning Map and in
the Zoning Regulations of the town as amended from time to time; provided
that any parcel whose use is lawfully nonconforming to its district at the
time this chapter is enacted shall be classified for noise emission purposes
according to the district appropriate for the nonconforming use. The current
designation shall be the determining factor, and any change in the zoning map
or zoning regulations will also represent a change in the Noise District.



   (B)   Noise Districts.



      (1)   Residential Noise District.  Lands or noise zones
contained within residential districts by the Planning and  Zoning
Regulations of the town shall be designated as Residential Noise Districts,
and shall be subject to the noise standards prescribed therefor or defined by
this chapter.



      (2)   Business Noise District.  Lands contained within
business districts by the Planning and Zoning Regulations of the town shall
be designated as Business Noise Districts, and shall be subject to the noise
standards prescribed therefor or defined by this chapter.



      (3)   Manufacturing Noise District. Lands contained within
manufacturing districts by the Planning and Zoning Regulations of the town
shall be designated as Manufacturing Noise Districts, and shall be subject to
the noise standards prescribed therefor or defined by this chapter.



      (4)   Mixed Use Noise District;  (referred to as Controlled
Development Districts or CDD).  Lands contained within mixed used districts
by the Planning and Zoning Regulations of the town shall be designated as
Business Noise Districts for purposes of this chapter and shall be subject to
the noise standards prescribed therefor or defined by this chapter.



   (C)   Emitter's nose zone.  Within a noise district, the Emitter's
noise zone is defined as his/her individual unit of land or group of
contiguous parcels under the same ownership as indicated by the public land
records. The emitter's noise zone also includes contiguous street and highway
rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way and water.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)



§ 101.03  NOISE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Excessive noise prohibited.  No person shall cause or allow
the emission of excessive noise as defined herein beyond the boundaries of
his/her noise district or noise zone as measured at any point on a receptor's
tract or parcel of land, so as to exceed the levels stated herein. The source
of noise measured shall be the responsibility of the emitter.



   (B)   Impulse noise.



      (1)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse
noise in excess of 80 dB peak sound pressure level during the nighttime.



      (2)   No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse
noise in excess of 100 dB peak sound pressure at any time to any noise
district or noise zone.



   (C)   Noise district and noise zone standards.



      (1)   (a)   No person in a manufacturing noise district
shall emit noise exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the
receptor's noise districts and noise zones:



 

 

RECEPTOR



 
Manufacturing
 
Business
 
Residential


 
 
 
Day
 
Night


Manufacturing Emitter to
 
70 dBA
 
66 dBA
 
61 dBA
 
51 dBA



 



         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed
above shall be considered excessive and unnecessary noise.



      (2)   (a)   No person in a business noise district shall
emit noise exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the
receptor's noise districts and noise zones:



 

 

RECEPTOR



 
Manufacturing
 
Business
 
Residential


 
 
 
Day
 
Night


Business Emitter to
 
62 dBA
 
62 dBA
 
55 dBA
 
45 dBA



 



         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed
above shall be considered excessive and unnecessary noise.



      (3)   (a)   No person in a mixed use district ("CDD") shall
emit noise exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the
receptor's noise districts and noise zones:



 

 

RECEPTOR



 
Manufacturing
 
Business
 
Residential


 
 
 
Day
 
Night


Mixed Use Emitter to
 
62 dBA
 
62 dBA
 
55 dBA 
 
45 dBA



 



         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed
above shall be considered excessive and unnecessary noise.



      (4)   (a)   No person in a residential noise district shall
emit noise exceeding the levels stated herein and applicable to the
receptor's noise districts and noise zones:



 

 

RECEPTOR



 
Manufacturing
 
Business
 
Residential


 
 
 
Day
 
Night


Residential Emitter to
 
62 dBA
 
55 dBA
 
55 dBA
 
45 dBA



 



         (b)   Levels emitted in excess of the values listed
above shall be considered excessive and unnecessary noise.



   (D)   Motor vehicle noise.



      (1)   All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the
town shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels as set forth
in the Regulations of the State of Connecticut, Department of Motor Vehicles,
Title 14, Sec. 14-80a-1 through 14-8-a-18, as amended from time to time.



      (2)   No sound amplifying devices on or within motor vehicles
shall emit noise in excess of the noise levels as specified in this division.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 101.99



§ 101.04  EXCLUSIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to noise or sound
emitted by or related to:



   (A)   Natural phenomena;



   (B)   The unamplified sound of the human voice;



   (C)   The unamplified sound made by any wild or domestic animal;



   (D)   Bells, carillons, or chimes associated with specific religious
observances and/or organizations;



   (E)   A public emergency sound signal attached to an authorized
emergency vehicle in the immediate act of responding to an emergency, or
located within or attached to a building, pole or other structure for the
purpose of sounding or testing an alarm relating to fire or emergency
management;



   (F)   Snow removal equipment, provided the equipment is maintained
in good repair so as to minimize noise and that noise discharged from
exhausts shall be adequately muffled to prevent loud and/or explosive noises
therefrom;



   (G)   Farming equipment or farming activity.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 570, passed 1-5-09)



§ 101.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempt from this chapter, subject to the special
conditions as specified:



   (A)   Noise created by any construction activity which is conducted
during daytime hours;



   (B)   Noise created by recreational activities that are authorized
by the town, including but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts
and fireworks displays;



   (C)   Noise created by the operation of public facility maintenance
equipment or private property maintenance equipment during daytime hours; and



   (D)   Noise created by blasting, other than that conducted in
connection with construction activities, provided that the blasting is
conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., at specified hours previously
announced to the public, and provided that a permit for such blasting has
been obtained from local authorities.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)



§ 101.06  EQUIPMENT AND MEASUREMENT.



   For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this
chapter, the following guidelines shall be applicable:



   (A)   A person conducting sound measurements shall have been trained
in the techniques and principles of sound measuring equipment and
instrumentation.



   (B)   Instruments used to determine noise levels shall be of
standard design, maintained in calibration and good working order, and
instrument manufacturer's instructions for use of the instruments shall be
followed.



   (C)   Measurements taken to determine compliance with this chapter,
in particular § 101.03, shall be taken at any elevation and at any point
beyond the boundary of the emitter's noise district or noise zone and within
the receptor's noise district or noise zone.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)  Penalty, see § 101.99



§ 101.07  APPEAL.



   (A)   Whenever a fine is imposed under this chapter, the person
fined may, within ten days from the date of the noise ticket, appeal by
filing a written notice of appeal to the town's Hearing Officer. The filing
of an appeal shall stay any fine imposed until such time as a decision is
rendered on the appeal.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by citation and
hearing as permitted by Conn. Gen. Stat. § 7-152(c).



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)



§ 101.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Hamden Police Department shall be responsible for enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter. All notices and fines required or permitted
by this chapter shall emanate from the Police Department. Fines shall be paid
to the Department of Police Services.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)



§ 101.99  PENALTY.



   Any person in violation of any section of any provision of this chapter
may be fined in an amount not to exceed $100 per violation. Each day a
violation continues after the time for correction of the violation has been
given in an order shall constitute a continuing violation, and the amount of
the fine shall be doubled for each day said violation continues, said fine
not to exceed $400 dollars per day.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00)



CHAPTER 102:  TOBACCO PRODUCTS



Section



   102.01   Definitions



   102.02   The use of any tobacco product is banned in designated
places



   102.03   Signage



   102.04   Enforcement



 



   102.99   Penalty



§ 102.01  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:



   “ENFORCEMENT.” All law enforcement officers of the Town of Hamden.



   “PARK OR RECREATIONAL PROPERTY.” Property owned or operated by the
Town of Hamden and used in connection with recreational programs or purposes,
including, but not limited to, sports or athletic fields and facilities,
parks, pocket parks, playgrounds, bike or walking paths, dog parks,
bleachers, gardens, passive recreation areas, trails and other areas where
people may assemble for recreational purposes, including markets, fairs,
parades, and any community, recreation or building located on park or
recreation property. Park or recreational property shall not include school
grounds.



   “PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS.” A parcel of land or portion thereof used
for school purposes and operated by the Town of Hamden Board of Education.



   “TOBACCO PRODUCT.” The use of any substance containing tobacco or
any tobacco product in all of its forms, including but not limited to a
lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device, such as all electronic
cigarettes (e-cig, e-hookah, vape pen, electronic nicotine delivery system),
as well as chew tobacco, snus and snuff as well as any product of formulation
of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is
manufactured, sold or offered for sale or otherwise distributed with the
expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body
but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco
dependence.



(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)



§ 102.02  THE USE OF ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT IS BANNED IN DESIGNATED PLACES.



   (A)   It shall be prohibited, at all times, for an individual to
smoke and/or use any tobacco product in any form while at a town park or
recreational property, on public school grounds, or on any other specified
sections of town owned property.



   (B)   The use of tobacco products while at a town park or
recreational property or town owned property may be permitted in areas
designated by the Mayor or his/her designee in consultation with the Parks
and Recreation Commission.



(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)



§ 102.03  SIGNAGE.



   Town parks or recreational properties, public school grounds and other
specified sections of town owned property where smoking and/or tobacco use
has been banned pursuant to this chapter shall be so designated by signs
posted that give notice to those areas of prohibition. The town shall post a
sign or signs on such properties stating that they are a "Tobacco Free Zone"
to indicate that said property is subject to this chapter. Said signs shall
identify this chapter by number and shall state the penalty amount for
violations.



(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)



§ 102.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   Members of the Town of Hamden's Police Department shall be charged with
the enforcement of this chapter. Such officer of the department shall inform
the violator of this chapter and take enforcement action when a violation has
occurred.



(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)



§ 102.99  PENALTY.



   Law enforcement officers may issue a citation for violation of this
chapter. Persons receiving said citations shall be fined $100 for each
violation of any provision of this chapter. Appeals may be made pursuant to
Chapter 12: Hearing Procedure for Municipal Citations of the Town of Hamden
Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 677, passed 7-5-16; Am. Ord. 695, passed 2-5-18)



CHAPTER 103:  HAZARDOUS WASTE



Section



   103.01   Storage, disposal or use of oil and gas drilling and
extraction prohibited



§ 103.01  STORAGE, DISPOSAL OR USE OF OIL AND GAS DRILLING AND EXTRACTION
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter the following terms,
phases and words shall have the meanings given here, unless clearly indicated
by the context.



   “APPLICATION.” The physical act of placing or spreading natural gas
waste or oil waste on any road or real property located within the Town of
Hamden.



   “HYDRAULIC FRACTURING.” The fracturing of underground rock
formations, including shale and non-shale formations, by manmade fluid-driven
techniques for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or other
subsurface hydrocarbon production.



   “NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES.” All geologic or geophysical
activities related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas,
including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic
fracturing.



   “NATURAL GAS WASTE.”



      (1)   Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is
generated as a result of natural gas extraction activities, which may consist
of water, brine, chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy
metals, or other contaminants;



      (2)   Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas
extraction activities;



      (3)   Any waste that is generated as a result of or in
association with the underground storage of natural gas;



      (4)   Any waste that is generated as a result of or in
association with liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and



      (5)   Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment,
processing, or modification of any of the above wastes.



   “OIL EXTRACTION ACTIVITIES.” All geologic or geophysical activities
related to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not
limited, to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing.



   “OIL WASTE.”



      (1)   Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is
generated as a result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of
water, brine, chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy
metals, or other contaminants;



      (2)   Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil
extraction activities; and



      (3)   Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment,
processing, or modification of any of the above wastes.



   (B)   Prohibitions.



      (1)   The application of natural gas waste or oil waste,
whether or not such waste has received Beneficial Use Determination or other
approval for use by the DEEP (Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection) or any other regulatory body, on any road or real property
located within the Town of Hamden for any purpose is prohibited.



      (2)   The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into
any wastewater treatment facility within or operated by the Town of Hamden is
prohibited.



      (3)   The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into
any solid waste management facility within or operated by the Town of Hamden
is prohibited.



      (4)   The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, transfer,
handling, treatment and/or processing of waste from natural gas or oil
extraction is prohibited within the Town of Hamden.



   (C)   Provision to be included in bids and contracts related to the
construction or maintenance of publicly owned and/or maintained roads or real
property within the Town of Hamden.



      (1)   All bids and contracts related to the retention of
services to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road
or real property within the Town of Hamden shall include a provision stating
that no materials containing natural gas or oil waste shall be utilized in
providing such a service.



      (2)   All bids and contracts related to the purchase or
acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly
owned and/or maintained road or real property within the Town of Hamden shall
include a provision stating that no materials containing natural gas



or oil waste shall be provided to the Town of Hamden.



      (3)   The following statement, which shall be a sworn
statement under penalty of perjury, shall be included in all bids related to
the purchase or acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain
any publicly owned and or maintained road or real property within the Town of
Hamden and all bids related to the retention of services to construct or
maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within
the Town of Hamden: "We               hereby submit a bid for
materials, equipment and/or labor for the Town of Hamden. The bid is for bid
documents titled       . We hereby certify under penalty of perjury that
no natural gas waste or oil waste will be used by the undersigned bidder or
any contractor, sub-contractor, agent or vendor agent in connection with the
bid; nor will the undersigned bidder or any sub-contractor, agent or vendor
agent thereof apply any natural gas waste or oil waste to any road or real
property within the Town of Hamden as a result of the submittal of this bid
if selected."



   (D)   Penalties. In response to a violation of this section, the
Town of Hamden may require remediation of any damage done to any land, road,
building, aquifer, well, watercourse, air quality or other asset, be it
public or private, within the Town of Hamden. The town may also impose fines
in the amount of $250 per violation per day for any violation of this section
and any other remedies allowable under the law.



   (E)   Transportation. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted
to ban the transportation of any product or byproduct described herein on any
roadway or real property within the Town of Hamden.



(Ord. 698, passed 2-26-18)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         110.   BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS WITH TOWN



         111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



         112.   AMUSEMENTS



         113.   AUCTIONS



         114.   JUNK DEALERS



         115.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS; MASSAGE THERAPISTS



         116.   MEAT AND MILK



         117.   VENDING, HAWKING AND PEDDLING



         118.   STANDARD MEASURES



         119.   [RESERVED]



         120.   ITINERANT VENDORS



         121.   BAZAARS, RAFFLES AND BINGO



         122.   UNIFORM PACKAGING PRACTICES



         123.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE POLICY



         124.   DISQUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS FROM BIDDING



         125.   EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORES



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS WITH TOWN



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Unfair employment practices



   110.03   Fair employment standards; certification of



   110.04   Notification of complaints; recording



   110.05   Cancellation or termination of transactions



   110.06   Circumstances for waiver



   110.07   Violation prohibited



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively:



   (A)   "Public-fund transaction." Any offer to furnish, or furnishing
of, goods or services, or combination of goods and services, to or for the
benefit of the town, or any agent or agency thereof (intending to include any
private organization supported or assisted by any amount of tax funds of the
town), in which the consideration for the furnishing is or would be
constituted in whole or in part by public funds of the town, or any agency
thereof.



   (B)   "Unfair employment practice." Shall have the meaning assigned
by Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 563, and the meaning assigned by Title VII, Public
Law 88-352, and reference to such statutes shall include such amendments
thereof as may be made from time to time.



   (C)   "Vendor." Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity,
or combination of entities, engaged in, or seeking to become engaged in, or
offering a bid to become engaged in, a public-fund transaction with any
department, office, commission, board, agency or other representative acting
for the town.



(Effective 8-1-68)



§ 110.02  Unfair employment practices.



   Public funds of the town shall not knowingly be paid to, nor expended,
so as to benefit or futher any interest of any vendor engaging in any unfair
employment practice. It is declared to be the public policy of the town that
vendors who engage in, or permit, unfair employment practices in their
business, trade or industry, shall not knowingly be allowed to transact
business with, perform services for, or furnish supplies to, the town. The
office of the purchasing agent, and all other departments, offices,
commissions, boards and other agencies, of the town, from time to time
engaged in the procurement of goods or services for the public purposes of
this community, shall not knowingly enter into any public-fund transaction
with a vendor engaging in an unfair employment practice.



(Effective 8-1-68)



§ 110.03  Fair employment standards; certification of.



   (A)   The fair employment standards of the state and federal
statutes referred to in § 110.01 of this chapter are made a condition of,
and specification of, all contracts for public-fund transactions of the town.



   (B)   Each contract document, purchase order or invoice relating to
a public-fund transaction shall contain a certification substantially as
follows: The contractor agrees and warrants that in the performance of this
contract, he will not discriminate or permit discrimination against any
person or group of persons on the grounds of race, color, religion, sex or
national origin in any manner prohibited by the laws of the United States or
this state, and further agrees to comply with all provisions of "An Ordinance
Relating to Doing Business with the Town of Hamden."



(Effective 8-1-68)



§ 110.04  Notification of complaints; recording.



   (A)   Every vendor shall promptly notify the purchasing agent of any
complaint or unfair employment practice filed against the vendor with the
responsible state commission under Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 563, and shall
promptly notify the purchasing agent of the final disposition by the
commission of any such complaint. All notices shall be in writing, and in the
form and contain the information as the purchasing agent may require. Willful
failure to comply with this section shall render any vendor ineligible, in
the discretion of the purchasing agent, to engage in, or submit a bid to
engage in, a public-fund transaction in the towr.



   (B)   The purchasing agent shall maintain a record of all vendors
against whom a final order has been entered by the responsible state
commission finding that the vendor is engaging in, or has engaged in, an
unfair employment practice.



   (C)   No vendor listed by the purchasing agent, as provided in
paragraph (B) of this section, shall be eligible to engage in, or submit a
bid to engage in, a public-fund transaction, until the vendor shall file with
the purchasing agent written evidence, verified by the responsible state
commission, that the vendor has corrected, satisfactory to the commission,
the unfair employment practice found to exist by the final order.



(Effective 8-1-68)



§ 110.05  Cancellation or termination of transactions.



   Upon notice of entry of a final order by the responsible state
commission under Conn. Gen. Stat., Ch. 563, which order determined the
existence of an unfair employment practice by any vendor, the purchasing
agent shall cancel or terminate any public-fund transaction involving the
vendor; provided that the purchasing agent may permit the vendor a reasonable
period of time, not exceeding 10 days, in which the vendor may obtain and
file with the purchasing agent the written evidence provided for by § 110.04
(C) of this chapter, upon receipt of which the purchasing agent is authorized
to waive the foregoing provision for cancellation or termination of the
public-fund transaction.



(Effective 8-1-68)



§ 110.06  Circumstances for waiver.



   If, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, cancellation or termination
of a public-fund transaction, as provided for by § 110.05 of this chapter,
would work to the detriment of, or would be contrary to the best interests
of, the town, he may waive the cancellation or termination of a partially
completed or unfulfilled public-fund transaction, upon notation of his
reasons therefor in writing on the particular contract documents in the files
of the town, but waiver of the cancellation or termination shall not operate
to exempt the vendor from the provisions of § 110.04 of this chapter with
respect to any future or subsequent public-fund transaction.



(Effective 8-1-68)



§ 110.07  Violation prohibited.



   (A)   No person shall file, or offer for file, a materially false
statement, required to be filed, or permitted to be filed, by this chapter.



   (B)   Any person convicted under this section, in addition to the
penalty provided in § 110.99 of this chapter, shall be ineligible to engage
in, or submit a bid to engage in, a public-funds transaction for a period of
5 years from such conviction.



(Effective 8-1-68) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of § 110.07 shall be fined not more
than $100.



(Effective 8-1-68)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Distances between outlets



   111.03   Moving existing place of business



   111.04   Exceptions



   111.05   Discontinuance of business



   111.06   Effect upon existing applications



   111.07   Sunday sales permitted



   111.08   Possession of alcohol



   111.09   Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on school 
property prohibited



   111.10   Municipal notices of alcoholic liquor permit renewals



Consumption and Possession in Public Highways, Public Areas, and Parking Areas



   111.15   Definitions



   111.16   Prohibited acts



   111.17   Exception



 



   111.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively:



   (A)   "ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR."  As defined by Conn. Gen. Stat., § 30-1.



   (B)   "PACKAGE STORE PERMIT."  As defined by Conn. Gen. Stat., §§
30-15 and 30-20, pertaining to the Liquor Control Act.



('66 Code, § 6-3)



§ 111.02  DISTANCES BETWEEN OUTLETS.



   No building or premises, which prior to 5-12-49, is not the site or
location of a business where alcoholic liquor, beer, ale or wine is sold at
retail for consumption off the premises, under a package store permit, shall
thereafter be used in whole or part for the sale of alcoholic liquor, wine,
beer or ale, under any package store permit which may be issued by the liquor
control commission of this state, if the main customer entrance to the
building or premises shall be within a 1,500 foot radius from the main
customer entrance to the main customer entrance of any other building which
shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, wine, beer or ale, under any
package store permit.



(‘66 Code, § 6-2) (Am. Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 111.03  MOVING EXISTING PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   These regulations shall permit any permittee using any building or
premises for the sale of alcoholic liquors under a package store permit
issued by the liquor store permit issued by the Liquor Control Commission of
this state to move the place of business to another building or premises
within the 1,500 foot radius above described, provided the main customer
entrance of the other building is not more than 800 feet from the main
customer entrance of the building formerly occupied by the permittee as a
place for the sale, under a package store permit, of alcoholic liquor;
provided that the removal shall be in accordance with the Liquor Control Act
and the rules and regulations of the Liquor Control Act; and provided that
the main customer entrance of the new place of business is more than 500 feet
from the main customer entrance of any other building which shall be used for
the sale of alcoholic liquor, wine, beer or ale, under any package store
permit.



(‘66 Code, § 6-5) (Am. Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13; Am. Ord. 676, passed
6-20-16)



§ 111.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   These regulations shall not apply to a restaurant permit, tavern
permit, manufacturing permit, club permit, druggist permit and a temporary
permit as described by the Liquor Control Act.



('66 Code, § 6-6)



§ 111.05  DISCONTINUANCE OF BUSINESS.



   If any building or premises within the 1,500 foot radius area above
described, which shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor under an
all-alcoholic liquor package store permit, shall cease to be actually so used
under any such permit, the premises shall not again be used for the sale of
alcoholic liquors under a package store permit, unless within 30 days after
the premises shall have ceased to be so used, it shall again be occupied and
actually used for the sale of alcoholic liquor under a package store permit
issued by the liquor control commission.



('66 Code, § 6-7)



§ 111.06  EFFECT UPON EXISTING APPLICATIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deny to any applicant who
has duly applied for a package store permit to the liquor control commission
before 5-12-49 from thereafter receiving the permit pursuant to the
application for any premises in the town.  Premises used pursuant to a
permit applied for and received as stated in this section shall be subject to
all regulations of this chapter in the same manner as if they had been in use
under the permit on 5-12-49. 



('66 Code, § 6-9)



§ 111.07  SUNDAY SALES PERMITTED.



   The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted on Sunday within the
bounds of the town in accordance with the laws of this state in relation
thereto.



('66 Code, § 6-1)



§ 111.08  POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL.



   (A)   Possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21
is prohibited and shall be punished by a fine of $100 for each offense.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   A person who possesses alcoholic liquor while
accompanied by a parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the age of 21;



      (2)   A person who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of
a licensed and practicing physician; or



      (3)   A person who is an employee of a permit holder under
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 30-90a, and who possesses alcoholic liquor in the course
of his or her employment or business.



   (C)   No person shall host an event or gathering at which the host
knowingly allows alcoholic liquor to be consumed by or dispensed to any
person under the age of 21 unless each said minor is accompanied by or in the
presence of his or her parent, guardian or spouse who has attained the age of
21.  This restriction shall apply to any event or gathering within the town,
whether on public or private property.  Any person who violates this section
shall be punished by a fine of $100 for each offense.



   (D)   All fines imposed under this article shall be made payable to
the Treasurer of the town, and shall be received by the Police Department
within ten business days from receipt of the citation.  All fines collected
by the Police Department shall be directed to the Town Treasurer.



   (E)   The hearing procedure shall be as set forth in Chapter 12 of
this code.



   (F)   Miscellaneous.



      (1)   The penalties established by this section shall not be
exclusive of any other enforcement remedy, which may be imposed by any state
and/or federal statute or regulation.



      (2)   In construing this section, feminine or neutral pronouns
shall be substituted for those of masculine form and vice versa, and the
plural of the singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any
case in which the context may require.



(Ord. 216, adopted 9-7-82; Am. Ord. 229, adopted 12-12-83; Am. Ord. 513,
passed 3-7-05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.09  POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON SCHOOL PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any
person within the boundaries of any school property to consume or have in his
possession or control, intoxicating liquors of any kind.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, school property shall include
all property under the jurisdiction of the Board of Education including an
outdoor area as well as school buildings.



   (C)   The Board of Education may upon application authorize the
consumption of alcoholic liquors on any school property within the town under
such conditions as the Board shall deem appropriate for the protection of the
public.



(Ord. 216, adopted 9-7-82; Am. Ord. 229, adopted 12-12-83)  Penalty, see §
111.99



§ 111.10  MUNICIPAL NOTICES OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR PERMIT RENEWALS.



   (A)   Each person who files an application pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 30-39, for renewal of a liquor permit that allows on-premises
serving or consumption of alcoholic liquor in the town, shall simultaneously
give written notice of such liquor permit renewal application to the Chief of
Police or his/her designee.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or his/her designee may respond in
writing, not later than 15 days after receipt of such notice, to the
Commissioner of Consumer Protection, with comments regarding the renewal
application that is the subject of such notice.



(Ord. 648, passed 7-7-14)



CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION IN PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, PUBLIC AREAS, AND PARKING AREAS



§ 111.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR" has the same meaning as set forth in Conn. Gen.
Stat. § 30-1.



   "OPEN CONTAINER."  Any open bottle; any bottle which was sealed by a
liquor tax stamp, which seal has been broken, whether or not stopped; any can
which has been opened in any way; any keg or dispensing device which is set
up to dispense; or any glass, cup, jar, or other vessel.



   "PARKED VEHICLE" has the same meaning as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat.
§ 14-1.



   "PARKING AREA."  Lots, areas, or other accommodations for the parking
of motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or
without charge.



   "PUBLIC AREA."  Any park, plaza, mall, arena, stadium, cemetery, or
other publicly-owned place which is open to the public.



   "PUBLIC HIGHWAY."  A highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, or
other way within and upon the control of the town and open public use,
including the sidewalks of any such highway.



(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)



§ 111.16  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   Except as permitted in § 111.17, no person shall consume any alcoholic
liquor, or possess any open container of alcoholic liquor upon or within the
limits of any public highway, public area, or parking area within the town. 
For purposes of this section, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the consumption of alcoholic liquor or the possession of an open
container of alcoholic liquor in vehicles within or upon parking areas or a
public highway or sidewalk is a violation hereof.



(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)



§ 111.17  EXCEPTION.



   Consumption of alcoholic liquor and possession of an open container of
alcoholic liquor is permitted during any function, festival, event, or
celebration conducted on or within a public highway, public area, or parking
area pursuant to any law, statute, ordinance, resolution, or permit
authorizing sale and consumption of liquor in or upon such public highway,
public area, or parking area.



(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)  Any person violating the provisions of § 111.09 shall be fined
$75 for each offense. 



(Ord. 216, adopted 9-7-82; Am. Ord. 229, adopted 12-12-83)



   (B)  Any person violating the provisions of §§ 111.15 through 111.17
shall be fined $75 for each offense.



(Ord. 241, adopted 11-5-84)



   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of § 111.08 shall be
fined $100 for each offense.



(Ord. 514, passed 3-7-05)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



   112.01   License required, when



   112.02   Time for obtaining license



   112.03   License fees



   112.04   Revocation of license; effect



   112.05   Location requirements for circuses and carnivals



   112.06   Inspection and report by fire marshal



   112.07   Police and fire protection; cost; exception



   112.08   Duty of police chief



   112.09   Violation prohibited



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  License required, when.



   No person, firm or corporation, as owner or proprietor, shall exhibit,
conduct or operate or cause or permit to be exhibited, conducted or operated
upon his premises any public dance, play or show, theatrical performance,
motion picture exhibition, athletic exhibition by professionals or any
circus, carnival or bazaar in the town unless a license therefor, as
herinafter provided, has been obtained from the police chief or his
representatives.



('66 Code, § 7-1) Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.02  Time for obtaining license.



   The owner or proprietor shall, not less than 15 days before exhibiting
any circus or carnival and not less than 5 days before exhibiting any public
dance, play or show, theatrical performance, motion picture exhibition or
athletic exhibition, obtain a license from the police chief.



('66 Code, § 7-2) Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  License fees.



   (A)   The following fees shall be paid to the police chief upon the
issuance of a license therefor:



      (1)   Public dance, play or show, $5 for each day;



      (2)   Theatrical performance, $5 for each day;



      (3)   Motion picture exhibition, $1 for each day;



      (4)   Athletic exhibition, $10 for each day;



      (5)   Circus, $500 for the first day and $250 for each
succeeding day;



      (6)   Carnival, $100 for the first day and $50 for each
succeeding day.



   (B)   Provided, however, that in lieu of the foregoing daily license
fee, the license fee for any motion picture exhibition of any motion picture
house with a seating capacity of 200 or less for the period of one month
shall be $2.50, and the license fee of any motion picture house with a
seating capacity of more than 200 shall be $5 per month; and provided further
that the police chief may waive the payment of all or any portion of the
license fee for any public dance, play or show, theatrical performance,
motion picture exhibition, athletic exhibition or carnival whenever the same
shall be exhibited, conducted or operated by any religious, educational or
charitable organization, by any volunteer fire department or veteran's
organization of the town, or if the proceeds thereof are to be used entirely
for the benefit of any religious, educational, charitable, or veteran's
organization located in the town.



('66 Code, § 7-7)



§ 112.04  Revocation of license; effect.



   The police chief may at any time revoke any license issued under the
provisions hereof for any breach of the terms and conditions thereof or the
violation of any statute relating thereto, and from the time of notice of any
revocation given to the person to whom such license was issued, any act done
under color of such license shall subject the person doing or suffering it to
be done to the same penalty as if he had done such act without such license.



('66 Code, § 7-6)



§ 112.05  Location requirements for circuses and carnivals.



   No license shall be issued by the police chief for any circus oi
carnival unless there has been filed with the police chief an amusement
license therefor, issued by the commissioner of state police, pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 29-129 to 29-143, inclusive and § 14-164A; and,
provided further, that the proposed location for any circus shall have a
frontage on a public highway within the town of not less than 250 feet and
the proposed location for any carnival shall have a frontage on a public
highway within the town of not less than 100 feet and that the area of the
proposed location shall be deemed sufficient by the police chief for the
intended use thereof without danger to the public, and provided the fire
marshal of the town shall file a written report with the police chief
certifying that in his opinion the proposed location is provided with
sufficient and adequate means of ingress and egress necessary for the
reasonable safety of the public.



('66 Code, § 7-3)



§ 112.06  Inspection and report by fire marshal.



   The fire marshal shall inspect the place of public assembly or location
to be used for any of the events noted in § 112.01 of this chapter, and if,
in his opinion, the place of public assembly or location is not adequate for
the event for which the license is required, he shall file a written report
with the owner or proprietor that the place of public assembly or location is
not adequate or suitable for this purpose and a copy of his report will be
filed with the police chief.



('66 Code, § 7-4)



§ 112.07  Police and fire protection; cost; exception.



   (A)   The police chief and the fire chief may assign constables,
policemen or firemen as they may deem necessary for the adequate protection
of the public at any public dance, play or show, theatrical performance,
motion picture exhibition, athletic exhibition or any circus or carnival. In
addition to the required license fees hereinafter provided, there shall be
paid to the police chief and the fire chief for each constable, policeman and
fireman so assigned to duty at any such event, a sum to be determined by the
police chief and fire chief, which sum is to be the prevailing hourly rate of
the policeman and fireman at the time the license is issued, based on the
number of hours of duty required. However, the minimum rate for each
policeman and fireman assigned to duty at the event shall be a flat sum of
not less than 5 hours' pay at the prevailing hourly rate.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to motion
picture theaters duly licensed by the commissioner of state police.



('66 Code, § 7-5)



§ 112.08  Duty of police chief.



   It shall be the duty of the police chief to determine what functions
fall within the scope of this chapter. The judgment of the police chief, or,
if he is unavailable, a representative, shall be final.



('66 Code, § 7-9)



§ 112.09  Violation prohibited.



   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any order or
regulation made pursuant thereunder.



('66 Code, § 7-8) Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be funded not more than $100.



('66 Code, § 7-8)



CHAPTER 113:  AUCTIONS



Section



   113.01   Permit required



   113.02   Fee



   113.03   Contents of application



   113.04   Police and fire protection



   113.05   Proof of character; revocation of permit



   113.06   Exceptions to application of chapter



 



   113.99   Penalty.



§ 113.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall expose or offer for sale by
competitive bidding or at public auction any used motor vehicles,
merchandise, goods, or articles of personal property, within the limits of
the town without having applied to and obtained from the chief of police a
permit therefor as herein provided. 



('66 Code, § 10-1; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)  Penalty, see 113.99



§ 113.02  FEE.



   The fee for a permit shall be $25 and shall expire within 60 days
following the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked, as herein
provided. 



('66 Code, § 10-2; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)



§ 113.03  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Each applicant for the permit shall make application therefor
in writing to the chief of police and file the same with the chief of police
at least three days before the issue thereof, stating thereon the name, age,
and street address of the applicant, the owner or owners of the goods to be
offered for sale, and a description of the kind and quality of the goods and
the state and town or city in which he or they reside and the location of the
place within this town where, and the hours when, such auction  will be
conducted.  Each applicant for a permit for sale at auction of gold or gold
plated ware, silver or silver plated ware, platinum ware, watches, jewelry,
precious stones, cut glass, or chinaware shall furnish satisfactory proof
that he has obtained an auctioneer's license from the commissioner of
consumer protection, pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-3.



   (B)   In the event the applicant intends to allow the sale or
consumption of food in connection with the auction, he or they shall provide
to the health director of the town a written statement as to the manner in
which food is to be dispensed at the auction.  In such case he shall obtain,
prior to the submission of the permit application to the chief of police, a
statement from the health director of the town approving of the manner in
which food is to be dispensed at the auction.



('66 Code, § 10-3; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)



§ 113.04  POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION.



   The chief of police shall examine the contents of any auction permit
application and determine whether any additional police and fire protection
is required for the conduct of the proposed auction.  In the event the chief
of police determines that additional police or fire protection is required,
he shall so advise the applicant who shall make arrangements with the
appropriate town departments for the obtaining of such additional police and
fire protection.  The chief of police shall not issue the permit unless he,
in his discretion, determines that the arrangements made for police and fire
protection are adequate. 



(Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)



§ 113.05  PROOF OF CHARACTER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Each applicant shall furnish in the application satisfactory proof that
he is a suitable person to hold the permit.  Upon approval of the
application by the chief of police, he shall forthwith pay the required
permit fee to the chief of police before the permit shall be issued.  The
chief of police shall have the power to revoke the same at any time after
issuance for cause or if, in his judgment, it shall be for the public
interest so to do. 



('66 Code, § 10-4; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)



§ 113.06  EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sale authorized
by law or conducted in pursuance of an order or under the authority of any
court or to an auction of household goods or of personal effects held under
the direction of the owner thereof, nor shall any permit fee be required of
any person expressly exempted therefrom by law. 



('66 Code, § 10-6; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates the provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 for each violation.



('66 Code, § 10-5; amend. Ord. 197, passed 7-7-80)



CHAPTER 114:  JUNK DEALERS



Section



   114.01   License required; duration



   114.02   License fee



   114.03   Plate or sign to be displayed



   114.04   Violation prohibited



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  License required; duration.



   (A)   All dealers and traders in secondhand bicycles, junk, old
metals, old rags and other secondhand articles, conducting such business or
trade within the limits of the town must first obtain a license therefor from
the police department.



   (B)   The license shall continue for one year from date of issue
unless sooner revoked.



('66 Code, § 33-1 amended 2-3-69) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.02  License fee.



   There shall be paid to the police department, for the use of the town,
the sum of $10 for each license issued.



('66 Code, § 33-1; amended 2-3-69)



§ 114.03  Plate or sign to be displayed.



   All such licensed dealers and traders shall while conducting such
business in the town display a plate or sign upon the wagon or vehicle used,
reading "Town of Hamden License" in the manner and place that it may be
plainly seen and read from the sidewalk.



('66 Code, § 33-2) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.04  Violation prohibited.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall knowingly or wilfully violate any
of the provisions of this chapter. Upon such violation, such person, firm or
corporation shall forfeit such license, in addition to the penalty provided
in § 114.99.



('66 Code, § 33-3) Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense.



('66 Code, § 33-3)



CHAPTER 115:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS; MASSAGE THERAPISTS



Section



   115.01   Policy



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   Transfer of permit



   115.04   Permit to operate massage establishment; application; fee;
issuance



   115.05   Denial, revocation or suspension of massage establishment
permit; hearings



   115.06   Hearing on denial of permit, revocation or suspension of
permit



   115.07   Facilities necessary



   115.08   Operating requirements



   115.09   Daily register



   115.10   Inspections



   115.11   Applicability of regulations to existing businesses



   115.12   Massage therapist permit required



   115.13   Application for massage therapist permit



   115.14   Issuance of massage therapist permit



   115.15   Conditional permits



   115.16   Denial, revocation or suspension of massage therapist permit



   115.17   Notification; hearing



   115.18   Hearing on denial, revocation or suspension of massage
therapist permit



   115.19   Exceptions



   115.20   Violation prohibited



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  POLICY.



   It is declared that the business of operating massage establishments
and the practice of massage or massage therapy as defined herein is a
business effecting the public health, safety, and general welfare.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively:



   (A)   “EMPLOYEE.” Any and all persons, other than a massage
therapist, who renders any service to the permittee, and who has no physical
contact with customers and clients.



   (B)   “MASSAGE THERAPY” or “MASSAGE.”  Any method of
pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft parts of the body
with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or
appliance with or without any such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other
similar preparations commonly used in this practice. “MASSAGE” or
“MASSAGE THERAPY” does not encompass diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs
or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any other service or
procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic,
naturopathy, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. No person
shall engage in the practice of massage or massage therapy unless the person
has obtained a license from the Connecticut Department of Public Health
pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes as may be amended.



   (C)   “MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.”  Any establish-ment, by whatever
name, having a fixed business where any person, firm, association, or
corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried
on any of the activities mentioned in division (B) of this section.



   (D)   “RECOGNIZED SCHOOL.”  Any school or institution of
learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, the method,
profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of
study not less than 500 hours to be given in not more than three calendar
months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of
graduation from such school or institution of learning following the
successful completion of such course of study or learning.



   (E)   “MASSAGE THERAPIST.” A person who is licensed to practice
massage therapy under the provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes as
may be amended. No person shall use the title “MASSAGE THERAPIST”,
“LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST”, “MASSAGE PRACTITIONER”,
“MASSAGIST”, “MASSEUR” or “MASSEUSE”, unless the person holds a
license issued in accordance with this section or other applicable law.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.03  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   No permit shall be transferable except with the written consent of the
Chief of Police or his/her designee and the approval of the Director of
Health.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  PERMIT TO OPERATE MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT; APPLICATION; FEE;
ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Permit required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in, conduct, or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or
carried on, in or upon any premise in the town, the operation of a massage
establishment, as herein defined, without first having obtained a permit from
the Chief of Police. Such permit shall be in addition to any permits,
licenses or requirements of the State Department of Public Health or the
local Health Department.



   (B)   Application.  Each applicant for a permit to maintain,
operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the
Chief of Police or his/her designee and pay a filing fee of $125 which shall
not be refundable. Such application shall be in writing, signed and sworn to
by the applicant, and shall set forth:



      (1)   The exact nature of the massage to be administered,
proposed place of business and facilities therein, and the name and address
of each applicant;



      (2)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of
age;



      (3)   Two portrait photographs of at least two inches by two
inches and a complete set of the applicant’s fingerprints which shall be
taken by the Chief of Police or his/her authorized representative;



      (4)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for
the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;



      (5)   Massage or similar business license history of the
applicant, whether such person has previously operated in this or in another
city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the
reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such
action of suspension or revocation;



      (6)   Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic
violations; and



      (7)   Such other information as may be necessary in order for
the Chief of Police or his/her designee to make any determination required by
this chapter.



   (C)   Issuance of massage establishment permit.  The Chief of
Police or his/her designee issue a permit to operate a massage establishment
upon finding:



      (1)   All requirements concerning the operation and facilities
described in this chapter are met as of the effective date of the permit.



      (2)   Compliance with all local and state statutes, codes,
chapters rules and regulations, including, health, housing, planning, zoning,
building, fire and safety requirements as well as terms and conditions as the
State Commissioner of Public Health or the local health director finds
necessary and proper as of the effective date of the permit.



      (3)   That the nature of the massage administered will not
endanger the health or safety of patrons of the massage establishment.



      (4)   That the applicant or any other person who will be
directly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment
has not been convicted of a felony, an offense involving the unauthorized
practice of the healing arts, sexual misconduct with minors, obscenity,
keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or
unlawful act, prostitution, pandering or human trafficking and has not had a
permit to operate a massage establishment or massage permit suspended or
revoked in this town or any other town or state; or that such conviction,
suspension or revocation occurred at least three years prior to the date of
the application.



      (5)   The applicant must furnish authorization to the Chief of
Police or his/her authorized representatives, to seek information and conduct
an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for permit. The Chief of
Police may require, and the applicant must furnish any other identification
and information to discover the truth of the matter hereinbefore specified as
required to be set forth in the application.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.05  DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT;
HEARINGS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police may deny, revoke or suspend any massage
establishment permit if it is found:



      (1)   That the applicant or holder of a permit has knowingly
or negligently made any false or misleading statement in applying for the
permit;



      (2)   That the applicant, holder of the permit or any person
directly engaged in the operation or management of the massage establishment
has been convicted of any offense stated above in § 115.04(C)(4), and/or has
had a permit to operate a massage establishment or massage therapist permit
suspended or revoked in this or any other state;



      (3)   That such conviction, suspension or revocation occurred
less than three years prior to the date of the application;



      (4)   That the applicant, holder of a permit or any person
engaged in the operation or management of the massage establishment has
violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or



      (5)   That the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any
duly authorized police officer or health inspector of the town to inspect the
premises or the operation therein.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall not deny, revoke or suspend any
permit issued under this chapter without notifying the applicant or holder of
the permit, in writing, of the facts and other specific section or sections
of this chapter upon which a determination was made, and of the applicant or
holder’s right to request a hearing before the Chief of Police and to
present evidence or argument on all facts or issues involved.



   (C)   A request for a hearing shall stay any revocation or
suspension until such time as a hearing has been held and a decision rendered
thereon, provided however, that if the Chief of Police finds that the public
health, safety and welfare requires emergency action and incorporates a
finding to that effect in his/her notice, the permit may be summarily
suspended, pending a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be promptly
instituted and all facts and issues shall be promptly determined.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.06  HEARING ON DENIAL OF PERMIT, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit to operate a
massage establishment or any renewals required, or the suspension or
revocation of a permit to operate a massage establishment, may request, in
writing, a hearing before the Chief of Police, at which hearing such person
shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence.



   (B)   Such request must be received within ten business days of
receipt of notice of such denial, revocation or suspension and shall be sent
to the Office of the Police Chief.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall schedule a hearing within a
reasonable number of days and all facts and issues shall be promptly
determined.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.07  FACILITIES NECESSARY.



   (A)   No permit for a massage establishment shall be issued by the
Chief of Police unless an inspection by the Director of Health or his/her
authorized representative reveals that the establishment complies with each
of the following minimum requirements:



      (1)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam
baths, and showers shall be waterproofed with approved waterproof materials;



      (2)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient
locations. When five or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on
the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided.
A single water closet per section is provided for each 20 or more employees
or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be
substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided.
Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein; and



      (3)   Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and
cold running water should be installed in either the toilet room or
vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a
dispenser and with sanitary towels.



   (B)   The Director of Health shall certify that the proposed massage
establishment complies with all the requirements of this section and shall
give or send such written certification to the Chief of Police or his/her
designee.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.08  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including
appliance, apparatus and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a
sanitary condition.



   (B)   All employees and massage therapists shall be clean and wear
clean outer garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment.
Provision for a separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the
premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing
rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.



   (C)   All employees and massage therapists must be modestly attired.
Diaphanous, flimsy, transparent, form-fitting or tight clothing is
prohibited. Clothing must cover the employees or massage therapists’ chest
at all times.



   (D)   Private parts of patrons must be covered by towels, cloth or
undergarments when in the presence of any employee or massage therapist. Any
contact with a patron’s genital area is strictly prohibited.



   (E)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean,
laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered
after each use thereof and stored in an approved sanitary manner.



   (F)   Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms
shall be thoroughly cleaned each day business is in operation. Bathtubs shall
be thoroughly cleansed after each use.



   (G)   No massage establishment granted a permit under provisions of
this chapter shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be placed,
published, or distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion
of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that
any services are available other than those services as described in §
115.02 of this chapter, or that employees or massage therapists are dressed
in any manner other than described in division (C) of this section; nor shall
any massage establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any
services are available other than those services described in § 115.02 of
this chapter.



   (H)   Services enumerated in § 115.02(B) of this chapter must be
carried on in one cubicle, room, booth or area within the massage
establishment. No service enumerated in § 115.02(B) of this chapter may be
carried on in any cubicle, room, booth or area except where such cubicle,
room, booth or area has doors or walls so that all activity within a cubicle,
room, booth or area is visible from outside the same. No massage service or
practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area
within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being
locked.



   (I)   No alcoholic beverage or other intoxicant shall be displayed,
served, ingested or sold on the premises of the massage establishment.



   (J)   A full schedule of service rates shall be posted in a
prominent place within the massage parlor in a manner as to come to the
attention of all patrons. No charges other than the specified rates for
specified services are to be allowed with the patron being notified of the
full cost prior to the rendering of any service.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.09  DAILY REGISTER.



   Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment shall
keep a daily register, approved as to form by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee, of all patrons with names, addresses and hours of arrival and, if
applicable, the rooms or cubicles assigned. The daily register shall at all
times during business hours be subject to inspection by Health Department
officials, by the Police Department and shall be kept on file for one year.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.10  INSPECTIONS.



   The Police Department and the Health Department shall from time to
time, perform an inspection for each massage establishment in the town for
the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are complied
with. The inspections shall be made at a reasonable time, in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow the
inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder the officer in any
manner.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.11  APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.



   Holders of any existing massage establishment permits heretofore issued
under any provision of law are required to comply with all provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.12  MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the practice of massage or massage
therapy unless he or she has obtained a current license from the State of
Connecticut Department of Public Health to practice massage therapy as
defined within the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and is a
licensed massage therapist.



   (B)   No person shall engage in the practice of massage or massage
therapy in the town without first having obtained a massage therapist permit
from the Chief of Police.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.13  APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT.



   Each applicant for a massage therapist permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police or his/her designee and pay a filing fee of $125
which shall not be refundable. Such application shall be in writing, signed
and sworn to by the applicant, and shall set forth:



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;



   (B)   Written documentation that the applicant is at least 18 years
of age;



   (C)   Such other information as may be necessary in order for the
Chief of Police to make any determination required by this chapter;



   (D)   Two portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches
by two inches and a complete set of the applicant’s fingerprints which
shall be taken by the Chief of Police or his/her authorized representative;



   (E)   Identification. Each applicant shall provide sufficient
identification to establish the applicant’s identity;



   (F)   Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations; and



   (G)   Such other information as may be necessary in order for the
Chief of Police or his/her designee to make any determination required by
this chapter.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.14  ISSUANCE OF MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall issue a massage therapist
permit upon finding:



   (A)   That the applicant has a current massage therapist’s license
issued by the State of Connecticut.



   (B)   That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony, an
offense involving the unauthorized practice of the healing arts, sexual
misconduct with minors, obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill
fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution, pandering or
human trafficking, and has not had a massage establishment or massage
therapist’s permit denied, suspended or revoked in this or any other town
or state.



   (C)   The applicant must furnish authorization to the Chief of
Police, or his/her authorized representatives, to seek information and
conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit. The Chief
of Police may require, and the applicant must furnish, any other
identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matter
hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application.



   (D)   Permits shall be issued for one calendar year and shall be
renewed annually upon payment of a $25 fee and proof of a current massage
therapist license issued by the State of Connecticut.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.15  CONDITIONAL PERMITS.



   An applicant who completes the requirements of § 115.13 above, and
submits all of the necessary information required by that section, may obtain
a conditional massage therapist permit pending the outcome of the fingerprint
check and subject to the following restrictions:



   (A)   The conditional permit shall only be issued if the applicant
has made a prima facie showing that he/she meets all of the requirements for
a permit.



   (B)   The conditional permit shall only be effective until Chief of
Police or his/her authorized representatives have had an opportunity to
investigate the applicant’s qualifications to hold a permit pursuant to
this chapter and to notify the applicant that his/her application for a
massage therapist permit has been granted or denied.



   (C)   If the applicant provides false or misleading information to
the Chief of Police, the Chief may automatically terminate the conditional
permit. If the Chief of Police automatically terminates a conditional permit,
he/she shall notify the holder of his/her decision by certified mail or
personal service.



   (D)   In no event shall such conditional permit be in effect for
more than 12 months after the date of its issuance.



   (E)   A conditional permit shall not be renewed.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.16  DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police may deny, revoke or suspend any massage
therapist’s permit if it is found:



   (A)   That the applicant for the permit has knowingly or negligently
made any false or misleading statement in applying for the permit;



   (B)   That the applicant or the holder of the permit has been
convicted of any offense stated above is § 115.14(B); or



   (C)   That the applicant or holder of the permit has violated any of
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.17  NOTIFICATION; HEARING.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall not deny, revoke or suspend any
permit issued under this chapter without notifying the applicant or the
holder of the permit, in writing, of the facts and other specific section or
sections of this chapter upon which a determination was made, and of the
holder’s right to request a hearing before the Chief of Police and to
present evidence or argument on all facts or issues involved.



   (B)   A request for a hearing under this chapter shall stay any
revocation or suspension until such time as a hearing has been held and a
decision rendered thereon, provided however, that if the Chief of Police
finds that the public health, safety and welfare requires emergency action
and incorporates a finding to that effect in his/her notice, the permit may
be summarily suspended, pending a hearing thereon, which hearing shall be
promptly instituted and all facts and issues shall be promptly determined.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.18  HEARING ON DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST
PERMIT.



   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit to operate a massage
establishment or a massage therapist’s permit or any renewals required, may
request, in writing, a hearing before the Chief of Police, at which hearing
such person shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.19  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to schools, hospitals, nursing homes,
sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the
healing arts under the laws of this state, or to persons working under the
direction of any such person or in any such establishment.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



§ 115.20  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   Every person, except persons who are specifically exempt by this
chapter, whether acting as individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator
or employee of operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who
performs massage or massage therapy or conducts a massage establishment
without first obtaining a permit and paying a fee to the town or shall
violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14) Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be fined $100.



(Ord. 653, passed 11-10-14)



CHAPTER 116:  MEAT AND MILK



Section



Sale of Meat



   116.01   Inspection required



   116.02   Violation prohibited



Sale of Milk; Pasteurization



   116.05   Definitions



   116.06   Registration of sellers required; exception



   116.07   Application for registration; certificate



   116.08   Certificate number required on vehicles



   116.09   Pasteurization required; exception



   116.10   Violation prohibited



 



   116.99   Penalty



SALE OF MEAT



§ 116.01  Inspection required.



   No meat shall be sold for human food or offered for sale or held with
the intention of selling the same in any market or store in the town unless
the animal furnishing the meat has been examined and approved by the director
of health, except such animals or carcasses as have been inspected and
approved by the United States Government or inspectors of this state.



('66 Code, § 40-1) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.02  Violation prohibited.



   No person shall violate any provision of § 116.01.



('66 Code, § 40.2) Penalty, see § 116.99



SALE OF MILK; PASTEURIZATION



§ 116.05  Definitions.



   For the purpose of §§ 116.05 to 116.10, inclusive, unless otherwise
specifically provided, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them respectively:



   (A)   "Cream." That portion of milk which contains not less than 16%
milk fat.



   (B)    "Dealer." Any person who receives milk from producers at a
plant where it is weighed, tested, pasteurized, bottled, canned or packaged
and then sold or delivered to any consumer or store in the town.



   (C)   "Milk:"



      (1)   For the purpose of § 116.09. The lacteal secretions
obtained by complete milking of cows or goats.



      (2)   For the purpose of §§ 116.05 to 116.08, inclusive.
Whole fluid milk.



   (D)   "Milk products." Any product made by the addition of any
substance to milk or cream and designated as a milk product by the milk
regulation board of this state.



   (E)   "Pasteurization, pasteurized, etc." The process of heating
every particle of milk to at least 143ºF. and holding at such temperature
for at least 15 seconds, in approved and properly operated equipment;
provided that nothing contained in this definition shall be construed as
debarring any other process which has been demonstrated to be equally
efficient and is approved by the dairy and food commission and milk
regulation board of this state.



   (F)   "Producer." Any person who owns or controls one or more cows
or goats, a part of all the milk from which is sold or offered for sale.



   (G)   "Store." A grocery, restaurant, drugstore or any mercantile
establishment which sells milk.



('66 Code, §§ 40-7 and 40-11)



§ 116.06  Registration of sellers required; exception.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, producer or dealer to
have in his possession with intent to sell, offer or expose for sale or sell,
deliver for sale or consumption within the town any milk without first
registering with the director of health and receiving a certificate as
hereinafter specified.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to sales of milk in stores or
sales of milk from a producer to a dealer.



('66 Code, § 40-3) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.07  Application for registration.



   (A)   An application for registration under §§ 116.05 to 116.10,
inclusive, shall be made on forms prepared by the director of health and
filed with the director of health. All applications shall contain the name,
residence, place of business of this applicant and the average daily number
of quarts of raw milk and the average daily number of quarts of pasteurized
milk sold by the applicant.



   (B)   The director of health after an inspection of the premises
shall grant or renew a certificate without charge to an applicant qualifying
under and complying with all provisions of §§ 116.05 to 116.10, inclusive.



   (C)   The registration period shall be from January 1 to December
31, inclusive, and certificates are to be renewed each January 1



   (D)   Certificates issued hereunder shall not be assignable.



   (E)   The director of health may refuse to grant or renew a
certificate or may suspend or revoke a certificate, after the director of
health has determined that the registrant has either failed to maintain a
sanitary establishment or to comply with any provision of §§ 116.05 to
116.10, inclusive, or has made a false statement in his application.



   (F)   Before refusing to grant or renew or before suspending or
revoking a certificate, the director of health shall afford the applicant or
registrant an opportunity to be heard before the director of health. A notice
shall be directed to such applicant or registrant by registered mail to his
last known address, giving at least 3 days' notice of the hearing and a
statement of the matter complained of.



('66 Code, § 40-4)



§ 116.08  Certificate number required on vehicles.



   Before carrying or transporting in vehicles on the public highway milk
for sale in the town, each dealer shall cause the number of his certificate
to be legiby placed and kept in a conspicuous place on each side of the outer
side of all carriages, wagons, carts, sleighs or other vehicles used by him
in the conveyance and sale of milk,



('66 Code, § 40-5) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.09  Pasteurization required; exception.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, producer or dealer to
sell, offer or expose for sale, deliver for sale or consumption within the
town any milk, cream or milk products which are not pasteurized.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to sales of milk from a producer
to a dealer or from one dealer to another dealer.



('66 Code, § 40-9) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.10  Violation prohibited.



   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter.



('66 Code, §§ 40-2, 40-6 and 40-10) Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not more than $50 for each
offense.



('66 Code, §§ 40-2, 40-6 and 40-10)



CHAPTER 117:  VENDING, HAWKING AND PEDDLING



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Permit required



   117.03   Permit fee; issuance; expiration



   117.04   Limited permits



   117.05   Permit requirements



   117.06   Badges and vehicle signs required



   117.07   Issuance of permit; appeal



   117.08   Exceptions; exemptions



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "HAWKER" or "PEDDLER." Any person whether principal or agent who goes
from town to town selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or
exposing therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or from
any animal or vehicle.



   "VEND" or "VENDING." To sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, solicit
offers to purchase or to barter; or to require someone to pay a fee or to
set, negotiate or establish a fee before providing goods or services.



(Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09)



§ 117.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person except those exempted by the state statute, or the provisions
of this chapter, shall engage in vending, hawking or peddling upon any of the
public streets of the Town of Hamden, or upon any state highway, except
limited access highways within Hamden, or any land abutting such streets or
highways, of any goods, wares or other merchandise, at any public or private
sale or auction, or shall vend, hawk or peddle these articles of merchandise
from house to house within the limits of the Town of Hamden without first
obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police or his/her designee.



(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-37) ('66 Code, § 48-1)(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09)
Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.03  PERMIT FEE; ISSUANCE; EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
The fee for a permit issued under this chapter shall be $200 each year in all
cases except as set forth in § 117.04 or § 117.08 of this chapter.



   (B)   Upon submission of an application for a permit under this
chapter, the applicant shall submit proper identification and payment of the
fee as set forth above.



('66 Code, § 48.2; amended 2-3-69) (Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty,
see § 117.99



§ 117.04  LIMITED PERMITS.



   Vendors or peddlers of popcorn, peanuts, balloons, banners, toys and
other similar activities may obtain from the Chief of Police or his/her
designee, a limited and restricted permit for the above-enumerated goods and
merchandise on a carnival, fair, festival, circus day only upon the streets
within a radius of one-half mile only of the grounds on which such event is
located, upon payment of a permit fee of $25. The permit shall be for one day
and shall be subject to the same requirements as other permits issued under
this chapter.



('66 Code, § 48-3; amended 2-3-69) (Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, §
117.99



§ 117.05  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   Any person desiring to secure a permit under this chapter shall apply
in writing over his/her signature to the Police Department on forms provided
by that Department. Such application shall include information required by
the Police Chief including but not limited to the following:



   (A)   The name, permanent home address of the applicant and, if any,
any local address of the applicant;



   (B)   A physical description of the applicant, including age,
height, weight, hair color, eye color;



   (C)   Applicant's State of Connecticut taxation number;



   (D)   Name and address of the applicant's employer or person to whom
or through whom orders are to be solicited;



   (E)   Length of time employed;



   (F)   Place of residence and nature of the employment of the
applicant during the last preceding year;



   (G)   A description of the nature or character of the goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant;



   (H)   Where applicable, the name and address of manufacturer,
publisher, distributor or parent company;



   (I)   Where such goods or products are located at the time that the
application is filed with the Police Department and the proposed method and
estimated delivery of said goods;



   (J)   The make, model, color and registration number of the vehicle,
if any, to be used by the applicant, whether or not such vehicle is to be
used for purposes of this permit;



   (K)   A statement as to whether the applicant has been arrested or
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor, and if so, the nature of the offense
and the penalty, if any;



   (L)   Two photographs of the applicant, which shall be approximately
two and one-half inches by two and one-half inches in size showing the head
and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;



   (M)   The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting to be taken by
the Police Department.



(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.06  BADGES AND VEHICLE SIGNS REQUIRED.



   All persons permitted by the Chief of Police under this chapter, shall
be issued a suitable badge bearing the words "licensed/permitted vendor" and
the date of the permit and its expiration along with a photograph of the
person. While engaged in business under this chapter, all persons shall,
conspicuously display such badge on his/her person. Each person so permitted
shall when using, for the purpose for which he/she is permitted, a wagon,
cart or vehicle shall have plainly displayed on both sides of such wagon,
cart or vehicle a sign designated and furnished by the Police Department
bearing the number of the permit, the date of the permit and its expiration
and the words "permitted or licensed vendor" in bold letters, such badge and
sign to be furnished by the Police Department without additional expense to
the person so permitted. The Police Department, upon the request of any
person who is exempted from taking out a permit by statute, may furnish to
such person, a badge, without charge.



('66 Code, § 48-4)(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.07  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; APPEAL.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall not be required to issue permits to
applicants who have violated any provision of this chapter or convicted of a
felony. Any party aggrieved by this determination shall have a right of
appeal to the Legislative Council.



   (B)   Permits shall be non-transferable and shall entitle the holder
to conduct business for the purpose and time so indicated.



(Am. Ord. 576, passed 7-6-09) Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.08  EXCEPTIONS; EXEMPTIONS.



(A)   The Police Chief may waive the permit fee (permit still required)
for a non-profit organization exempt from federal income taxation by Section
501 of the Internal Revenue Code, or any subsequent corresponding internal
revenue code of the United States, as from time amended, or a charitable
organization.



(Conn. Gen. Stat.,  § 21-37)



   (B)   No permit fee (permits still required) shall be required from
any resident of this state who has resided within the state for a period of
two years next preceding the date of application for a permit, who is (1) a
veteran who served in time of war, as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-103;
and (2) a hawker or peddler as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-36; and (3)
a principal pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-36.



   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to sales by farmers and gardeners
of the produce of their farms, gardens, and greenhouses, including fruit,
vegetables, and flowers or to the sale, distribution and delivery of milk,
teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods, to sales on
approval, to conditional; sales of merchandise, or to the taking of orders
for merchandise for future delivery when full payment is not required at the
time of the solicitation.



(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-37)



   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to the home delivery of
newspapers.



   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit persons
having an established place of business in the Town of Hamden from using the
area adjacent to their business for the display of their goods, wares or
merchandise not shall any permit be required for same.



   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any
manner the Commissioner of Transportation's statutory authority concerning
state highways. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as empowering the
Town of Hamden to prohibit, regulate, control or impose a fee on any person
operating any business on any state highway or land abutting any sate highway
pursuant to a contract with the state.



(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-37) (Am. Ord. 476, passed 7-6-09)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who engages in the business of a vendor, peddler or hawker
without complying with the provision of this chapter shall be fined $199 for
each offense.



(Conn. Gen. Stat., § 21-38) ('66 Code, § 48-5) (Am. Ord. 476, passed 7-6-09)



CHAPTER 118:  STANDARD MEASURES



Section



   118.01   Standard measures required; tests



   118.02   Violation prohibited



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  Standard measures required; tests.



   Every person, firm, and corporation, either by himself, itself, agent
or agents, using gasoline pumps or other automatic liquid-measuring devices
for the sale of gasoline and other volatile, inflammable fluids, shall
provide himself, itself or themselves with proper standard measures, duly
sealed by the sealer of weights and measures of the town, in capacities of
one gallon and 5 gallons, for the purpose of making tests to ascertain
whether the measuring device used is delivering the correct quantity of
liquid. Tests of each pump or other measuring device must be made by the
seller or sellers before he or they make the first sale each day, and also
before commencing to dispense any new supply of liquid.



('66 Code, § 62-1) Penalty, see § 118.99



Cross-reference:



   Sealer of weights and measures, see Ch. 35, § 35.01.



§ 118.02  Violation prohibited.



   No person, firm, or corporation, either by himself, itself, agent or
agents, shall fail to provide himself or itself with such standard measures,
or shall fail to test the gasoline pump or other automatic measuring device
as provided in § 118.01 of this chapter.



('66 Code, § 62-2) Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not more than $50 for each
offense.



('66 Code, § 62-2)



CHAPTER 119:  [RESERVED]



 



CHAPTER 120:  ITINERANT VENDORS



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   Scope



   120.03   License required; exemptions



 



   120.99   Penalty



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ITINERANT VENDOR."  Any person, whether principal or agent, who
engages in a temporary or transient business, either in one locality or
traveling from place to place, selling goods, wares, and merchandise, and
who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases, or occupies
any building or structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares,
and merchandise.



   "MANAGING ITINERANT VENDOR." Any person who conducts, manages or
organizes a show of itinerant vendors for purposes of exhibition and sale at
any location which is open to the general public and at which goods, wares or
merchandise are on display and offered for sale by any vendors.



   "TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT BUSINESS."  Any exhibition and sale of goods,
wares, or merchandise which is carried on in any tent, booth, building, or
other structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business
hours for a period of at least nine months in each year.



(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 578, passed 7-6-09)



§ 120.02  SCOPE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling
agents in the usual course of business;



      (2)   Bona fide sales of goods, wares, and merchandise by
sample for future delivery;



      (3)   Hawkers on the streets or peddlers from vehicles;



      (4)   Any sale of goods, wares, or merchandise on the grounds
of any incorporated agricultural society during the continuance of any annual
fair held by such society;



      (5)   Any general sale, fair, auction or  bazaar held or
sponsored by an ecclesiastical society, church corporation, governmental
entity or any corporation which is exempt from taxation under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or any subsequent corresponding
section of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States as from time to
time may be amended;



      (6)   Tag sales or garage sales on premises devoted to
residential use and where permitted by local law.



   (B)   No itinerant vendor shall be relieved or exempted from the
provisions and requirements of this chapter by reason of associating
himself/herself temporarily with any local dealer, auctioneer, trader or
merchant, or by conducting any temporary or transient business in connection
with or in the name of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader or merchant.



(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 248, adopted 9-4-85; Am. Ord. 578, passed
7-6-09)



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Before selling within the Town of Hamden, under a state
license, each itinerant vendor shall make application for a municipal license
to the Mayor or his/her designee and make payment of $250. Upon payment of
this fee, the Town Clerk shall issue the license which may not continue for a
period longer than the unexpired period of the state license under which the
municipal license is issued. The municipal license shall remain in force as
long as the licensee continuously keeps and exposes for sale in the Town of
Hamden such stock of goods, wares and merchandise, but not later than the
first day of October following its date.



   (B)   Upon payment of the license fee and proof of payment of all
other license fees, if any, chargeable upon local sales, the Town Clerk shall
record the state license of the transient vendor in full, shall endorse
thereon the words "local license fees paid" and shall affix thereto his/her
official signature and the date of the endorsement.



   (C)   No license fee shall be required from any resident of
Connecticut who has resided in Connecticut for a period of two years next
proceeding the date of application for the license and who is a veteran who
served in time of war as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 27-103, for the
privilege of buying, selling or vending goods, wares or merchandise within
its limits; provided lapel pins, buttons, flowers, small flags and similar
novelties and books and magazines shall not be construed to be goods, wares,
or merchandise within the meaning of this chapter. The Town of Hamden may
defer issuance of such license for a period of not to exceed seven days for
the purpose of investigation. Each  veteran engaged in any of those
occupations shall produce his/her discharge, certificate of honorable
discharge from the service or a copy thereof certified by the Town Clerk from
the records of the town where such discharge or certificate of discharge is
recorded as provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-93, for inspection, together
with a certificate from the Town Clerk that the applicant is a resident of
the state, upon such demand of any proper officer of the town and if he/she
fails to do so, he/she shall not be entitled to any privilege under this
section. Any person who makes a false representation for the purpose of
availing him/herself of the privilege of this section shall be fined $25.00



(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 248, adopted 9-4-85; Am. Ord. 578, passed
7-6-09)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   Any itinerant vendor or managing itinerant vendor who sells or exposes
for sale at public auction or private sale any goods, wares or merchandise
without state and local licenses issued as provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., §§
21-28 and 21-29 shall be fined $50.



(Ord. 231, adopted 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 584, passed 7-6-09)



CHAPTER 121:  BAZAARS, RAFFLES AND BINGO



Section



   121.01   State provisions adopted



§ 121.01  STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED.



   (A)   The Legislative Council, in accordance with Section 7-171 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, hereby adopts the provisions of Sections
7-171 to 7-186, inclusive.



   (B)   No bazaar or raffle shall be promoted, operated, or conducted
in the town after the adoption of this section, unless said bazaar or raffle
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Sections 7-171 or
7-186, inclusive of the Connecticut General Statutes.



   (C)   The playing of Bingo in the Town of Hamden, as provided in
Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-169, as may be amended, shall be
permitted.



(Ord. 277, adopted 7-14-88; Am. Ord. 665, adopted 10-5-15)



CHAPTER 122:  UNIFORM PACKAGING PRACTICES



Section



   122.01   Definitions



   122.02   Packaging requirements; utensils and containers to be of
polystyrene



   122.03   Health Director to promulgate regulations



   122.04   Exemptions



   122.05   Abatement of violations



   122.06   Preemption by state law



   122.07   Effective date



 



   122.99   Penalty



§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BIODEGRADABLE PACKAGING."  Packaging made of cellulose-based or other
substances that are capable of being readily attacked, decomposed,
assimilated, and otherwise completely oxidized or broken down by bacteria or
other natural biological organisms into carbonaceous soil material or water
and carbon dioxide.



   "PACKAGING."  All food-related wrappings, adhesives, cords, bindings,
strings, bags, boxes, containers and disposable or non-reusable plates, cups,
or drinking utensils intended for use within Hamden.



   "RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT."  Any restaurant, food operation, or any
other place, other than a private residence, where food and drink is prepared
or served, with or without charge, for consumption on or off the premises,
including any catering establishment or any eating place, whether fixed or
mobile, restaurant, bar, café, cafeteria, industrial establishment, public
or private school, private club, coffee shop, tea room, short order café,
sandwich stand or any other type of food service operation and any person,
firm or corporation which sells, offers or keeps for sale any groceries,
confectioneries, meats, fish, vegetables or fruits, all sales outlets,
stores, shops or other places of business located within the town, which
operate primarily to sell or convey foods directly to the ultimate consumer
which foods are predominantly contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging.
"RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT" shall include, but not be limited to, any place
where food is prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled,
packaged, handled, stored, manufactured, and sold or offered for sale
including, but not limited to, any fixed or mobile restaurant; drive-in;
coffee shop; cafeteria; short order café; delicatessen; luncheonette; grill;
sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub;
roadside stand; take-out prepared food place; industrial feeding
establishment; catering kitchen, commissary; grocery store; public food
market; food stand; or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for
sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other establishment
or operation, including homes, where food is processed, prepared, stored,
served, or provided for the public for charge.



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)



§ 122.02  PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS; UTENSILS AND CONTAINERS TO BE OF
POLYSTYRENE.



   (A)   No retail food establishment located and doing business within
the town shall sell or convey food directly to ultimate consumers within the
town unless such food is placed, wrapped, or packed in biodegradable
packaging at the conclusion of a sales transaction for the purchase of such
food, which takes place on the premises of such a retail food establishment
at or near a sales counter or equivalent customer purchasing station but
prior to removal of such food from the premises of such retail food
establishment.



   (B)   No retail food establishment located and doing business within
the town shall sell, give, or provide eating utensils or food containers to
any consumers within the town if such eating utensil or food container is
composed of polystyrene.



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.03  HEALTH DIRECTOR TO PROMULGATE REGULATIONS.



   The Town Health Director or any entity serving as such may issue and
promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement and
carry out the provisions of this law.



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)



§ 122.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   Section 122.02 shall not apply to the following items:



   (A)   Any flexible transparent covering for uncooked or raw meat,
poultry, raw fish, hard cheese, cold cuts, fruit and vegetable produce, baked
goods, or bread;



   (B)   Any food packaging used at hospitals or nursing homes;



   (C)   Any paper or other cellulose based packaging that is coated
with polyethylene plastic on only one side;



   (D)   Any plastic covers, covering material, food containers, lids,
eating utensils, or straws that are not made of polystyrene or polyvinyl
chloride.



   (E)   Any cup lid which is not environmentally acceptable, but for
which there is not a commercially available alternative determined by the
town health director or any entity serving as such may be exempted by rule
created under § 122.05(B) provided that the town health director or any
entity serving as such or its designee shall report in writing on or before
April 30, 1990 and quarterly thereafter to the legislative council on the
status of any item exempted under this provision.  Upon determination that
the item is commercially available, notification will be published and the
effective date of the prohibition shall be 90 days from the publication date.



   (F)   In determining whether there are commercially available
alternatives, the town health director or any entity serving as such shall
consider the following:



      (1)   The availability of environmentally acceptable packaging
for affected projects;



      (2)   The economic consequences to manufacturers, suppliers,
retailers, and other vendors of requiring environmentally acceptable
packaging when available; and



      (3)   The competitive effects on manufacturers, suppliers,
retailers and other vendors involved in the sale of product brands or labels
available only in packaging that is not environmentally acceptable packaging.



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89; Am. Ord. 307, passed 2-26-90)



§ 122.05  ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Town Health Director or any entity serving as such or his
authorized agent or a sanitarian employed by such Health Director or any
authorized agent of such entity or any sanitarian employed by such entity may
enter any retail food establishment in the town where there is just cause to
suspect the use of any packaging prohibited by this chapter and abate or
cause to be abated such use.



   (B)   For the purposes of abating the use of such prohibited
packaging the Town Health Director or any entity serving as such, shall have
the same power and authority granted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes
Section 19a-206(b) and (c).



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)



§ 122.06  PREEMPTION BY STATE LAW.



   This law shall be null and void on the day that Statewide legislation
goes into effect, incorporating either the same or substantially similar
provisions as are contained in this law, or in the event that a pertinent
State or Federal administrative agency issues and promulgates regulations
preempting such action by the town. The Town Legislature may determine via
mere resolution whether or not identical or substantially similar statewide
legislation has been enacted for the purposes of triggering the provisions of
this section.



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)



§ 122.07  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall become effective on March 1, 1990.



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)



§ 122.99  PENALTY.



   Failure to comply with § 122.02 shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $100 for each day such violation continues to exist and
imprisonment of not more than three months, or both.



(Ord. 297, adopted 8-7-89)



CHAPTER 123:  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE POLICY



Section



   123.01   Goals and objectives



   123.02   Eligibility



   123.03   Term of policy



   123.04   Application and review process



   123.05   Evaluation process and criteria



   123.06   Delinquent tax issues



   123.07   Types of incentives; use of multiple incentives by any one
applicant



   123.08   Real property tax incentives



   123.09   Real property tax incentives for rehabilitation areas



   123.10   Personal property tax incentives



   123.11   Contaminated sites; remediation tax incentives



   123.12   Property improvement incentives



   123.13   Waiver of building permit fees



§ 123.01  GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   The goal of this economic development incentive policy is to
strengthen Hamden's manufacturing, technology and commercial tax base and
produce a viable tax revenue stream.



   (B)   The objectives of this policy are as follows:



      (1)   To ensure that Hamden remains a competitive business
location in both the state and the region;



      (2)   To encourage the retention and expansion of existing
businesses;



      (3)   To aid in the location of new businesses to Hamden;



      (4)   To encourage the redevelopment and adaptive reuse of
obsolete or distressed properties which pose special development problems
because of their age, configuration and location;



      (5)   To assist in the redemption and redevelopment of
contaminated industrial and commercial sites;



      (6)   To support the economic development of Hamden's
Enterprise Zone and encourage the location and expansion of manufacturing and
warehouse/distribution businesses throughout town in conjunction with the
town's state designation as a targeted investment community;



      (7)   To support economic development in Hamden's Neighborhood
Revitalization Zones; and



      (8)   To aid major new industrial or commercial developments,
which, through the extension and improvement of public infrastructure, will
create parcels suitable for, industrial, commercial or mixed use development
projects where town participation makes the project both feasible and
competitive, or where the town's contribution creates new industrial parks or
businesses.



(Ord. 384, passed 10-19-08; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510,
passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am.
Ord. 654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.02  ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   Real property incentives may be available to any party owning
or proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the Town of Hamden,
or any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in air space in the
town, or with any party who is the lessee of, or who proposes to be the
lessee of, air space in the town in such a manner that the air space leased
or proposed to be leased shall be assessed to the lessee pursuant to Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 12-64, fixing the assessment of the real property or air space
which is the subject of the agreement, and all improvements thereon or
therein and to be constructed thereon or therein subject to the provisions
set for the below provided that the improvements shall be for one of the
following: 1) office use; 2) retail use; 3) permanent residential use; 4)
transient residential use; 5) manufacturing; 6) warehouse, storage or
distribution use; 7) structured multi-leveled parking use necessary in
connection with a mass transit system; 8) information technology; 9)
recreational facilities; or 10) transportation facilities and which meet the
eligibility criteria listed below.



   (B)   Personal property incentives may be available to any party
owning or proposing to acquire an interest in real property in the Town of
Hamden, or with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest in air
space in the town, or with any party who is the lessee of, or who proposes to
be the lessee of, air space in the town in such a manner that the air space
leased or proposed to be leased shall be assessed to the lessee pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-64, upon which is located or proposed to be located a
manufacturing facility, as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(72) and
which meet the edibility as listed below.



   (C)   Real property incentives may be available to the owner of any
real property located in Neighborhood Revitalization Zones (Highwood and
State Street neighborhoods have been designated by the town as Neighborhood
Revitalization Zones) who agrees to rehabilitate such property or construct
new multi-family rental housing or cooperative housing on such property and
which meet the eligibility criteria listed below.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.03  TERM OF POLICY.



   This incentive policy shall remain in effect until June 30, 2018.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 426, passed 11-6-00; Am. Ord. 440, passed
7-2-01; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord.
556, passed 2-4-08; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 609, passed 7-5-11;
Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654, passed 1-5-15; Am. Ord. 661,
passed 7-6-15)



§ 123.04  APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS.



   (A)   Applications for tax deferral incentives on real property.
Applications for tax deferral incentives as set forth in §§ 123.08 and
123.09 of this chapter for a project consisting of eligible improvements must
be submitted to the Economic and Community Development Office prior to the
project’s application for a building permit. Such application shall be
reviewed by a committee composed of the Mayor; the Economic and Community
Development Director, the Finance Director; the Assessor; the Tax Collector;
the chair of the Economic Development Commission (EDC); a member of the
Economic Development Commission who shall be appointed by the chair of the
Economic Development Commission; and two members (one Democrat and one
Republican) of the Legislative Council who shall be appointed by the
Legislative Council President. The committee will review and initially
determine an applicant’s eligibility based on the evaluation criteria as
set below in § 123.05; negotiate and provide tentative incentive offers to
such applicants; and provide a letter of intent outlining the town’s
incentive offer to the applicant. The letter will state that final approval
of the terms is contingent on EDC and Legislative Council approval as well as
the execution of a formal legal agreement. The Legislative Council shall give
final approval to the agreement and authorize its execution.



   (B)   Applications for tax deferral incentives on personal property.
Applications for tax deferral incentives as set forth in § 123.10 of this
chapter on personal property shall be submitted to the Economic and Community
Development Office. Such applications shall be reviewed and processed as set
forth above in division (A) of this section and in accordance with the
criteria as set forth below in § 123.05.



   (C)   Applications for contaminated sites tax incentives.
Applications for tax incentives on contaminated sites as set forth in §
123.11 of this chapter shall be submitted to the Economic and Community
Development Office. Such applications shall be reviewed and processed as set
forth in division (A) of this section in accordance with the criteria as set
forth below in § 123.05.



   (D)   Local building permit fee waivers. Applications for local
building permit waivers as set forth in § 123.13 of this chapter shall be
submitted to the Economic and Community Development Office. Such applications
shall be reviewed and processed as set forth below in division (A) of this
section in accordance with the criteria set forth below in § 123.05. If
approved, the Building Official shall waive local building permit fees in
accordance with § 123.13.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.05  EVALUATION PROCESS AND CRITERIA.



   The levels of incentives presented in §§ 123.08, 123.09, 123.10,
123.11 and 123.12 are maximum benefit levels. The committee may recommend a
level lower than the maximum or recommend that the applicant not receive any
incentive based upon the following criteria:



   (A)   The extent to which the final assistance aids in the expansion
and retention of existing firms in Hamden or aids in the location of new
firms in Hamden;



   (B)   The short and long term increase in real and personal property
tax base associated in the project;



   (C)   The extent to which the town's participation through
incentives eliminates a blighted property and puts that property to
productive reuse;



   (D)   The extent to which the town's incentive will contribute
toward environmental remediation and the redevelopment of contaminated sites;



   (E)   The extent to which the incentives will aid in an identified
property of district rehabilitation and revitalization efforts as articulated
in the town's plan of development, neighborhood and revitalization zone
plans, enterprise zone policies, or projects identified by the Economic
Development Commission or the Legislative Council;



   (F)   The extent to which a new development project serves to create
opportunities for commercial and industrial development, extend public
infrastructure, and provide for industrial and commercial growth; and



   (G)   The extent to which a project positively contributes to the
creation of jobs and that it contributes to Hamden's quality of life.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.06  DELINQUENT TAX ISSUES.



With the exception of a site identified as environmentally impacted pursuant
to § 123.11 of this chapter, any applicant delinquent in taxes to the town
shall not be considered for incentives unless the applicant has made
arrangements to pay these taxes with the tax collector. If a business
receiving incentives becomes delinquent at any time during the incentive
period and does not make an acceptable repayment arrangement with the tax
collector, the incentive program shall cease and that business shall be
liable for paying all taxes deferred or abated to the date of delinquency.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.07  TYPES OF INCENTIVES; USE OF MULTIPLE INCENTIVES BY ANY ONE
APPLICANT.



   (A)   The specifics of the following incentives are limited by state
laws: assessment deferrals on real property improvements, Conn. Gen. Stat.,
§§ 12-65b and 12-65g; assessment deferrals on personal property, (located
in manufacturing facilities) Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65h; abatement of real
property taxes during periods of environmental remediation, PA 98-253; and
forgiveness of back real property taxes to benefit prospective purchasers of
vacant hazardous sites if they remediate that site, PA 98-253.



   (B)   The Economic Development Commission recognizes that the town
offers incentives that are not included in this chapter. These are:
Enterprise Zone (EZ), Railroad Depot Zone (RRDZ) and real and personal
property tax abatements; Targeted Investment Community (TIC) real and
personal property tax abatements; assessment deferrals for real property
improvements in the Enterprise Zone (1989 ordinance); tax abatements on new
machinery and equipment used in manufacturing processes. Any applicant who
qualified for EZ, RRDZ or TIC tax abatements for real or personal property
must use those and shall not be eligible for the town’s real and personal
property tax incentives under this chapter.



   (C)   Applicants for town or EZ/TIC incentives may also apply for
remediation incentives, building permit fee waivers and property improvement
and incentives.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.08  REAL PROPERTY TAX INCENTIVES.



   (A)   (Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65b).  Subsequent to an affirmative
vote of the Legislative Council, the town (through the Mayor) may enter into
a written agreement with any party owning or proposing to acquire an interest
in real property in the Town of Hamden, or with any party owning or proposing
to acquire an interest in air space in the town, or with any party who is the
lessee of, or who proposes to be the lessee of, air space in the town in such
a manner that the air space leased or proposed to be leased shall be assessed
to the lessee pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-64, subject to the
provisions set forth below.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall only apply if the
improvements are for at least one of the following: 1) office use; 2) retain
use; 3) permanent residential use; 4) transient residential use; 5)
manufacturing; 6) warehouse, storage or distribution use; 7) structured
multi-leveled parking use necessary in connection with a mass transit system;
8) information technology; 9) recreational facilities; or 10) transportation
facilities.



   (C)   Based on the cost of improvements, the Assessor shall
determine the net increase in assessed value. The increased value shall be
the basis of the amount of the deferral.



   (D)   Payback period.  If the owner or lessee receiving the
incentive substantially reduces its operations on its real property, attempts
to assign its rights under this agreement, or sells or otherwise transfers
the real estate during the relevant payback period noted above, the town may
terminate the incentive program and may require full pay back of all deferred
taxes. In order to maintain eligibility the town may require property owners
or lessees to submit eligibility affidavits annually.



   (E)   Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall
be recorded in the Hamden land records and shall constitute a priority lien
against the property benefited until the conditions of the tax abatement have
been fulfilled and the agreement has expired. Upon default under the terms of
the agreement, or material misrepresentation in the application, the taxes
abated shall immediately become due and payable, with interest as provided by
law, and may be liened; and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as
provided by law for tax property liens generally.



   (F)   Effective date for deferrals.  Assessment deferrals on real
property made under this section shall commence on the October 1 Grand List
following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the Building
Department.



 

COST OF IMPROVEMENTS
 
PERCENT DEFERRED OF THE INCREASED ASSESSMENT
 
TIME PERIOD
 
PAY BACK PERIOD


(for businesses not  located or locating in a Neighborhood Revitalization
Zone)
 
 
 


Over $15 million
 
year 1 - to maximum of 70%

year 2 - to maximum of 60%

year 3 - to maximum of 50%

year 4 - to maximum of 40%

year 5 - to maximum of 30%

year 6 - to maximum of 20%

year 7 - to maximum of 10%
 
7 years
 
10 years


$3 million to $15 million
 
year 1 - to maximum of 70%

year 2 - to maximum of 60%

year 3 - to maximum of 50%

year 4 - to maximum of 40%

year 5 - to maximum of 30%

year 6 - to maximum of 20%
 
6 years
 
10 years


$500,000 to $2,999,999
 
year 1 - to maximum of 70%

year 2 - to maximum of 60%

year 3 - to maximum of 50%
 
2 years
 
5 years


$25,000 to $499,999
 
year 1 - to maximum of 50%

year 2 - to maximum of 40%

year 3 - to maximum of 30%
 
3 years
 
5 years



 



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65b



§ 123.09  REAL PROPERTY TAX INCENTIVES FOR REHABILITATION AREAS.



 

COST OF IMPROVEMENTS
 
PERCENT DEFERRED OF THE INCREASED ASSESSMENT
 
TIME PERIOD
 
PAY BACK PERIOD


(for businesses located or locating in a Neighborhood Revitalization Zone)
 
 
 


Over $3 million
 
year 1 - to maximum of 70%

year 2 - to maximum of 70%

year 3 - to maximum of 70%

year 4 - to maximum of 70%

year 5 - to maximum of 70%
 
5 years
 
10 years


$500,000 to

$2,999,999
 
year 1 - to maximum of 100%

year 2 - to maximum of 100%
 
2 years
 
5 years


$50,000 to $499,999
 
year 1 - to maximum of 50%

year 2 - to maximum of 50%

year 3 - to maximum of 50%
 
3 years
 
5 years



 



   (A)   Payback period.  If the owner receiving the incentive
substantially reduces its operations on its real property, attempts to assign
its rights under this agreement, or sells or otherwise transfers the real
estate during the relevant payback period noted above, the town may terminate
the incentive program and may require full pay back of all deferred taxes. In
order to maintain eligibility the town may require property owners to submit
eligibility affidavits annually.



   (B)   Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall
be recorded in the Hamden land records and shall constitute a priority lien
against the property benefited until the conditions of the tax abatement have
been fulfilled and the agreement has expired. Upon default under the terms of
the agreement, or material misrepresentation in the application, the taxes
abated shall immediately become due and payable, with interest as provided by
law, and may be liened; and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as
provided by law for tax property liens generally.



   (C)   Effective date for deferrals.  Assessment deferrals on real
property made under this section shall commence on the October 1 Grand List
following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the Building
Department.



(Ord. 654, passed 1-5-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65e



§ 123.10  PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX INCENTIVES.



   (A)   (Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65h).  Subsequent to an affirmative
vote of the Legislative Council, the town (through the Mayor) may enter into
a written agreement with any party that owns or proposes to acquire an
interest in real property, or with any party owning or proposing to acquire
an interest in air space in the town, or with any party who is the lessee of,
or who proses to be the lessee of, air space in the town in such a manner
that the airspace leased or proposed to be leased shall be assessed to the
lessee pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-64, in an appropriately zoned
area, upon which is located or proposed to be located a manufacturing
facility, as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-81(72), fixing the assessment
of the personal property located within the facility which is the subject of
the agreement. The increased portion of the assessment of personal property
in that facility may be deferred depending on the net increase in personal
property.



 

AMOUNT OF NET INCREASE IN ASSESSED VALUE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
 
PERCENT DEFERRED OF THE INCREASED PORTION OF THE ASSESSMENT
 
TIME PERIOD
 
PAY BACK PERIOD


$3 million plus
 
year 1 - to maximum of 70%

year 2 - to maximum of 70%

year 3 - to maximum of 70%

year 4 - to maximum of 70%

year 5 - to maximum of 70%
 
5 years
 
10 years


$500,000 to

$3,000,000
 
year 1 - to maximum of 70%

year 2 - to maximum of 70%
 
2 years
 
5 years


$25,000 to

$499,999
 
year 1 - to maximum of 50%

year 2 - to maximum of 50%

year 3 - to maximum of 50%
 
3 years
 
5 years



 



   (B)   Payback period.  If an owner or lessee receiving the
incentive substantially reduces its operations on its real property, attempts
to assign its rights under this agreement, or sells or otherwise transfers
the real estate during the relevant payback period noted above, the town may
terminate the incentive program and may require full pay back of all deferred
taxes. In order to maintain eligibility, the town may require property owners
to submit eligibility annually.



   (C)   Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall
be recorded in the Hamden land records and shall constitute a priority lien
against the property benefited until the conditions of the tax abatement have
been fulfilled and the agreement has expired. Upon default under the terms of
the agreement, or material misrepresentation in the application, the taxes
abated shall immediately become due and payable, with interest as provided by
law, and may be liened; and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as
provided by law for tax property liens generally.



   (D)   Effective date of deferral.  Deferrals for increased
assessments on personal property granted under this section shall commence on
October 1 of the year following the purchase and declaration to the Assessor
of such personal property.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-65h



§ 123.11  CONTAMINATED SITES; REMEDIATION TAX INCENTIVES.



   (A)   (Public Act 97-109 as amended by Public Act 98-253).  The
town may:



      (1)   Enter into an agreement with the owner of any real
property to abate the property tax due as of the date of the agreement for a
period of time not to exceed seven years if the property has been subject to
a spill as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 22a-452c, and the owner agrees to
conduct any environmental site assessment, demolition and remediation of the
spill necessary to redevelop the property. Any such tax abatement shall be
only for the period of remediation and redevelopment and shall be contingent
upon the continuation and completion of the remediation and redevelopment
process with the respect to purposes specified in the agreement. The
abatement shall cease upon the sale or transfer of the property for any other
purpose unless the town consents to its continuation. The town may also
establish a recapture provision in the event of sale provided such recapture
shall not exceed the original amount of taxes abated and may not go back
further than the date of the agreement; or



      (2)   Forgive all or a portion of the principal balance and
interest due on delinquent property taxes for the benefit of any prospective
purchaser who has obtained an environmental investigation or remediation plan
approved by the Commission of Environmental Protection or a licensed
environmental professional under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 22a-133w, § 22a-133x,
as amended by § 13 of Public Act 98-253, or § 22a-133y and completes such
remediation plan for an establishment, as defined in § 22a-134, as amended
by § 2 of Public Act 98-253, deemed by the town to be abandoned.



   (B)   Any abatement or forgiveness of taxes under division (A) of
this section shall be approved by a vote of the Legislative Council and shall
be contingent upon any conditions deemed appropriate by such body.



   (C)   The town shall notify the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection, the Commissioner of Economic and Community Development and the
Secretary of Policy and Management not later than 30 days after granting any
abatement or forgiveness of taxes under division (A) of this section. Such
notice shall provide the owner of purchaser’s name, as the case may be, and
the address of the property.



   (D)   The Town of Hamden may offer up to a 100% real property tax
abatement to owners during the period of time that they remediate their
property or for seven years whichever is shorter as specified in divisions
(A) and (C) of this section. The town will seek the professional review of an
environmental engineer of the town’s engineering department to assess the
maximum time that should be allowed for remediation work and thus for the
abatement period. The owner shall provide the town with phase one and two
environmental assessments and a redevelopment plan for vacant and abandoned
sites. The town will decide on pay back/recapture requirements on a
case-by-case basis.



   (E)   The Town of Hamden may consider forgiving all or a portion of
back taxes and interest owed for the benefit of purchasers of vacant
environmentally hazardous sites as specified in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section. A redevelopment plan and environmental assessments shall be provided
to the town as part of the application.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.12  PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT INCENTIVES.



   (A)   The Town of Hamden may, as its option, offer property
incentives for improvements for commercial, retail, office, service, manu-
facturing, storage, warehousing and distribution developments that it deems
would significantly increase the town’s tax base or be of significant
benefit to the town.



   (B)   Property improvements shall be granted in accordance with the
process set forth in § 123.04(A) of this chapter.



   (C)   Property improvements include all site work including paving,
curbing, landscaping, fencing, utilities and drainage. It also includes all
improvements to buildings such as structural (foundation, wall sections,
roof) and electrical, mechanical, HVAC, telecommunication improvements, and
the like, all of which will be fixed improvements, not removal by the
occupant.



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord.
654, passed 1-5-15)



§ 123.13  WAIVER OF BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Commercial, retail, office, service, manufacturing, storage,
warehousing and distribution businesses that own or propose to own real
property anywhere in town and that newly construct or make improvements to
such real property shall receive local building permit fee waivers according
to the improvements cost levels listed below. Any owner or lessee granted a
permit waiver shall still be required to pay the educational fee required by
the State of Connecticut.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter local building permits shall not
include HVAC, plumbing and electrical permits.



 

COST OF IMPROVEMENTS
 
TOWN BUILDING PERMIT FEE WAIVER
 
LOCATION OF BUSINESS


Under $100,000

$100,000 - $500,000

$500,000 - $3 million

Above $3 million
 
100% of fee waived

50% of fee waived

25% of fee waived

No waiver
 
businesses that do not own or propose to own property within the Neighborhood
Revitalization Zone


Under $100,000

$100,000 - $500,000

$500,000 - $3 million

Above $3 million
 
100% of fee waived

100% of fee waived

100% of fee waived

No waiver
 
businesses that own or propose to own property within the Neighborhood

Revitalization Zone



 



(Ord. 428, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 446, passed 10-1-01; Am. Ord. 510, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 529, passed 8-1-05; Am. Ord. 562, passed 7-7- 08; Am. Ord.
613, passed 1-3-12; Am. Ord. 654, passed 1-5-15)



CHAPTER 124:  DISQUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS FROM BIDDING



Section



   124.01   Definitions



   124.02   Causes for disqualification



   124.03   Disqualification; exceptions



   124.04   Notice of hearing; hearing procedure



§ 124.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CONTRACT" or "CONTRACTING."  Any relationship or arrangement with the
town whereby a contractor seeks or obtains the right to supply, or supplies
goods, supplies, services or equipment to the town directly, or indirectly
through a relationship with any other contractor such as by being an agent,
subcontractor, joint venture, supplier and the like.



   "CONTRACTOR."  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity,
including professional consultants, which has contracted or seeks to contract
with the town or to participate in such a contract in connection with any
public works of the town.



   "DISQUALIFICATION." The prohibition of any contractor from bidding on,
applying for, or participating as a subcontractor on, town contracts in
response to an invitation to bid or from being considered for the awarding of
any town contract or purchase order.



   "HEARING OFFICER."  The person appointed by the Mayor to hear and
decide allegations that any contractor should be disqualified pursuant to
this chapter, except that no hearing officer shall be appointed who has
personally carried out the function of investigator in any contested issue
before that hearing officer.



   "PUBLIC WORKS."  The use of federal, state or local funds for a
project that serves the interest of the general public.



(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)



§ 124.02  CAUSES FOR DISQUALIFICATION.



   (A)   Causes for disqualification from bidding on, applying for or
participating in contracts shall include the following:



      (1)   Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere for or admission to the commission of a criminal offense as an
incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or
subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract;



      (2)   Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere or admission to the violation of any state or federal law for
embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of
records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of
business integrity or business honesty which affects responsibility as a
municipal contractor;



      (3)   Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere or admission to a violation of state or federal antitrust,
collusion or conspiracy law arising out of the submission of bids or
proposals on a public or private contract or subcontract;



      (4)   A willful failure to perform in accordance with the
terms of one or more public contracts, agreements or transactions;



      (5)   A history of failure to perform in accordance with the
terms of one or more public contracts, agreements or transactions; or



      (6)   A willful violation of a statutory or regulatory
provision or requirement applicable to a public contract, agreement or
transaction.



   (B)   For purposes of a disqualification proceeding under this
chapter, conduct may be imputed as follows:



      (1)   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper
conduct of any officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee or other
individual associated with a contractor may be imputed to the contractor when
the conduct occurred in connection with the individual's performance of
duties for or on behalf of the contractor and the contractor knew of or had
reason to know of such conduct. The term "other seriously improper conduct"
does not include advice from an attorney, accountant or other paid consultant
if it was reasonable for the contractor to rely on such advice.



      (2)   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper
conduct of a contractor may be imputed to any officer, director, shareholder,
partner, employee or other individual associated with the contractor who
participated in, knew of or had reason to know of the contractor's conduct.



      (3)   The fraudulent, criminal or other seriously improper
conduct of one contractor participating in a joint venture or similar
arrangement may be imputed to other participating contractors if the conduct
occurred for or on behalf of the joint venture or similar arrangement and
these contractors knew of or had reason to know of such conduct.



(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)



§ 124.03  DISQUALIFICATION; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Any contractor may be disqualified for a period not to exceed
two years from bidding on, applying for, or participating as a subcontractor
under, contracts with the town for one or more causes set forth in division
(B) of this section.



   (B)   The town may reduce the period or extent of disqualification,
upon the contractor's request, supported by documentation, for the following
reasons:



      (1)   Newly discovered material evidence;



      (2)   Reversal of the conviction upon which the
disqualification was based;



      (3)   Bona fide change in ownership or management;



      (4)   Elimination of other causes for which the
disqualification was imposed; or



      (5)   Other reasons the municipality deems appropriate.



   (C)   The town may grant an exception permitting a disqualified
contractor to participate in a particular contract or subcontract upon a
written determination by the Purchasing Agent that there is good cause, in
the interest of the public, for such action.



(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)



§ 124.04  NOTICE OF HEARING; HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Subsequent to the determination that there exists one or more
causes for disqualification of any contractor, the Purchasing Agent shall
recommend disqualification of said contractor to the Mayor. Upon review of
the recommendation, the Mayor may assign a hearing officer to determine
whether there exists, pursuant to § 124.02(B) above, one or more causes for
disqualifying a contractor from bidding on, applying for or participating in
an award of town contracts.



   (B)   The town, through the Purchasing Agent, shall give written
notice to the contractor of the town's intent to commence a hearing to
determine whether the contractor should be disqualified under this chapter.
The notice shall include a statement of the time, place and nature of the
hearing. Copies of the notice shall be sent to the affected department and
the Town Attorney.



   (C)   The hearing shall be held in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat.,
§ 4-176e through § 4-181a, as may be amended. The Hearing Officer shall
issue a written decision within 90 days of the last date of such hearing and
state in the decision the reasons for the action taken and, if the contractor
is disqualified, the period of such disqualification. The existence of a
cause for disqualification shall not be the sole factor to be considered in
determining whether the contractor shall be disqualified. In determining
whether to disqualify a contractor, the hearing officer shall consider the
seriousness of the contractor's acts or omissions and any mitigating factors.
The hearing officer shall send the decision to the contractor by certified
mail, return receipt requested.



(Ord. 517, passed 4-4-05)



CHAPTER 125: EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORES



Section



   125.01   Definitions



   125.02   Licensing requirements



   125.03   License application



   125.04   Issuance, denial and appeal of denial of license



   125.05   Extended hours convenience store security



   125.06   Creating or maintaining non-compliant extended hours
convenient stores prohibited



   125.07   Enforcement



   125.08   Suspension/revocation of license



   125.09   Delivery of notices



   125.10   Expiration and renewal of registration



   125.11   Nontransferability



 



   125.99   Penalty



§ 125.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “BUSINESS PREMISES.”  The main structure and the property
belonging to or associated with an extended hours convenience store.



   “CHIEF OF POLICE.”  The Chief of the Hamden Police Department or
his/her designee.



   “DISORDERLY ESTABLISHMENT.”  Includes any business premises where
acts are performed or activities are conducted or condoned, whether inside or
outside the business premises, which are contrary to the rules of good order
and behavior, violative of the public peace, indecent, or which tend to
corrupt the morals of the community and promote criminal activity.



   “DROP SAFE.”  means a cash management device in which money can be
deposited without the depositor having access to the contents.



   “EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORE.”  Any building, structure or
grounds primarily used for the retail sale of groceries, consumables,
commodities open for business between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
or any part thereof. The term “EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORE” shall
not include:



      (1)   A business that is solely or primarily a restaurant;



      (2)   A business that has a least 10,000 square feet of retail
floor space within the main structure; or



      (3)   Any business that has no retail floor space accessible
to the public.



   “HEIGHT MARKER.”  A measuring strip that may be attached on or
near a door frame of an extended hours convenience store to aid in
identifying the height of a person suspected of committing a crime.



   “LICENSE.”  A license issued by the Town Planner under this
chapter to the owner of an extended hours convenience store.



   “OWNER.”  The person, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or
other entity or group enterprise licensed to do business at an extended hours
convenience store at a particular location or locations, in lawful possession
of the location by virtue of a deed, license, lease, sublease or other
contract or agreement.



   “PERSON.”  Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity.



   “REGISTERED AGENT.”  The person identified in the license
application.



   “TOWN PLANNER.”  The Town Planner for the Town of Hamden or
his/her designee.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.02  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No extended hours convenience store shall be opened between
the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or any portion thereof, without a
license issued under this chapter.



   (B)   The fee for this license shall be $100 yearly.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   To obtain a license for an extended hours convenience store, a
person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the
Town Planner. The applicant must be the person who will own or operate the
extended hours convenience store. The application must contain all of the
following information:



      (1)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone
number of the applicant;



      (2)   The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile
number, and telephone number of the extended hours convenience store. The
names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all
owners of the extended hours convenience store;



      (3)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone
number of a person or persons who can be contacted 24 hours a day, seven days
a week, in the event of an emergency condition involving the extended hours
convenience store;



      (4)   The name, street address, mailing address, and telephone
number of the registered agent for the extended hours convenience store;



      (5)   The total area in square feet of the extended hours
convenience store; and



      (6)   Such additional information as the applicant desires to
include or that the Town Planner deems necessary to aid in the determination
of whether the requested license should be granted.



   (B)   An applicant shall notify the Town Planner within 45 days
after any material change in the information contained in the application for
a license for an extended hours convenience store, including, but not limited
to, any changes in ownership of the property and any changes in the
registered agent, manager, or emergency contact person(s) for the property.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.04  ISSUANCE, DENIAL AND APPEAL OF DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Town Planner shall issue to the applicant a license for an
extended hours convenience store if the Town Planner determines that:



      (1)   The applicant has complied with all requirements for
issuance of the license; and



      (2)   The applicant has not made a false statement as to a
material matter in any application for a license.



   (B)   If the Town Planner determines that the requirements of
division (A) of this section have not been met the Town Planner shall deny a
license to the applicant. If the Town Planner determines that an applicant
should be denied a license, the Town Planner shall deliver written notice to
the applicant that the application is denied and include in the notice the
reason for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right of
appeal.



   (C)   A license issued under this section must be displayed to the
public in a manner and location approved by the Town Planner. The license
must be presented upon request to any Town official for examination.



   (D)   No license shall be granted or renewed for any extended hours
convenience store on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of
the town of Hamden are delinquent or unpaid (if due).



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.05  EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENCE STORE SECURITY.



   (A)   Every extended hours convenience store shall be equipped with
the following security devices and standards:



      (1)   A fully operative security camera system capable of
recording and retrieving an image to assist in offender identification and
apprehension;



      (2)   A drop safe or cash management system device for
restricted access to cash receipts;



      (3)   A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of
between .5 and 1.5 foot candles per square foot at 18 inches above the
surface, if applicable;



      (4)   A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that
the cash register contains  $50 or less;



      (5)   Window signage that allows a clear and unobstructed view
from outside the building and in a normal line of sight of the cash register
and sales transaction area;



      (6)   Height markers at the entrance of the extended hours
convenience store which display height measures; and



      (7)   A cash management system policy to limit the cash on
hand at all times.



   (B)   An extended hours convenience store shall not have window
tinting that reduces exterior or interior viewing of the normal line of sight.



   (C)   Every extended hours convenience store shall be equipped with
a silent alarm to an alarm monitoring company. The alarm must be registered
in accordance with Chapter 100 of the Town Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.06  CREATING OR MAINTAINING NON-COMPLIANT EXTENDED HOURS CONVENIENT
STORES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Complaint or violation. Any person affected by the action or
inaction of an extended hours convenience store subject to the provisions of
this chapter may contact the Town Planner.



   (B)   Notice of violation; order to correct; time limit for
compliance. If the Town Planner acting by him/herself or by an appropriate
enforcement officer, has reason to believe, pursuant to an inspection of the
premises, that an owner or agent of an extended hours convenience store has
violated the provisions of this chapter, the Town Planner or Enforcement
Officer shall serve a notice of violation and an order to correct such
violation on the owner of record. If the owner's address is the same as the
property where the violation has occurred, then a notice may be left at the
time the violation is noted. The order shall require the owner to comply with
the requirements of this chapter within 30 days of receipt of the notice.



   (C)   Failure to correct deficiency. If an owner of property has
been served with a notice of violation and order to correct and has failed to
do so within 30 days as determined upon subsequent inspection, the Town
Planner shall cause the owner to be fined, by way of citation,  $100 for
each day that each non-compliant condition persists beyond 30 days from the
effective date of the order until the owner presents appropriate evidence
that the cited non-compliant conditions have been corrected and the premises
have been re-inspected and approved.



   (D)   Failure to pay. Should an owner fail to pay, within 30 days, a
fine levied pursuant to this chapter, 1% interest charges shall be applied to
the outstanding balance. The interest shall accrue along with the fines and
shall be compounded daily. In addition, the Town of Hamden may bring a civil
action against the debtor in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover
such debt.



   (E)   Appeal from citation. Any owner may appeal a citation in
accordance with Chapter 12 of the Hamden Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No extended hours convenience store shall be opened between
the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. or any portion thereof, without a
license, nor allow, create or maintain an environment that attracts or
encourages criminal activity.



   (B)   If an extended hours convenience store owner operates his, her
or its business without a license between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. or any portion thereof, the Town Planner has the authority to close the
business and issue citations for each violation of operating without a
license.



   (C)   If serious criminal activity, as defined by the Hamden Police
Chief, including, but not limited to, felonious conduct or narcotics or
controlled drug offenses, as defined by the Connecticut General Statutes,
occurs, that extended hours convenience store shall implement one of the
following security measures:



      (1)   Provide for a least two employees on the premises at all
times after 10:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; or



      (2)   Install for use by employees at all times after 10:00
p.m. and before 5:00 a.m., a secured safety enclosure of transparent
polycarbonate or other appropriate material.



   (D)   License suspension. The Town Planner may suspend a license
issued under this chapter if the owner fails to comply with any provision of
this chapter or any other town ordinance or state or federal law applicable
to an extended hours convenience store; or intentionally made a false
statement as to a material matter in the application or in a hearing
concerning the license; or upon the occurrence of any events involving
serious criminal activity; or upon the recommendation of any agents or
representatives of the Town of Hamden the Town Planner may reasonably
conclude that the business constitutes a disorderly establishment and the
extended hours convenience store license may be suspended for up to 30 days
in accordance with § 125.08, below of this chapter. The license may
thereafter be suspended again or may be revoked if two or more serious
criminal activity events occur during a 12 month period. The Town Planner may
also at his/her discretion revoke the owner’s extended hours license to
operate if the taxes on the business establishment are delinquent.



   (E)   Appeal from suspension/revocation. Any owner or person
designated by the owner may appeal his/her suspension or revocation of the
license of an extended hours convenience store in accordance with the
following procedure.



      (1)   Any person served with a notice of suspension or
revocation shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Town Planner
upon petition. The person shall file such petition at the Planning Department
requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefore, within three business days after the date notice was served. Upon
receipt of such petition, the Town Planner and/or his/her agents shall set a
time and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be
heard and to show why the notice should be modified or withdrawn.



      (2)   After the hearing, the Town Planner and/or his/her
agents shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending on the finding
as to when the provisions of this chapter and any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. The license which has been
suspended by notice shall be deemed automatically revoked if a petition for
hearing is not filed within three days after the notice is serviced.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.08  SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Before suspending or revoking an extended hours convenience
store license issued under this chapter, the Town Planner shall deliver
written notice to the owner or the registered agent that the license is being
considered for suspension or revocation. The notice must include the reason
for the proposed suspension or revocation and the actions the registrant must
take to prevent the suspension or revocation, and a statement that the
registrant has ten days after the date of delivery to comply with the notice.



   (B)   If after ten days from the date the notice required above is
delivered the registrant has not complied with the notice, the Town Planner
shall suspend or revoke the license and deliver written notice of the
revocation to the registrant. The notice must include the reason for the
suspension or revocation, the date the Town Planner orders the suspension or
revocation, and a statement informing the registrant of the right of appeal.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.09  DELIVERY OF NOTICES.



   Any written notice that the Town Planner is required to give an owner
or registered agent under this chapter is deemed to be delivered: (1) on the
date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or registrant or the
applicant or registrant's registered agent; or (2) three days after the date
the notice is placed in the United States mail with proper postage and
properly addressed to the applicant or registrant or the applicant or
registrant's registered agent at the address provided for the applicant or
registrant or the registered agent in the most recent registration
application.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.10  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   A license for a convenience store expires one year after the
date of issuance.



   (B)   A license may be renewed by mailing an application to the Town
Planner. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the
expiration of the license.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.11  NONTRANSFERABILITY.



   A license for an extended hours convenience store is not transferable.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



§ 125.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates a provision of this chapter or who fails
to perform an act required of the person by this chapter, commits a
violation. A person commits a separate violation each day or portion of a day
during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued.



      (1)   A violation offense under this chapter is punishable by
a fine of $250.



   (B)   The penalties provided for in division (A) of this section are
in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the town may have under
town ordinances and state or federal law.



(Ord. 637, passed 7-1-13)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



RESERVED



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter



         150.   BUILDING CODE



         150A.   DELAY OF DEMOLITION



         151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



         152.   HOUSING CODE



         153.   SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS



         154.   MISCELLANEOUS



         155.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



         156.   PENALTIES FOR ZONING VIOLATIONS



         157.   MUNICIPAL FINES FOR VIOLATIONS OF INLAND WETLAND
AND WATERCOURSE REGULATIONS



         158.   WAIVER OF PENALTY FOR NOT DISCLOSING THE ACTUAL
RENTAL AND RENTAL RELATED INCOME AND OPERATING EXPENSES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
CONN. GEN. STAT., § 12-63c(d)



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODE



Section



Building Code



   150.01   Adopted by reference



   150.02   [Reserved]



   150.03   [Reserved]



   150.04   Certification of back taxes



Amendments to Basic Building Code



   150.05   Authority



   150.06   Building permit fee



   150.07   Additional permit fee for certain work



   150.08   Fee for removal of building



   150.09   Fee for demolition of building



   150.10   Fee for signs, billboards,  display structures;
certificates of occupancy



   150.11   Fee for certain equipment



   150.12   Revocation of permit; incomplete work; penalties;
reinspection



   150.13   Account; disposition of fees



   150.14   License required; suspension;  revocation; fee



   150.15   Supplementary provisions



   150.16   Condemnation of structures



   150.17   Tax exemption for solar energy  heating or cooling systems



   150.18   Certificate of zoning compliance prior to certificate of
use and  occupancy



   150.19   Certificate of occupancy fee



   150.20   "Certificate of W.P.C.A. Compliance" prior to the
certificate of use and occupancy



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.01  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The State of Connecticut Building Code, adopted by this town 4-2-64,
is  hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein.  Three copies
of such code shall be found on file in the office of the clerk.



§ 150.02  [RESERVED]



§ 150.03  [RESERVED]



§ 150.04  CERTIFICATION OF BACK TAXES.



   (A)   No building application shall be approved by the Building
Department until the applicant provides the Building Department with a
statement, in writing, from the office of the Tax Collector that there are no
delinquent taxes or sewer use fees due for the property for which an
application is made or provides a statement, in writing, from the Tax
Collector, that the owner of the property for which an application is made
has entered into a payment program approved by the Tax Collector to pay off
any delinquent taxes or sewer use fees which may be due. 



(C.G.S. § 7-148(c)(2)(B))



   (B)   Exceptions.



      (1)   The Building Official may grant a building application
without the satisfaction of the above certifications if he or she certifies
in writing, as part of the file, that an emergency exists affecting the
health or safety of the occupants of the building, upon which property the
building application is sought.



      (2)   The Building Official may grant a building application
without the satisfaction of the above certification if he or she certifies in
writing, as part of the file, that the building upon which property the
application is sought is vacant and in seriously deteriorated condition.



   (C)    As used in this section, the term "building application"
shall include any application for a building, electrical, plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning, refrigeration, well pump installation, ventilating system,
exhaust system permit or a certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   As used in this section, the term "seriously deteriorated
condition" means physical condition of a vacant building that, in combination
with issues related to title, taxes and ownership create a negative value for
the property as determined by the Assessor, Building Official, and the
Director of Economic and Community Development.



(Ord. 401, passed 2-7-00; Am. Ord. 536, passed 6-12-06)



AMENDMENTS TO BASIC BUILDING CODE



§ 150.05  AUTHORITY.



   Pursuant to authority under the state basic building code, fees are
established in the following sections.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)



§ 150.06  BUILDING PERMIT FEE.



   The minimum fee for a building permit shall be $25; the fees to be paid
for a building permit shall be based on the estimated cost of the building,
excluding therefrom the cost of the mechanical installations, as follows: 
for the first $1,000 of estimated value the fee shall be $18 and an
additional fee of $18 per $1,000 or fraction thereof for building or
buildings costing from $1,001 and up.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-64; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed
1-8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01)



§ 150.07  ADDITIONAL PERMIT FEE FOR CERTAIN WORK.



   In addition to the building permit fee provided for in § 150.06 there
shall be paid an additional separate permit fee specifically for electrical
work, plumbing work, heating work, air-conditioning work, refrigeration work,
well pump installations, ventilating and exhaust systems, plus swimming pool
permits.  The fee for each of these permits shall be based on the estimated
cost of the specific work done as follows:



   (A)   A minimum fee of $25 for all work estimated to be valued at
from $1 to $1,000;



   (B)   An additional fee of $18 per $1,000 or fraction thereof above
the first $1,000 of estimated value.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed
1-8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01)



§ 150.08  FEE FOR REMOVAL OF BUILDING.



   The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be at the rate
of $8 per $100 of the estimated cost of moving plus the cost of new
foundations and all work necessary to place the building or structure in its
completed location on the site.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)



§ 150.09  FEE FOR DEMOLITION OF BUILDING.



   (A)   The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or
structure shall be at the rate of $25 per first $1,000 of estimated cost of
demolition of the building or structure.



   (B)   An additional fee of $18 per $1,000 for each $1,000 or
fraction thereof above the first $1,000 of estimated value.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed
1-8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01)



§ 150.10  FEE FOR SIGNS, BILLBOARDS, DISPLAY STRUCTURES; CERTIFICATES OF
OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   The fee for signs, billboards, and other display structures
for which permits are required under the provisions of the basic building
code shall be at the rate of $25 per first $1,000 of cost.  The minimum
permit fee shall be $25.



   (B)   An additional fee of $18 per $1,000 for each $1,000 or
fraction thereof above the first $1,000 of estimated value.



   (C)   A minimum fee of $25 for a certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86; Am. Ord. 302, passed
1-8-90; Am. Ord. 321, passed 5-4-92; Am. Ord. 436, passed 4-2-01)



§ 150.11  FEE FOR CERTAIN EQUIPMENT.



   The fee for elevator equipment, lift equipment, display structures
within or outside of a building, temporary sheds or tents, or other
permanently affixed equipment used in connection with the operation of the
building, such as compactors, ventilating equipment, exhaust systems, power
generators, temporary heating equipment and duct systems, commercial cooking
appliances, commercial hoods and fans, shall be at the rate of $8 per $1,000
of the estimated cost of equipment.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)



§ 150.12  REVOCATION OF PERMIT; INCOMPLETE WORK; PENALTIES; REINSPECTION.



   (A)   In the case of a revocation of a permit, abandonment or
discontinuation of a building project, the volume of work actually completed
shall be computed by the Building Official, and any excess fee for work not
completed shall be returned to the permit holder.



   (B)   All penalties that may have been imposed on the permit holder
under the requirements of the basic code shall first be collected. If in the
opinion of the Building Official because of the change of scope of work
covered under an existing permit a revised cost or declaration is necessary,
the Building Official shall require an additional charge be paid by the
contractor or owner and applied to the original permit.



   (C)   A $25 fee shall be required for each trade inspector called
for a re-inspection for any reason. All requests for re-inspections shall be
made, in writing, accompanied by the fine, within ten days from receipt of
written notification of such fine. When requested by the enforcing officer,
the contractor or the shall make arrangements to be present at the job at a
specified time.



   (D)   The fee for any permit issued by the Building Department shall
be either doubled or subject to a fine of $100 (whichever is more) for any
work started without proper permits issued by the Building Department.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 139, passed 3-1-76; Am. Ord. 252, passed
5-5-86; Am. Ord. 621, passed 8-6-12)



§ 150.13  ACCOUNT; DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   The building official shall keep an accurate account of all fees
collected for building permits.  The collected fees shall be deposited
monthly in the general fund.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)



§ 150.14  LICENSE REQUIRED; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION; FEE.



   (A)   Any individual, firm, or corporation desiring to construct,
enlarge, alter, or repair a building, excavate or erect a foundation or
change the occupancy of any dwelling, the construction of which is regulated
by the basic building code, shall first obtain a builder's license to engage
in the business.  The license shall remain in force from the date of
issuance until the following first Monday in January, unless revoked
sooner.  The license may be suspended or revoked by the building official
for failure to comply with the state basic building code.



   (B)   Upon revocation of a license for just cause, the builder is
prohibited from engaging as a builder or contractor in the town until a
hearing has been held by the building department board of appeals, whose
members will act as a hearing board.  Upon suspension of the license, the
suspension shall remain in effect until the violation is corrected.  Upon
revocation, the permit holder may appeal such revocation to the building
department board of appeals, as provided by § 128.6 of the state basic
building code.



   (C)   Division (A) does not apply to a home owner or individual
adding, repairing, or renovating his own home or dwelling, who has applied
for and obtained the required building permit.



   (D)   There shall be a license fee for a builder's license, of $10
per annum, payable upon issuance of the license.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)



§ 150.15  SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS.



   The following supplementary provisions are established:



   (A)   No wiring shall be installed in a new structure until such
time all rough plumbing and rough heating is installed.



   (B)   All electrical permits must be applied for by a licensed
electrician before a structural permit can be accepted for a swimming pool
installation.



   (C)   All sign installations must be approved by the zoning office
before sign permits, structural permits, and wiring permits may be issued by
the building department. 



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)



§ 150.16  CONDEMNATION OF STRUCTURES.



   The following procedure is established for condemnation of structures:



   (A)   The building official shall issue an order requiring the
removal of the structure within a time period stated within the order,
determined upon the degree of danger to public safety.  The order shall be
sent to the owner of record by certified mail (return receipt requested).  A
copy of the order shall be recorded on the land records of the town.  If the
order is undeliverable for any reason a duplicate copy of the order shall be
served upon the owner of record in the manner provided for service of process.



   (B)   The order shall inform the owner of his responsibility to
notify the building official of rejection or acceptance of the order.  If
the owner fails to inform the building official of his intention within ten
days after issuance of the order, or fails to comply with the order within
that time, the building official shall forward notification of the
condemnation to all persons having a financial interest of record in the
subject property.



   (C)   If the building official has not received notification of
intent to comply within 15 days of the sending of the notice, he shall
forward his request for demolition to the mayor for processing under
applicable provisions of the Charter and other ordinances of the town
relating to appropriation and expenditure of funds.  Not less than 3 bids
for demolition shall be obtained from contractors authorized to conduct
demolition work within the town.



   (D)   Expenditures necessary in connection with demolition of any
structure within the town shall become a lien on the land involved, shall be
recorded on the land records of the town and may be collected in the manner
provided by statute for the collection of taxes. 



(Ord. 105, passed 12-4-72; Am. Ord. 252, passed 5-5-86)



§ 150.17  TAX EXEMPTION FOR SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Any building, the construction of which is commenced on or
after October 1, 1976, and before October 1, 1991, which is equipped with a
solar energy heating or cooling system, or any building to which a solar
energy heating or cooling system is added on or after October 1, 1976, and
before October 1, 1991, is exempt from taxation in accordance with Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-81 (56), to the extent of the amount by which the assessed
valuation of the real property equipped with the solar heating or cooling
system exceeds the assessed valuation of the property equipped with the
conventional portion of the heating or cooling system, exclusive of any
portion of the system related to solar energy.  This exemption shall only
apply to the first 7 assessment years following construction of the building
or addition of any such system to a building.



   (B)   As used in this section, "SOLAR ENERGY HEATING OR COOLING
SYSTEM" means equipment, including windmills, which provides for the
collection, transfer, storage, and use of incident solar energy for water
heating, space heating, or cooling which absent the solar energy system would
require a conventional energy source, such as petroleum products, natural
gas, or electricity, and which meets standards established by regulation by
the commissioner of planning and energy policy.



   (C)   Any person who desires to claim the exemption provided in this
section shall file with the assessor or board of assessors in the town,
within 30 days following the annual assessment date, written application
claiming the exemption on a form as prescribed by the tax commissioner. 
Failure to file the application in the manner and form within the time limit
prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to the exemption for the
assessment year.



(Ord. 170, passed 6-5-78)



§ 150.18  CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE PRIOR TO THE CERTIFICATE OF USE
AND OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No certificate of use and occupancy may be issued by the
building inspector or any other duly authorized agent of the town unless a
certificate of zoning compliance as set forth in division (B) of this section
has been issued by the zoning enforcement officer or his duly designated
agent.



   (B)   The zoning enforcement officer shall issue a certificate of
zoning compliance only if the buildings and structures along with all on-site
improvements are in compliance with approved plans on file with the town
planning and zoning office, if any such plans were required, or all other
applicable zoning ordinances and regulations of the town.



   (C)   When a building or structure is entitled thereto, the zoning
enforcement officer shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance within 10
days after written applications.  The certificate shall certify compliance
with the provisions of the town zoning regulations, the land subdivision
regulations for the town.  In the event the zoning enforcement officer
determines that the certificate should not be issued, he shall state his
reasons in writing.  The decision of the zoning enforcement officer shall be
appealable to the zoning board of appeals.



   (D)   The provision in division (A) of this section to the contrary
notwith-standing, the building inspector may issue a temporary certificate of
use and occupancy if it is determined by the building inspector that weather
conditions are such that completion of all on- site improvements are
presently impractical and that the requirements of the basic building code
for the temporary certificate are complied with and further, that there is
sufficient security in the form of a bond or otherwise on file with the
zoning enforcement officer to insure satisfactory completion of all on-site
work. 



(Ord. 164, passed 4-3-75)



§ 150.19  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FEE.



   The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be $5 for each unit so
certified.



(Ord. 301, passed 1-2-90)



§ 150.20  "CERTIFICATE OF W.P.C.A. COMPLIANCE" PRIOR TO THE CERTIFICATE OF
USE AND OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No certificate of use and occupancy may be issued by the
building inspector or any other duly authorized agent of the Town unless a
"Certificate of W.P.C.A. Compliance" as set forth in division (B) of this
section has been issued by the W.P.C.A. or its duly designated agent.



   (B)   The W.P.C.A. shall issue a "Certificate of W.P.C.A.
Compliance" only if the buildings and structures are in compliance with
approved plans on file with the Department of Engineering and all other
applicable W.P.C.A. regulations, in particular that the connection to the
public sewer system and the installation of a check valve has been verified
by an inspector from the Department of Engineering.



   (C)   When a building or structure is entitled thereto, the W.P.C.A.
or its duly designated agent shall issue a "Certificate of W.P.C.A.
Compliance" within ten days after written application. The certificate shall
certify compliance with the provisions of the W.P.C.A. regulations. In the
event that the W.P.C.A. or its duly authorized agent determines that the
certificate shall not be issued, he shall state his reasons in writing.



(Ord. 370, passed 2-3-97)



CHAPTER 150A:  DELAY OF DEMOLITION



Section



   150A.01   Permit requirements



   150A.02   Additional requirements for certain structures



   150A.03   Application for permit; contents



   150A.04   Notice of intent to demolish; publication; posting



   150A.05   Form/contents of notice



   150A.06   Objection to demolition application



   150A.07   Exceptions



 



   150A.99   Penalty



§ 150A.01  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof
without first obtaining a demolition permit from the Building Official or
his/her designee in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes and the
regulations of Connecticut state agencies as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04)  Penalty, see § 150A.99



§ 150A.02  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN STRUCTURES.



   (A)   In addition to the requirements set forth in the Connecticut
General Statutes and the regulations of Connecticut state agencies as may be
amended from time to time, any building, structure or part thereof to be
demolished that falls within any one of the following categories shall be
subject to the provisions set forth in §§ 150A.03 through 150A.08, prior to
the issuance of a demolition permit.



      (1)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is 500
square feet or more in size and that is 50 years old or more; or



      (2)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is listed
in a historic resources inventory, including the town-wide historic and
architectural survey. Applicant and Building Official shall consult the
Connecticut Historical Resource Inventory to see if the property in question
is on the town, state or federal list of historic structures; or



      (3)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is on a
list of individual properties on the National Register of Historic Places; or



      (4)   Any building, structure or part thereof that is listed
as a contributing property located within a National Register Historic
District.



   (B)   If it is determined that the proposed demolition is subject to
delay as set forth above, the Building Official or his/her designee shall
inform the applicant in writing that a waiting period of 90 business days
from the date of the application shall be imposed before granting the
demolition permit.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see § 150A.99



§ 150A.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; CONTENTS.



   In addition to any other requirements set forth in the Connecticut
General Statutes or the regulations of Connecticut state agencies, Applicants
shall file an application on a form provided and verified under oath by the
town's Building Official, which application shall include the following
information:



   (A)   The name, if any, and address of the structure is to be
demolished;



   (B)   The name and address of the owner(s) of the structure to be
demolished;



   (C)   The age (year originally built) of the structure to be
demolished;



   (D)   The square footage of the structure to be demolished; and



   (E)   The names and addresses of the owners of all properties
adjoining the property on which the structure to be demolished is located,
according to a copy of the current Assessor's map which must be attached to
the application.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see § 150A.99



§ 150A.04  NOTICE OF INTENT TO DEMOLISH; PUBLICATION; POSTING.



   Within ten calendar days after the filing of an application for a
permit to demolish, the applicant shall:



   (A)   Publish in the local newspaper having the greatest circulation
in the town a "notice of intent to demolish" as set forth in § 150A.05.



   (B)   Mail copies of the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owners of all properties adjoining (abutting) the property
on which the structure to be demolished is situated.



   (C)   Mail copies of the notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the Hamden Historical Society, the Hamden Historian and any
individual, firm, corporation, organization or other entity which has
requested in writing from the town Building Official copies of any of the
notices filed pursuant to this chapter.



   (D)   Post in a conspicuous location on the property on which the
structure that is to be demolished is situated a sign at least 24 by 36
inches in size that is visible from the nearest public street or other access
way adjoining the property. The sign shall include a copy of the notice and
shall contain the word "DEMOLITION" in capital letters no less than three
inches in height. If there is more than one structure proposed for
demolition, one sign shall be posted for each structure. All signs required
hereunder shall remain posted on the property, if the permit is issued, until
the completion of all demolition activities authorized by the permit.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see § 150A.99



§ 150A.05  FORM/CONTENTS OF NOTICE.



   The notice required in § 150A.04 shall be on a form approved by the
town Building Official, shall include the words "Notice of Intent to
Demolish" in prominent letters at the head of the notice and shall include
the following information:



   (A)   The information required in § 150A.03;



   (B)   A statement that an application for a permit to demolish a
structure has been filed in the office of the town Building Official and is
currently pending and available for public inspection; and



   (C)   A statement setting forth the provisions of § 150A.06.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see § 150A.99



§ 150A.06  OBJECTION TO DEMOLITION APPLICATION.



   (A)   With respect to any application to demolish a building,
structure or part thereof, if a written objection to the issuance of the
permit is filed with the town Building Official by any individual, firm,
corporation, organization or other entity within 14 calendar days following
publication of the legal notice as required, the Building Official shall
delay issuance of the permit for demolition for a period of 90 calendar days
from the receipt of the application.



   (B)   If no objection to the demolition of the subject building,
structure or part thereof is filed within 14 calendar days of the
publication, the Building Official may issue the permit forthwith.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04) Penalty, see § 150A.99



§ 150A.07  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Any building, structure or part thereof, if a local or state
official having authority has ordered demolition because of a threat to
public health or safety; or



   (B)   Buildings or structures or parts thereof within historic
districts or historic properties as the demolition waiting periods with
respect thereto are governed by Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 7-147j and 7-147y.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04)



§ 150A.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to other penalties and remedies provided by law, each
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of
$100 per day, with each day of the violation constituting a separate
violation.



(Ord. 501, passed 4-7-04)



CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   151.01   Authority



   151.02   Declaration of policy



   151.03   Definitions



   151.04   Subdivision control



   151.05   Subdivision design standards



   151.06   Specifications for maps and plans



   151.07   Filing of maps and plans



   151.08   Variances



   151.09   Records and reviews



   151.10   Chart of pavement types



   151.11   Chart of highway classes



   151.12   Road construction specifications; minimum



   151.13   Notes



   151.14   Violation prohibited



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  Authority.



   The town plan and zoning commission prescribes the following rules and
regulations to control the subdivision of land pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat.,
Ch. 45, § 8-25, As provided in the act, these rules and regulations
constitute part of the official plan of Hamden, and no subdivision, either
public or private, shall be authorized in the town until its character and
extent has been submitted to arid approved by the commission and the
legislative council.



('66 Code, § 63-1)



§ 151.02  Declaration of policy.



   The purpose of these subdivision regulations is to achieve orderly
urban development through land subdivision, to promote and develop the
utilization of land to assure the best possible urban environment, to cause
land subdivision to be in accordance with the master plan for the town, and
to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community.



('66 Code, § 63-2)



§ 151.03  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively:



   (A)   "Access drive." A private right-of-way providing secondary
vehicular-access to the side or rear of 3 or more lots, parcels or properties.



   (B)   "Agreement." An agreement between the owner, developer and
contractor of the subdivision and the town.



   (C)   "Block." An area bounded by streets.



   (D)   "Cartway." The portion of a street for vehicular use.



   (E)   "Commission." The town plan and zoning commission, except when
the term is used in relation to powers or matters ex pressly reserved for
either the planning section or the zoning section under the special act
creating the town plan and zoning commission. In that case, the term
"commission" shall be deemed to mean either the zoning section or the
planning section in accordance with the duties and powers of the respective
sections as provided by such special act.



   (F)   "Dead end street." A street having but one vehicular access to
another street, and not terminated by a vehicular turnaround.



   (G)   "Easement." A right granted for the purpose of limited public
or quasi-public use across private land.



   (H)   "Improved street." A street with paved cartway and curbs, and
provided, if specified, with sidewalks or curbs.



   (I)   "Interior walk." A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending
from a street into a block or across a block to another street.



   (J)   "Legally opened street." A street for which the town accepts
responsibility for public use.



   (K)   "Loam." Loose, fertile soil, suitable for growing grass and
shrubs.



   (L)   "Lot." A plot or parcel of land which is, or in the future may
be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement.



   (M)   "Master plan for the town." A comprehensive plan for the town
showing its present and planned physical development drawn pursuant to Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 8-23.



   (N)   "Multiple dwelling." A detached dwelling, designed and
occupied for dwelling purposes by more than 2 families.



   (O)   "Performance bond." A surety bond issued by an insurance
company or bonding company licensed to do business in the state.



   (P)   "Plot plan." A plan prepared primarily for title purposes
which shows the location, dimensions and bearings of parcels of ground.



   (Q)   "Preliminary subdivision plan." A preliminary drawing of the
entire property under single ownership, showing approximate proposed street
and lot layout for the specific area, to be submitted as a basis for
consideration prior to the preparation of a record subdivision plan, except
such areas as may be exempted by specific direction of the commission.



   (R)   "Print." A white paper reproduction of the original drawing.



   (S)   "Private street." A street for which the abutting property
owners only have complete legal and financial responsibility.



   (T)   "Property data map." A map showing all existing conditions
affecting or affected by the property to be subdivided, required prior to the
submission of an application for subdivision approval.



   (U)   "Record subdivision plan." A complete and exact subdivision
plan, prepared in form for official recording, to define property lines,
proposed streets and other improvements for inclusion in one agreement.



   (V)   "Reverse frontage lot." A lot extending between and having
frontage on a major street or highway and a residential street, with
vehicular access solely from the latter.



   (W)   "Right-of-way." Land reserved for use as a street, interior
walk or for other public purpose.



   (X)   "Setback or building line." The line within a property de
fining the required minimum distance between any structure and the adjacent
right-of-way or property line as defined and established by the regulations
of the town plan and zoning commission, or as defined and restricted in the
front-yard restrictions of the zoning regulations or by building lines
established under special or general acts relating to the town, or as
required herein.



   (Y)   "Sight distance." The maximum distance of unobstructed vision
(in a horizontal or vertical plane) along a street 4 feet above the ground at
any given point on the street.



   (Z)   "Street." A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way,
whether dedicated or not, intended for use as a means of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic. Street shall be deemed to include avenue, boulevard,
court, expressway, highway, lane, road and the like. Streets may be further
subdivided as follows:



      (1)   A major highway is a street used primarily for traffic
not local in destination.



      (2)   A major street is a street which carries traffic,
generally local, to or from the system of major highways or which serves as
main circulation for a large area.



      (3)   A primary residential street is a street which serves
the prime function of collecting or distributing intracommunity residential
traffic.



      (4)   A secondary residential street is a street which is used
primarily for residential access.



      (5)   A tertiary residential street is a street which provides
access to homes on lots in excess of 20,000 square feet, having 100 feet
minimum frontage at the building line and having no house or garage located
within 50 feet of such right-of-way; or one which serves not more than 6 lots
or parcels.



      (6)   A marginal access street is a major street, parallel and
adjacent to a major street or major highway, providing access to abutting
properties and controlling the location of intersection with such major
street or highway.



      (7)   A cul-de-sac street is a minor street having but one
vehicular access to another street and terminated by a paved ve hicular
turn-around.



   (AA)   "Subdivider." The owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent
of the owner or equitable owner of the property subdivided.



   (BB)   "Subdivision."



      (1)   A division of any part or area of land by the owner or
his agent, into lots or parcels 3 or :more in number for the purpose of
conveyance, transfer, improvement or sale with or without appurtenant roads,
streets, lanes, driveways and ways dedicated or intended to be dedicated to
public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon. A
subdivision includes division of a parcel of land having frontage on an
existing improved street into 3 or more lots, one or more of which have
frontage on the existing street.



      (2)   Any development of a parcel of land which involves
installation of streets and driveways whether or not dedicated and whether or
not the parcel is divided for the purpose of immediate conveyance, transfer
or sale.



      (3)   The term subdivision includes resubdivision and, as
appropriate, shall refer to the process of subdividing land or to the land so
subdivided.



      (4)   Where only a portion of land is subdivided, the balance
of such tract for which subdivision is not proposed need not be included in
the record subdivision plan as required hereunder. if the balance of such
tract is later subdivided, the provisions of these regulations shall apply.



   (CC)   "These regulations." The subdivision regulations of the town
plan and zoning commission.



('66 Code, § 63-3)



§ 151.04  Subdivision control.



   (A)   No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be
effected, and no street, driveway, sanitary sewer, storm water sewer, water
main or public service or other facilities in connection with land
subdivision shall be constructed, maintained, opened or dedicated for public
use, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, until
a subdivision plan has been approved and the provisions of these regulations
have been complied with.



   (B)   No subdivider shall sell any lot in a subdivision, or erect
any building on land in a subdivision, unless and until a subdivision plan
has been approved, and subject to the provisions of § 151.07 (F).



   (C)   The commission shall review and approve or disapprove
subdivision plans and shall administer provisions of these regulations.



   (D)   The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to the
sale or conveyance of land in excess of 5 acres for purposes other than land
subdivision and the immediate improvement thereof for resale; provided the
seller furnishes to the commission a plot plan of the lots of land so sold or
conveyed and the commission approves such plot plan based upon a finding that
such plan is not contrary to the public interest and the purpose of these
regulations.



   (E)   The terms and provisions of these regulations shall not apply
to pending or previously approved land subdivision plans.



('66 Code, § 63-4)



§ 151.05  Subdivision design standards.



   (A)   Application. The principles, standards and requirements set
forth in this section shall be applied by the commission in its review of
proposed subdivision. Such principles, standards and requirements shall be
deemed as minimal in nature, and whenever the principles, standards or
requirements of other town codes, ordinances or regulations are higher or
more restrictive, the latter shall control any application for proposed
subdivision.



   (B)   Recommendations. In the consideration of subdivision the
commission shall make such recommendations as seem necessary to preserve and
enhance or produce scenic values and conditions for the improvement of
subdivision or development design.



   (C)   Suitability of land use:



      (1)   Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to
be subdivided. Land of such character that it cannot be safely used for
building purposes because of exceptional danger to health or peril from fire,
flood or other menace shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for
such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard, until appropriate measures have been taken by the
subdivider to lessen such hazards.



      (2)   All plans shall be in reasonable conformity to the
master plan for the town as adopted by the town plan and zoning commission.



   (D)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips of land, which in the opinion
of the commission show an intent by the subdivider to control access to land
of another, are prohibited.



   (E)   Street system:



      (1)   Streets shall be logically related to the topography so
as to produce reasonable grades and suitable building sites.



      (2)   Proposed streets shall, conform to the requirements of a
general plan of the area as developed by the commission.



      (3)   Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards and requirements of the department of public works and engineering.



      (4)   Residential streets shall be so laid out as to
discourage through traffic; however, the arrangement of streets shall provide
for the continuation of existing or proposed major streets or highways.



      (5)   If lots resulting from original subdivision are large
enough to permit resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not
subdivided, adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall
be provided as necessary.



      (6)   The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall
provide for the continuation of streets as required by the commission in
adjoining subdivision or for their proper future projection when adjoining
property is not subdivided, and shall be of a width consistent with that of
existing connecting streets, or 50 feet, whichever is greater.



      (7)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
proposed major street or highway, the commission may require marginal access
streets, driveways, reverse frontage lots or such additional treatment as
will reduce the number of intersections with such street or highway, separate
local and through traffic, and provide protection for abutting properties.



      (8)   Dead end streets shall be prohibited, except as short
stubs to permit future street extension into adjoining tracts, in which case
they shall be provided with a temporary turnaround of standard cul-de-sac
radius.



   (F)   Cul-de-sac streets. CuIs-de-sac, permanently designed as such,
shall be of reasonable length, not exceeding 500 feet, and shall have at the
closed end a turnaround containing a right-of-way having an outside radius of
not less than 60 feet, which shall be paved to a radius of not less than 50
feet.



   (G)   Street requirements:



      (1)   Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths shall
conform to the town plan, and where not shown thereon shall conform to the
following:



         (a)   A primary residential street shall have a cart-way
40 feet in width centered in a right-of-way 60 feet in width.



         (b)   A secondary residential street shall have a
cart-way 30 feet in width centered in a right-of-way 50 feet in width.



         (c)   A tertiary residential street shall have a cartway
20 feet in width centered in a right-of-way 50 feet in width.



         (d)   A marginal access street shall have a cartway 26
feet in width included in a right-of-way which shall vary with conditions but
in no case shall be less than 36 feet.



      (2)   Additional right-of-way and cartway requirements may be
required by the commission in order to lessen congestion in the streets, to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to facilitate the adequate
provision for transportation and other public requirements and to promote the
general welfare.



      (3)   Short extension of existing streets with lesser
right-of-way or cartway requirements may be permitted at the discretion of
the commission.



   (H)   Street alignment:



      (1)   Whenever street lines are deflected in excess of 5º,
connection shall be made by a horizontal curve.



      (2)   To ensure adequate sight distance, center line radii for
horizontal curves shall be laid out in accordance with the following
standards:



         (a)   Primary residential street, 150 feet.



         (b)   Secondary residential street, 100 feet.



         (c)   Tertiary residential street, 100 feet.



      (3)   A tangent of 50 feet minimum shall be required between 2
successive curves turning in opposite directions.



   (I)   Street grades:



      (1)   Center line grades shall be not less than 0.7%.



      (2)   Center line grades shall not exceed the following
standards:



         (a)   Primary and secondary residential streets, 8%.



         (b)   Tertiary residential street, 10%.



      (3)   Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade
exceeding 3% and shall be designed in relation to the extent of the grade
change and to provide the following minimum sight distances:



         (a)   Primary residential streets, 200 feet.



         (b)   Secondary residential streets, 150 feet.



         (c)   Tertiary residential streets, 100 feet.



      (4)   Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 4 %, leveling areas having a maximum grade of 2% shall
be provided for a minimum distance of 25 feet measured from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street.



   (J)   Street intersections:



      (1)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of
less than 75º. In all cases intersections shall be designed so as to provide
satisfactory land usage and safe traffic condition.



      (2)   Intersections with major streets or major highways
should be reduced to a minimum.



      (3)   Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall
be laid out either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of
125 feet between their center lines.



      (4)   Curb radii shall be provided at street intersection
varying according to the types of streets intersecting and the angle at which
they intersect: provided, however, that none shall be less than 15 feet.



   (K)   Street names:



      (1)   Names of new streets shall not duplicate, nor bear
phonetic resemblance to, the names of existing streets within the town.



      (2)   Streets which join or are in alignment with streets of
abutting or neighboring properties shall bear the same name.



   (L)   Blocks:



      (1)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be designed
with due regard for:



         (a)   Provision of suitable building sites for the type
of use contemplated.



         (b)   Eliminating of excessive street area.



         (c)   Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.



         (d)   Topography and drainage.



         (e)   Requirements of the town zoning regulations.



      (2)   Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to
accommodate 2 tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots are required.



      (3)   Interior walks may be required where necessary to
facilitate circulation or provide access to community facilities.



   (M)   Lots and lot sizes:



      (1)   Frontage shall be measured at the building line or at
the street line, whichever is larger.



      (2)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines.



      (3)   Reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation from traffic arteries or to provide
protection for abutting properties or to overcome certain conditions of
topography or orientation.



      (4)   There shall be adequate width and area on every lot
after the erection of a residence to permit the parking within the lot of at
least one car for each family dwelling unit permitted under the zoning
regulations.



      (5)   All lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of
the zoning regulations of the town. The width and depth of the lots shall be
exclusive of the right-of-way of any access drive.



      (6)   In areas where no off-lot sewerage or water facilities
are available, the director of health may require lot sizes in excess of the
minimum requirements of the zoning regulations. In fixing the allowable lot
size, the director of health shall give consideration to the topography of
the site; the location of existing and proposed buildings on the lot, and
existing buildings on adjacent lots; the location of existing sewerage and
water facilities on adjacent property; the water table; the geology and
characteristics of the soil; the type and size of proposed sewerage and water
facilities and the estimated use thereof.



      (7)   In areas where no off-lot sewerage or water facilities
are available, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide
adequate information to prove that the area of each lot is adequate to permit
the installation and operation of an individual sewage disposal system
(septic tank and drain field). Such in formation shall consist of the report
of the director of health re garding seepage and other tests he may require.
The subdivider shall provide the necessary equipment and labor for making
these tests.



      (8)   Lots with no frontage on an accepted street or on a
street proposed for acceptance shall not be permitted.



      (9)   All lots in a subdivision shall be numbered consecu
tively with the first lot designated by the numeral one. No fraction, suffix
or prefix shall be permitted. Adjoining subdivisions having the same name
shall not duplicate the numbers of the previous plan, but shall continue the
sequence used in the previous plan.



   (N)   Driveway and easements:



      (1)   Where permitted, access drives serving residential
properties on 2 sides must have a minimum paved width of 15 feet. In cases
where access drives serve properties on one side only, the commission may
permit a paving of narrower width; however, in no case shall access drives be
paved less than 12 feet wide.



      (2)   Access drives may be required in commercial and
industrial subdivisions, except where other adequate, provision is made for
off-street loading and parking consistent with the use proposed. Where
required these access drives shall have a minimum paved width of 20 feet.



      (3)   Dead end and access drives shall be avoided; however,
where this proves impossible, they shall be terminated with a paved, T-bar,
turning area having a minimum depth of 20 feet on both sides of the access
drive and a minimum width of 10 feet.



      (4)   Access drive intersections and sharp changes in
alignment shall be avoided, and where necessary, corners shall be rounded or
cut back sufficiently to permit safe vehicular circulation.



      (5)   Easements shall be provided as necessary for public
utilities and shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.



      (6)   Such easement shall be located on or be adjacent to rear
or side lot lines.



      (7)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there
shall be a drainage easement of right-of-way conforming substantially to the
line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to provide
drainage and permit access for maintenance by the town.



      (8)   Where a subdivision adjoins a park, watercourse or other
land use different from that proposed, the commission may require a setback
from such park, watercourse or other land use for the protection of or
separation of the several land uses; provided, such setback shall be not less
than 10 feet nor more than 50 feet.



   (O)   Community facilities:



      (1)   Areas set aside for parks and playgrounds to be
dedicated or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners by
covenant in the deed, whether or not required by the commission, shall be of
reasonable size and character for neighborhood playgrounds or other
recreational uses.



      (2)   The commission may require that an area of reasonable
size, exclusive of streets, shall be reserved or dedicated for recreational
or public use.



      (3)   If a subdivider reserves an area for recreational or
public use, the area shall be adequate for building sites for the facilities,
landscaping and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed.



   (P)   Approval of appropriate departments. All improvements such as
streets, driveways, water mains and sewers shall be constructed at the
expense of the subdivider in accordance with the specifications set forth in
the material following § 151.12.



   (Q)   Tree planting. The subdivider shall supply and plant, to the
specifications of the director of public works for genus, size and number
(depending on the width of the lot), not less than one tree per 60 foot lot.



   (R)   Loam. All areas excepting cartways, sidewalks and other
hard-surfaced areas shall be covered with a minimum of 4 inches of loam,
except the areas which are to be left in their natural condition, such as
rocky outcroppings, swamps, etc., and which areas are delineated on the
property data map. (See § 151.06 (A).



   (S)   Street signs. Street signs shall be erected by the public
works and engineering department at the expense of the subdivider.



   (T)   Merestones. Merestones set at all control points within a
subdivision shall be of the type as specified by the public works and
engineering department.



   (U)   In matters of judgment or interpretation of the above general
standards, the opinion of the commission shall prevail.



('66 Code, § 63-5)



§ 151.06  Specifications for maps and plans.



   (A)   Specifications for property data map:



      (1)   Property data maps shall be drawn at a scale of 50 feet
to one inch, on individual sheets not to exceed 24 by 36 inches.



      (2)   The following information shall be shown thereon:



         (a)   Name of the subdivider.



         (b)   Name of the registered owner.



         (c)   Name of and registration number of and
certification by a registered engineer, or land surveyor responsible for the
certification of maps.



         (d)   North point and scale and date.



         (e)   Tract boundaries with bearings or angles and
distances.



         (f)   Adjacent streets with names and widths where
established. In addition each tract shall be referenced to adjacent street
lines and to the town coordinate system where applicable.



         (g)   Name of adjacent subdivisions, or of owners, and
of record owners of adjacent unplatted properties.



         (h)   Topography based on datum approved by the public
works and engineering department and showing contours at vertical intervals
of not more than 5 feet.



         (i)   Lines and limits of all easements and rights-ofway.



         (j)   Limits of zoning classifications in which the
property lies.



         (k)   All merestones or other established control points
within the property.



         (l)   Approximate location of watercourses, tree masses,
rock outcrops, existing buildings and actual location of sewers, inlets,
water mains, easements and rights-of-way, fire hydrants. railroads, existing
and accepted streets and their established grades.



   (B)   Specifications for preliminary plan and data.



      (1)   The preliminary plan shall indicate in sketch form on
the property data map the following information:



         (a)   Proposed street layout, street names, lot lines
and lot identification numbers. Streets shall indicate proposed cartway and
right-of-way widths, approximate radii of curvature and approximate grades;
lots shall show approximate dimensions and areas when required by the
commission.



         (b)   Sites dedicated or reserved for purposes other
than residential.



         (c)   Proposed sewerage and drainage.



      (2)   When required, the subdivider shall submit data on
subsoil conditions.



   (C)   Specifications for record subdivision plan:



      (1)   The record subdivision plan shall be drawn to a scale of
50 feet to one inch, on individual sheets not to exceed 24 by 36 inches.



      (2)   The record subdivision plan shall indicate the following
information on one or more sheets as required for clarity except that
subparagraphs (a) and (d) below shall be shown on all sheets submitted.



         (a)   Name of the subdivider and of the owner in whose
name the subdivision is to be recorded.



         (b)   Title.



         (c)   North point, scale and date.



         (d)   Name, registration number of and certification by
a registered professional engineer or land surveyor.



         (e)   Primary control points, approved by the department
of public works and engineering, or ties to such control points to which all
pertinent engineering data shall be referred.



         (f)   Boundaries, with distances, bearings and location
of monuments. Such dimensions shall be in feet and tenths of a foot.



         (g)   Name of adjacent subdivisions, or of owners, and
of record owners of adjacent unplatted properties.



         (h)   Topography based on datum approved by the
department of public works and engineering, and showing contours at intervals
of 5 feet.



         (i)   Street lines, street names, lot lines and lot
identification numbers, easements, rights-of-way and other land divisions and
their purpose.



         (j)   Radii, lengths of curves, and tangent bearings for
all streets.



         (k)   Right-of-way and cartway widths for all streets.



         (l)   When required by the department of public works
and engineering, street profiles, details of culverts or other necessary
data, as specified by the department of public works and engineering and as
stipulated in the material following § 151.12.



         (m)   Adjacent streets with names and dimensions.



         (n)   Building lines or street setback lines.



         (o)   Calculated areas of all lots where area approxi
mated is within 5% of the minimum area requirements.



         (p)   Location and boundaries of all nondedicated ways
or easements, and of drainage ways.



         (q)   Location and outline of all existing structures to
remain.



         (r)   Location of all watercourses.



         (s)   When required by the commission the location,
depth and size of sewers, storm water drains, water lines, location of wells
and cesspools or septic tanks.



         (t)   A certification showing that applicant is owner of
the land, or his qualified representative.



         (u)   Statement dedicating streets, rights-of-way or
other areas for public use as may be required by the town.



         (v)   Such other certificates, affidavits or
endorsements as the commission may require for the enforcement of these
regulations.



('66 Code, § 63-6)



§ 151.07  Filing of maps and plans.



   (A)   Filing of property data map:



      (1)   Every subdivider shall file with the commission 2 prints
of the property data map, prior to filing an application for the conditional
approval of the preliminary plan. Property data maps shall conform to the
provisions of § 151.06 (A).



      (2)   Following the filing of the property data map and prior
to the preparation of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall ascertain
from the commission those elements and conditions which should be taken into
consideration in the design of the subdivision. These shall include any
features of the master plan for the town and its amendments, or of any plans
of the commission, including but not limited to proposed streets, recreation
areas, drainage reservations, shopping centers and school sites.



   (B)   Filing and approval of preliminary plan:



      (1)   Written application shall be made to the clerk of the
commission on a form supplied by him on or before the first of the month
during which the application is to be acted upon by the commission. There
shall be a fee of $10 accompanying the application.



      (2)   A minimum of 6 prints of the preliminary plan and
supplementary data shall be submitted to the commission together with the
written application for conditional approval. Preliminary plans shall comply
with the provisions of § 151.06 (B).



      (3)   The clerk of the commission shall, upon receipt of the
plans, check the plans to ascertain that they comply with these regulations
and the zoning regulations.



      (4)   Approval of other departments is necessary before action
can be taken by the commission:



         (a)   Approval of the proposed methods of sanitary
sewage disposal shall be expressed in writing by the director of health.



         (b)   Approval of the engineering design of the street
and drainage system shall be expressed in writing by the director of public
works and engineering.



      (5)   When a subdivision plan abuts a state highway, the clerk
of the commission shall, within 3 days of the receipt of application for
subdivision approval, transmit the plans and all appurtenant data to the
state highway commissioner for consideration and recommendation before action
is taken by the commission. If no recommendation is received within 14 days,
the commission shall assume that there are no objections to the plan.



      (6)   When a subdivision plan abuts a town boundary, the clerk
of the commission shall, within 3 days of the receipt of application for
subdivision approval, transmit the plans and all appurtenant data to the head
of the government of the adjoining town for consideration and recommendation
before action is taken by the commission. If no recommendation is received
within 30 days, the commission shall assume that there are no objections to
the plan.



      (7)   The commission shall act on the application for approval
of the preliminary plan forthwith except that if it fails to act within 60
days its approval shall be assumed.



         (a)   If it approves the preliminary plan the commission
shall express such approval as conditional approval and shall notify the
subdivider and the department of public works and engineering of the approval.



         (b)   In the event of disapproval, the commission shall
notify the subdivider in writing, not more than 10 days following, of its
action and its reason therefor.



      (8)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plan shall not
constitute approval of the record subdivision plan, but shall be deemed as an
expression of approval of the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation
of the record subdivision plan.



   (C)   Agreement and performance bond requirements:



      (1)   The subdivider shall, after conditional approval is
granted to the subdivider, sign an agreement prepared by the commission
containing all phases of improvement to be effected by the subdivider. The
registered engineer or land surveyor certifying to the plans submitted to the
commission shall make an estimate of the cost of all the required
improvements and submit such estimate to the clerk of the commission. Upon
approval of this estimate, the subdivider shall be so notified and will
submit an approved performance bond in an amount equal to the approved
estimate.



      (2)   The subdivider shall have the full responsibility for
design and construction of adequate drainage systems and streets, and for the
acquisition of rights-of-way as shown on the record subdivision plan or as
are necessary for the protection of third parties or for the access to the
subdivision.



      (3)   The subdivider shall provide for the design and con
struct all facilities such as roads and sewers, etc., shown on the record
subdivision plan or as are necessary for access to such subdivision or for
the protection of the right of third parties.



   (D)   Filing and approval of the record subdivision plan:



      (1)   Record subdivision plans shall comply with the pro
visions of § 151.06 (C) of these regulations, and shall be in substantial
conformity with the preliminary plan, as approved. A record subdivision plan
may consist of a portion of the approved preliminary plan, if desired.



      (2)   Application for the approval of the record subdivision
plan shall be submitted in writing to the commission within 6 months after
approval of the preliminary plan; otherwise such approval shall become null
and void unless an extension of time is applied for in writing and granted by
the commission:



         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by a minimum
of 7 copies of each drawing comprising the record sub division plan, of which
2 copies shall be on linen, and other exhibits required for approval.



         (b)   The commission shall act upon the application
forthwith, except that if it fails to act within 60 days its approval shall
be presumed.



         (c)   The approval of the commission shall be noted on
all copies of each drawing comprising the record subdivision plan. The 2
linen prints shall be signed, with one retained by the commission and the
other by the town clerk, the distribution of the other 5 prints with the
approval noted thereon shall be: one copy each to the department of public
works and engineering, the department of public health, the building
department, fire department and to the subdivider.



         (d)   The commission may, if it deems necessary, hold a
public hearing on a record subdivision plan, after due notice in a daily
newspaper published in the vicinity, which notice shall be published at least
5 days prior to the hearing. At this hearing, the subdivider or his agent and
all other parties whose interest may be affected by the proposed subdivision
shall be heard.



         (e)   In the event of disapproval the commission will
notify the subdivider of its reasons therefor in writing not more than 10
days following such action.



   (E)   Record filing. The record subdivision plan must be filed in
the office of the town clerk within 3 months after the date of final approval
by the commission, with such filing contingent upon fulfillment of all
related legal requirements. An extension of time for a period not exceeding
one year may be granted by the commission upon application by the subdivider.



   (F)   Completion. The subdivider shall construct all streets, curbs
and sewers as provided in the subdivision agreement prior to the sale of any
lot within such subdivision unless the contract for sale expressly prohibits
the occupancy of such premises at a time prior to the completion of the
streets, curbs and sewers. Sidewalks shall be installed within the time
limited by the terms of the agreement for completion of the subdivision,
which shall not exceed 2 years.



§ 151.08  Variances.



   The commission may authorize the variances from the terms of these
regulations as will not be contrary to the interact of public health, safety
or general welfare, and where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of these regula tions will result in serious
practical difficulty; provided, however, that the purpose and intent of these
regulations shall be observed and substantial justice done. Where the
subdivider desires the variance of any provisions of the foregoing
regulations, he shall include a request therefor, with a statement of reasons
for such request, with the application for the approval of the preliminary or
final plan.



('66 Code, § 63-8)



§ 151.09  Records and reviews.



   (A)   The commission shall keep a record of its findings, decisions
and recommendations relative to all subdivision applications filed with it.
All such records shall be public records.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any administrative decision of any
employee of the commission, with respect to any interpretation or requirement
of any provision of these regulations, shall have a right to a review by the
commission within 30 days of the mailing or communication of the decision.
Any person requesting such review may appear before the commission in person
or by agent or attorney.



('66 Code, § 63-9)



§ 151.10  Chart of pavement types.



A



 



 
Subbase
 
Base
 
Surface





Class A 1 —

 
8 inch gravel
 
7 inch ABM
 
3 inch AC concrete



2 —

 
8 inch gravel
 
 
10 inch-8 inch-10 inch PC concrete



3 —

 
8 inch gravel
 
8 inch PC crete
 
2 inch AC concrete



4 —

 
 
 



Class B 1 —

 
12 inch gravel
 
 
3 inch AC concrete



2 —

 
9 inch gravel
 
3 inch WBM
 
3 inch ABM



3 —

 
8 inch gravel
 
4 inch ABM
 
3 inch ABM Class



C 1 —

 
Granular local material
 
9 inch gravel
 
3-coat MC-1-2-3 sand



2 —

 
Granular local material
 
9 inch gravel
 
2-coat MC-1-3 sand




 
 
 
1-coat RC-5 sand



3 —

 
Granular local material
 
8 inch WBM
 
2-coat RC-2-5 stone




 



('66 Code, § 63-13)



§ 151.11  Chart of highway classes.



 



 

A

 

AB

 

B

 

C






Daily traffic

 

4,000 to 20,000

 

750 to 12,000

 

750 to 4,000

 

300 to 750




Surface width

 

2 - 25 feet

 

40 feet

 

36 feet

 

30 feet




Shoulders

 

10 feet

 

8 feet

 

4 feet

 

0




Maximum grade

 

4%

 

6%

 

6%

 

8%




Minimum grade

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.8%

 

1%




Maximum crown

 

1/8 inch to 1.0 foot

 

1/4 inch to 1.0 foot

 

1/4 inch to 1.0 foot

 

1/2 inch to 1.0 foot




Minimum right-of-way

 

100 feet

 

80 feet

 

60 feet

 

50 feet





 



('66 Code, § 63-14)



§ 151.12  Road construction specifications, minimum.



   (A)   Class C-I:



      (1)   Base graded to proper line and cross section of suit
able material none of which is organic. Satisfactorily compacted.



      (2)   Eight inches of bank-run gravel compacted in place to
final grade.



      (3)   MC-1 Cutbach asphalt applied at a rate of 0.5 to 0.7
gallons per square yard and allowed to penetrate. If necessary (still tacky)
sanded where required 8 to 24 hours later.



      (4)   After 5 to 7 days - MC-2 or MC-3 applied at a rate of
.05 gallons per square yard and covered within one hour with sharp sand and
lightly broomed.



      (5)   After an additional 7 to 20 days MC-3 applied at a rate
of 0.35 to 0.5 gallons per square yard and sanded and broomed.



   (B)   Class C-II:



      (1)   Similar to C-1



      (2)   Similar to C-1



      (3)   Similar to C-1



      (4)   Similar to C-1



      (5)   After an additional 7 to 20 days MC-5 applied at a rate
of 0.3 to 0.4 gallons per square yard and 1/2 inch stone chips applied at a
rate of 25 to 40 pounds per square yard and thoroughly rolled.



('66 Code, § 63-15)



§ 151.13  Notes.



   (A)   Rolled bank-run gravel. Materials, workmanship, construction,
etc., shall be in accordance with § 3.02, Rolled Gravel Base, Connecticut
State Highway Specification, latest edition or amendment thereto.



   (B)   Bituminous material. Materials, application, methods of
construction, etc., shall be in accordance with Section Bituminous Material
for Surface, Connecticut State Highway Specification, latest edition or
amendment thereto.



   (C)   Bituminous gutters. Bituminous gutters as approved shall be
constructed on all grades greater than 5% and shall be in accordance with §
8.02 Bituminous Gutters, Connecticut State Highway Specification, latest
edition or amendment thereto.



   (D)   Bituminous curbs. Bituminous curbs as approved shall be
constructed only when concrete curbs and sidewalks have been waived by the
proper authorities having jurisdiction.



   (E)   Plans and profiles. Plans and profiles of all roads or
streets, drainage lines, catch basin locations, manholes, sanitary sewer
lines, utilities, etc., to be submitted with approved layout. No gravel base
to be laid until subbase has been approved by the engineering department.



   (F)   Concrete sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks and curbs to be 1:2:4
concrete and Constructed to dimensions shown.



   (G)   Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches to be 6 inches thick
and constructed as shown.



   (H)   Street curvature. Minimum center line radius to be 180 feet on
secondary streets (see "minimum sight distance" sketch, available for
inspection in the office of the town planner).



   (I)   Street width. Minimum street width is 50 feet.



   (J)   Street signs. Street signs of the standard type used by the
town shall be placed at all street intersections.



   (K)   Curb radius. Minimum radii of all curbs of street
intersections to be not less than 20 feet.



   (L)   Merestones. Merestones as shown on plans shall be set on both
sides of street at all angle points of the streets, the beginning and end of
each curve, at all street intersections and at all other critical points on
the street lines.



   (M)   Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac to have radii of not less than 60
feet. Wherever necessary either type "A" or type "B" as shown hereon
(sketches of types "A" and "B" culs-de-sac are available for inspection in
the office of the town planner), may be used.



('66 Code, § 63-16)



§ 151.14  Violation prohibited.



   (A)   As provided in Conn. Gen. Stat., Title 8, Ch. 126 no person
shall lay out or open any street or tract of land within the town without a
map or plat of such street or tract having been approved by the commissioner
and filed in the office of the town clerk and shall be fined for each lot
sold or offered for sale or so subdivided.



   (B)   Any subdivision of land in violation of the terms of these
regulations is declared to be a public nuisance and the appropriate officers
of the town are authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceedings
to restrain or abate such violation.



('66 Code, § 63-10) Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.99  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of § 151.14 (A) shall be fined not more
than $200.



('66 Code, § 63-10)



CHAPTER 152:  HOUSING CODE



Section



General



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Director of health to enforce



Inspections



   152.05   Inspection of dwellings, premises, etc.



   152.06   Coordination of enforcement



   152.07   Administrative liability



Service of Notices; Hearings



   152.10   Notice of violation



   152.11   Grounds for content may be filed



   152.12   Time limit



   152.13   Designation of referees



   152.14   Powers of referee



   152.15   Record of proceedings



   152.16   Time limit for decision



   152.17   Further hearing by board of review



   152.18   Board of review to grant hearing



   152.19   Notice of hearing



   152.20   Rights of petitioner



   152.21   Conditions for extension of time



   152.22   Conditions for variances



   152.23   Conditions for setting aside final decision



   152.24   Emergency determined by director of health



   152.25   Conference granted to owner



Basic Equipment and Facilities, Minimum Standards



   152.30   Compliance required



   152.31   Kitchen sink required



   152.32   Flush water closet and lavatory basin



   152.33   Bathtub or shower



   152.34   Limitation of use of facilities



   152.35   Hot and cold water lines



   152.36   Rubbish storage



   152.37   Garbage disposal



   152.38   Water-heating facilities



   152.39   Means of egress



Light, Heating; Minimum Standards



   152.45   Compliance required



   152.46   Total window area



   152.47   Adequate ventilation



   152.48   Requirements for bathroom and water closet



   152.49   Electric service requirements



   152.50   Heating facilities



   152.51   Public halls and stairways lighted



   152.52   Screens required



   152.53   Rodent control



Dwelling Units, Sanitary Maintenance



   152.55   Compliance required



   152.56   Foundation, wall, roof, etc.



   152.57   Window, exterior door and basement hatchway



   152.58   Stairs and porch



   152.59   Installation of plumbing fixtures



   152.60   Floor surfaces maintained



   152.61   Maintenance of all facilities



   152.62   Rental or occupancy of vacant dwelling unit



   152.63   Discontinuance of service



Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements



   152.65   Compliance required



   152.66   Floor space



   152.67   Space requirement for sleeping rooms



   152.68   Ceiling height



   152.69   Smoke alarms



   152.70   Basement space prohibited; conditions



Owner's Responsibility



   152.75   Maintenance of premises



   152.76   Responsibilities of occupant



   152.77   Rubbish disposal



   152.78   Garbage disposal



   152.79   Screens, storm doors and windows



   152.80   Extermination of insects, rodents



   152.81   Plumbing fixtures



Rooming House



   152.85   Compliance required; exceptions



   152.86   Rooming house permit



   152.87   Inspection



   152.88   Permit suspended; conference granted



   152.89   Plumbing facility requirements



   152.90   Bed linen and towels supplied



   152.91   Floor space in sleeping rooms



   152.92   Means of egress



   152.93   Sanitary maintenance



   152.94   Hotels, motels, dormitories, clubs



Unfit Dwellings; Legal Procedure



   152.100   Compliance required



   152.101   Defects in unfit dwellings



   152.102   Unfit dwellings vacated



   152.103   Written approval required to reoccupy



   152.104   Placards on unfit dwellings



   152.105   Conference and hearing granted



Violation



   152.110   Prohibited



 



   152.199   Penalty



GENERAL



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively:



   (A)   "Basement." That portion of a building which is partially or
completely below grade.



   (B)   "Door." A swinging or sliding barrier by which an entry is
closed or opened.



   (C)   "Dwelling." Any building which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that
temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.



   (D)   "Dwelling unit." Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   (E)   "Extermination." The control and climination of insects,
rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigation, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal
pest-elimination methods approved by the director of health.



   (F)   "Garbage." The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   (G)   "Habitable room." A room or enclosed floor space used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water-closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers
or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.



   (H)   "Director of health." The legally designated health authority
of the town, or his authorized representative.



   (I)   "Infestation." The presence, within or around a dwelling, of
any insects, rodents or other pests.



   (J)   "Multiple dwelling." Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.



   (K)   “Occupant.” Any person, over one year of age, living,
sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling
unit.



   (L)   “Operator.” Any person who has charge, care or control of
a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units are let.



   (M)   "Ordinary minimum winter conditions." The temperature 15°F.
above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year period.



   (N)   "Owner." Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others:



      (1)   Shall have legal title to or beneficial interest in any
dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof;



      (2)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or officer, or director of a
corporation or corporate owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any person
thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, to the same extent as if he/she were the owner.



   (O)   "Plumbing." Shall include all of the following supplied
facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes,
garbage-disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.



   (P)   Intentionally blank.



   (Q)   “Rooming House” or “Boarding House.” With the
exception of any dwelling that has received and maintained a valid student
housing permit from the Planning and Zoning Department, any dwelling in which
at least three persons but less than 15 persons are housed or boarded for
consideration or otherwise without separate kitchen facilities, with or
without meals. If 15 or more persons are housed or boarded, such building
shall be considered a hotel or motel.



   (R)   "Rubbish." Combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
except garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimming, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.



   (S)   "Supplied."  Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the
control of the owner or operator.



   (T)   "Temporary housing." Any tent, trailer or other structure used
for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   (U)   Meaning of certain words: Whenever the words “dwelling,”
“dwelling unit,” “rooming house,” “premises,” are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”



   (V)   “Window.” An opening typically in the wall of a building,
for admission of light and air that is usually closed by casements or sashes
containing transparent material (such as glass) and capable of being opened
or shut.



(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16)



§ 152.02  DIRECTOR OF HEALTH TO ENFORCE.



   The director of health is authorized to make and, after a public
hearing has been held by the director of health of this town, to adopt such
written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter; provided that the rules and regulations
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. The director of
health shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he/she
may adopt with the clerk of this town. The rules and regulations shall have
the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty
for a violation thereon shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the
provisions of this chapter as hereinafter provided.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



INSPECTIONS



§ 152.05  INSPECTION OF DWELLINGS, PREMISES, ETC.



   The Director of Health is authorized and directed to make inspections
to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, and premises located
within this town, in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public.
For the purpose of making the inspections, the Director of Health is
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, and premises. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling and dwelling unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the
Director of Health free access to the dwelling or dwelling unit and its
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of the inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of the
dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making the repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. The foregoing shall not authorize entry by force to make the
inspections and in the event the owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall refuse to permit entry for the
inspection, entry for such purpose shall be allowed only through a properly
issued warrant in accordance with law.



(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.06  Coordination of enforcement.



   Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection
therewith under the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the health department of the municipality. Wherever, in the
opinion of the director of health, it is necessary or desirable to have
inspections of any condition by any other department, he shall arrange for
this, to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings
shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or
conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violation under this
chapter shall be issued without the approval of the director of health, and
it shall be the responsibility of that official before issuing any such order
to determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or official
of the government concerned with any matter involved on the case in question.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.07  Administrative liability.



   Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or local law or
ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the municipality charged with the
enforcement of the housing code shall render himself personally liable for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. No
person who institutes, or assists in the prosecution of, a criminal
proceeding under this chapter shall be liable to damages hereunder unless he
acted with actual malice and without reasonable grounds for believing that
the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of an unlawful act or omission.
Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the municipality,
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter, shall be defended by the legal representative of the
municipality until the final determination of the proceedings therein.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



SERVICE OF NOTICE; HEARINGS



§ 152.10  Notice of violation.



   Whenever the director of health determines that there are rea sonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pur suant thereto, he shall give
notice of the alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:



   (A)   Be put in writing;



   (B)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;



   (C)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires; and



   (D)   Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the
case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is
served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by registered mail
to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of
this state. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.11  Grounds for content may be filed.



   Any person aggrieved by a notice of the director of health issued in
connection with any alleged violation of this chapter or of applicable rules
and regulations issued pursuant thereto, or by any order requiring repair or
demolition, may petition the director of health for a conference on the
matter. The petition may be filed by means of a letter, setting forth the
petitioner's grounds for contesting the notice or order and must be received
by the director of health within 21 days after such notice or order was
served on the petitioner.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.12  Time limit.



   The director of health shall set a time and place for the conference
and shall advise the petitioner in writing of such time and place within 10
days of the receipt cf his petition.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.13  Designation of referees.



   The director of health shall designate one or more referees to preside
at the conference, such referee or referees to be a member or members of the
board of review, which shall consist of the fire marshal, the planning
director and the building inspector.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.14  Powers of referee.



   The referee is authorized to administer oaths and affirmations and to
subpoena any witnesses or documents, which may be introduced before him.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.15  Record of proceedings.



   A verbatim record of the proceedings before the referee shall be kept
for each conference.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.16  Time limit  for decision.



   Within 10 days following the close of each conference, the referee
shall affirm, set aside or modify the notice or order contested by the
petitioner, and shall advise the petitioner and the board of review of his
decision in writing.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.17  Further hearing by board of review.



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the referee may file a petition
for hearing before the board of review within 21 days after such decision has
been rendered and served upon petitioner in the manner prescribed for the
service of notice in § 152.10.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.18  Board of review to grant hearing.



   Upon receipt of a valid petition, the board of review shall grant the
hearing requested, and shall advise petitioner of its decision in writing
within 10 days of the day on which his petition was received.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.19  Notice of hearing.



   When the board of review determines to hold a hearing, it shall serve
petitioner with notice of its decision in the manner provided for service of
notice in § 152.10. The board of review shall also notify the director of
health of its determination, and shall request that a transcript of the
record of the conference held pursuant to § 152.11 be filed with the board
of review within 10 days of the announcement of the decision.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.20  Rights of petitioner.



   At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show
cause why the notice or order should be modified or withdrawn, or why the
period of time permitted for compliance should be extended.



(Adopted, 9-5-67)



§ 152.21  Conditions for extension of time.



   The hearing shall be on the record of the conference. The board of
review, after consideration of the record as a whole, may affirm, modify or
revoke the notice of order, and may grant an extension of time for the
performance of any act of not more than 6 additional months, where the board
of review finds that there is practical difficulty or undue hardship
connected with the performance of any act required by the provisions of this
chapter or by applicable rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto, and
that the extension is in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter to
secure the public health, safety and welfare.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.22  Conditions for variances.



   The board of review may grant variances from the provisions of this
chapter, or from applicable rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto,
when .the board of review finds that there is practical difficulty or undue
hardship connected with the performance of any act required by this chapter
and applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto; that strict adherence
to the provisions would be arbitrary in the case at hand; that extension
would not provide an appropriate remedy in the case at hand; and that the
variance is in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter to secure the
public health, safety and welfare.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.23  Conditions for setting aside final decision.



   Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the board of review may
obtain judicial review by filing in a court of competent jurisdiction, within
21 days of the announcement of the decision, a petition praying that the
decision be set aside in whole or in part. A copy of each petition so filed
shall be forthwith transmitted to the board of review which shall file in a
court a record of the proceedings upon which it based its decision. Upon the
filing of the record, the court shall affirm, modify, or vacate the decision
complained of in whole or in part. The findings of the board of review with
respect to questions of fact shall be sustained if supported by substantial
evidence on the record, considered as a whole.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.24  Emergency determined by director of health.



   Whenever, in the judgment of the director of health, an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety
or welfare, he may, without notice, conference or hearing, issue an order
directing the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the structure to
which the provisions of this chapter or applicable rules and regulations
pursuant thereto apply, to take such action as is necessary to correct or
abate the emergency; or, if circumstances warrant may himself act to abate or
correct it.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.25  Conference granted to owner.



   The owner,. occupant or other person in charge of the structure shall
be granted a conference on the matter upon his request, as soon as
practicable, but the conference shall in no case stay the abatement or
correction of the emergency.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES, MINIMUM STANDARDS



§ 152.30  Compliance required.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements provided in §§ 152.30 to 152.39, inclusive.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.31  Kitchen sink required.



   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.32  Flush water closet and lavatory basin.



   Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under § 152.34)
shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within the room and
which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good
working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved
by the director of health,



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.33  BATHTUB OR SHOWER.



   Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under § 152.34)
shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person within the
room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected to
a water and sewer system approved by the director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.34  LIMITATION OF USE OF FACILITIES.



   The occupants of not more than two dwelling units may share a single
flush water closet, a single lavatory basin, and a single bathtub or shower
ir:



   (A)   Neither of the two dwelling units contains more than two
rooms; provided that, for the purposes of this paragraph, a kitchenette or an
efficiency kitchen with not more than 60 square feet of floor area shall not
be counted as a room;



   (B)   The habitable area of each of such dwelling units shall equal
not more than 250 square feet of floor area; and



   (C)   Such water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall
be in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer
system approved by the director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.35  HOT AND COLD WATER LINES.



   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required under
the provisions of §§ 152.31 to 152.34, inclusive, shall be properly
connected with both hot and cold water lines.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.36  RUBBISH STORAGE.



   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities, type and location of which are approved by the director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.37  GARBAGE DISPOSAL.



   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers, type and location of which are approved by the
director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.38  WATER-HEATING FACILITIES.



   Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot-water lines required under the provisions of
§ 152.35, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to
permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
120º F. The supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting
the requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating
facilities required under the provisions of § 152.70 are not in operation.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.39  MEANS OF EGRESS.



   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



LIGHT, HEATING; MINIMUM STANDARDS



§ 152.45  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements provided in §§ 152.45
to 152.53, inclusive.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.46  TOTAL WINDOW AREA.



   (A)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facility directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 8% of the floor
area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any room and light-obstruction structures are located less than
three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, the window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and
shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top
of the room, the total window area of the skylight shall equal at least 15 %
of the total floor area of the room.



   (B)   Emergency egress.



      (1)   Every sleeping room shall have at least one operable
window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. The units
must be operable from the inside to a full clear opening without the use of a
key or tool. Where the windows are provided as a means of egress or rescue,
they shall have a sill height of not more than 44 inches above the floor. All
egress or rescue windows from sleeping rooms must have a net clear opening of
5.7 square feet. The minimum net clear opening height shall be 24 inches. The
minimum net clear opening width shall be 20 inches. Grade floor windows may
have a minimum net clear opening of 5.0 square feet. Existing windows shall
be permitted to utilize removable sash. To achieve required opening, sash
shall be capable of being removed without use of key or tool.



      (2)   Sliding glass doors may be considered to meet the
required window area provided the required square foot area is met.



   (C)   Ventilation.



      (1)   The glazed areas need not be openable when the opening
is not required by  division (B)(2) above, and an approved mechanical
ventilation system is provided and capable of producing 0.35 air change per
hour in the room or a whole-house mechanical ventilation system is installed
and capable of supplying outdoor ventilation air of 15 cubic feet per minute
per occupant computed on the basis of two occupants for the first bedroom and
one occupant for each additional bedroom.



      (2)   The glazed area may be omitted in rooms where the
opening is not required by division (B)(1) above, and an approved mechanical
ventilation system is provided and capable of producing 0.35 air change per
hour in the room of a whole-housed mechanical ventilation system is installed
and capable of supplying outdoor ventilation air of 15 cubic feet per minute
per occupant computed on the basis of two occupants for the first bedroom and
one occupant for each additional bedroom, and artificial light is provided
capable of producing an average illumination of six foot candles over the
area of the room at a height of 30 inches above the floor level.



      (3)   When alcove rooms open without obstruction into
adjoining rooms, the required window openings to the outer air shall be based
on the combined floor area of room and alcove. For the purposes of
determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as
a portion of the adjoining room when at least 1/2 of the area of the common
wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than 1/10
of the floor area of the interior room but not less than 25 square feet.



(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03; Am. Ord. 568, passed 1-5-09)
Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.47  ADEQUATE VENTILATION.



   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the
room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be
equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size, as required in § 152.46, except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.48  REQUIREMENTS FOR BATHROOM AND WATER CLOSET.



   Every bathroom and water-closet compartment shall comply with the light
and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in § § 152.46
and 152.47, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately
ventilated bathrooms and water-closet compartments equipped with a
ventilation system which is kept in continuous operation and approved by the
director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.49  ELECTRIC SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Where there is electric service available from power lines which are
not more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every habitable room of such
dwelling shall contain at least two separate floor- or wall-type electric
convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling-type electric-light fixture; and every water-closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet
and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe
working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in
a safe manner.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.50  HEATING FACILITIES.



   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable
of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
water-closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least 65º F at a distance three feet above floor level,
under ordinary minimum winter conditions.



(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.51  PUBLIC HALLS AND STAIRWAYS LIGHTED.



   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing
five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy
and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system
which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.52  SCREENS REQUIRED.



   During that portion of each year when the director of health deems it
necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every
door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have
supplied screens and a self-closing device. Every window or other device with
openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall
likewise be supplied with screens; provided that such screens shall not be
required during such period in rooms deemed by the director of health to be
located high enough in the upper stories of buildings as to be free from such
insects, and in rooms located in areas of this town which are deemed by the
director of health to have so few such insects as to render screens
unnecessary.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.53  RODENT CONTROL.



   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an
entry. for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as
will effectively prevent their entrance.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



DWELLING UNITS, SANITARY MAINTENANCE



§ 152.55  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements provided in §§ 152.55
to 152.62, inclusive.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.56  FOUNDATION, WALL, ROOD, ETC.



   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and shall be capable of affording
privacy and shall be kept in good repair.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.57  WINDOW, EXTERIOR DOOR AND HATCHWAY.



   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.58  STAIRS AND PORCH.



   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.59  INSTALLATION OF PLUMBING FIXTURES.



   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.60  FLOOR SURFACES MAINTAINED.



   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to
water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.61  MAINTENANCE OF ALL FACILITIES.



   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.62  RENTAL OR OCCUPANCY OF VACANT DWELLING UNIT.



   No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
or dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy in
compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter.



(Adopted 9-5-67; Am. Ord. 491, passed 11-6-03) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.63  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from
or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, let or occupied
by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies
when  discontinuance of service is approved by the director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS



§ 152.65  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupany any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements as provided in § § 152.65 to 152.69, inclusive.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.66  FLOOR SPACE.



   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor
space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet
of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.67  SPACE REQUIREMENT FOR SLEEPING ROOMS.



   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.68  CEILING HEIGHT.



   (A)   At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall
have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part
of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the
room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



   (B)   Ceiling height in existing basements being converted to
habitable space shall not be less than six feet ten inches clear except under
beams, girders, pipes, ducts or other obstructions where the clear height
shall be a minimum of six feet six inches.



(Am. Ord. 568, passed 1-5-09) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.69  SMOKE ALARMS.



   (A)   Smoke alarms.



      (1)   Smoke alarms shall be installed in the following
locations:



         (a)   In each sleeping room.



         (b)   Outside each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.



         (c)   On each additional story of the dwelling,
including basements but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics.
In dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between
the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice
for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one
full story below the upper level.



      (2)   The smoke detectors may be battery operated and are not
required to be interconnected when other remodeling considerations do not
require the removal of the appropriate wall and ceasing coverings to
facilitate concealed interconnected wiring.



   (B)   Carbon monoxide detectors.



      (1)   Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed outside of
each sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedroom.



      (2)   Exception. Carbon monoxide detectors shall not be
required in dwelling units not containing a fuel-burning appliance, fireplace
or attached garage.



(Ord. 568, passed 1-5-09)  Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.70  BASEMENT SPACE PROHIBITED; CONDITIONS.



   No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:



   (A)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground
and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;



   (B)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in § 152.45;



   (C)   The required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining the window area; and



   (D)   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at
least the minimum as required under § 152.47, except where there is supplied
some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the director
of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY



§ 152.75  MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.



   Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared
or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.76  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANT.



   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.77  RUBBISH DISPOSAL.



   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
containers required by § 152.36 of this chapter.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.78  GARBAGE DISPOSAL.



   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage, and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in
a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities
or garbage storage containers required by § 152.37 of this chapter.  It
shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply the facilities or
containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than 4
dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on premises where more than
4 dwelling units share the same premises.  In all other cases it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.



(Adopted 9-5-67)  Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.79  SCREENS, STORM DOORS AND WINDOWS.



   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same
are required under the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to
supply the service.



(Adopted 9-5-67)  Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.80  EXTERMINATION OF INSECTS, RODENTS.



   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
therein or on the premises.  Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in 2 or more of the
dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be
the responsibility of the owner.



(Adopted 9-5-67)  Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.81  PLUMBING FIXTURES.



   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 



(Adopted 9-5-67)  Penalty, see § 152.199



ROOMING HOUSES



§ 152.85  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to
another for occupancy in any rooming house, except in compliance with the
provisions of every section of this chapter, except the provisions of §§
152.30 through 152.53.



(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16)  Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.86  ROOMING HOUSE PERMIT.



   No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming
house permit issued by the Director of Health in the name of the operator and
for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the
Director of Health for the permit, which shall be issued by the Director of
Health upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of the
chapter and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This
permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at
all times. The permit shall be nontransferable. Every person holding such a
permit shall give notice in writing to the Director of Health within 24 hours
after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of
ownership of, interest in, or control of the rooming house. The notice shall
include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or
control of the rooming house. Every rooming house permit shall expire at the
end of one year following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or
revoked as hereinafter provided. For every permit issued hereunder and for
each annual renewal, there shall be paid to the health department, for the
use of the town, a permit fee of $50 by each rooming house. 



(Adopted 9-5-67; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78; Am. Ord. 669, passed
2-1-16) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.87  Inspection.



   Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the director of health
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, the director of health shall give notice in writing to the operator
of such rooming house that unless the conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period, to be determined by the director of health, the
operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of the period
the director of health shall reinspect the rooming house, and if he finds
that the conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall give
notice in writing to the operator that the latter's permit has been
suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, the operator shall
immediately cease operation of the rooming house, and no person shall occupy
for sleeping or living purposes.



(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16)  Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.88  Permit suspended; conference granted.



   Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended,
or who has received notice from the director of health that his permit is to
be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his rooming house are
corrected, may request and shall be granted a conference and hearing on the
matter under the procedure provided by §§ 152.10 to 152.25, inclusive;
provided that, if no petition for such conference and hearing is filed within
21 days following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit
shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



§ 152.89  Plumbing facility requirements.



   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the director of
health and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each 6 persons or
fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the
operator's family wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided
that, in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may
be substituted for not more than 1/2 the required number of water closets.
All of the facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be
reasonably accessible from a common hail or passageway to all persons sharing
the facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied
with hot-water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a
basement except by written approval of the director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.90  Bed linen and towels supplied.



   The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and
towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room
to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.91  Floor space in sleeping rooms.



   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor space for each occupant thereof.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.92  Means of egress.



   Every rooming house shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of
this state and this town.



(Adopted 9-5-67) (Am. Ord. 669, passed 2-1-16) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.93  Sanitary maintenance.



   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance
of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house. He shall be
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where
the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.94  Hotels, motels, dormitories, clubs.



   Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall
also apply to hotels, motels, dormitories and clubs, except to the extent
that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state
or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



UNFIT DWELLINGS; LEGAL PROCEDURE



§ 152.100  Compliance required.



   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human
habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such
unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the
following requirements as provided in §§ 152.100 to 152.105, inclusive.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.101  Defects in unfit dwellings.



   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall
be so designated and placarded by the director of health:



   (A)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated unsanitary,
unsafe or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupant; or of the public.



   (B)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation
facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of
the public.



   (C)   One which because of its general condition or location is
unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants
or of the public.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.102  Unfit dwellings vacated.



   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation,
and so designated and placarded by the director of health, shall be vacated
within a reasonable time as ordered by the director of health.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.103  Written approval required to reoccupy.



   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as
unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from, and the placard is removed by, the director
of health. The director of health shall remove the placard whenever the
defect or defects, upon which the condemnation and placarding action were
based, have been eliminated.



(Adopted 9-5-87) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.104  Placards on unfit dwellings.



   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such, except as provided in § 152.103.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.105  Conference and hearing granted.



   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation
may request and shall be granted a conference and hearing on the matter under
the procedure set forth in §§ 152.10 to 152.25, inclusive.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



VIOLATION



§ 152.110  Prohibited.



   No person shall violate any provision of this chapter, or any provision
of any rule or regulation adopted by the director of health pursuant to
authority granted by this chapter.



(Adopted 9-5-67) Penalty, see § 152.199



§ 152.199  Penalty.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $25 or imprisoned not less than 10 days nor more than 25 days. Each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Adopted 9-5-67)



CHAPTER 153:  SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS



Section



   153.01   Definition



   153.02   Permit required



   153.03   Application for permit



   153.04   Permit fee



   153.05   Approval of plans



   153.06   Final inspection



   153.07   Location



   153.08   Violation prohibited



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter a "SWIMMING POOL" shall be defined as
an enclosure for water with a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons. 



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 1)



§ 153.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any person constructing or erecting a swimming pool shall first obtain
a written permit from the director of health or an inspector duly appointed
by him.



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 3)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Applications for a swimming pool permit shall be in writing, shall be
in the name of the owner of the premises where the swimming pool is to be
constructed or erected, or his agent, and shall contain information relative
to the swimming pool, its construction or erection and the proposed location
as may be required by the director of health on a form provided by the health
department.



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 4)



§ 153.04  PERMIT FEE.



   For every permit issued hereunder there shall be paid to the health
department, for the use of the town, a permit fee of $5.



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 6; amend. Ord. 167, passed 4-18-78)



§ 153.05  APPROVAL OF PLANS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct,
erect, or cause to be constructed, erected or commence to construct or erect
in the town any swimming pool unless and until plans for the swimming pool
have been approved by the director of health or an inspector duly appointed
by him and a written permit issued by the director of health or his duly
appointed inspector for the construction or erection of a swimming pool. 



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 2) Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.06  FINAL INSPECTION.



   All swimming pools constructed or erected shall be subject to a final
inspection by the director of health or his duly appointed inspector before
the swimming pools are used. 



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 5)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.07  LOCATION.



   (A)   Swimming pools shall be located only in areas where proper and
adequate drainage is available so that a public nuisance is not created.



   (B)   No swimming pool shall be located within 25 feet of any
sanitary system or within 75 feet of any well. 



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, §§ 2 and 4)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.08  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall violate any provision of this
chapter.



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 7)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $50. 



('66 Code, Appendix VIII, § 7)



CHAPTER 154:  MISCELLANEOUS



Section



Building On Unaccepted Streets



   154.01   Intent



   154.02   Issuance of permit, town engineer to certify



   154.03   Issuance of permit, applicant to certify



   154.04   When exempt



   154.05   Building permit to restore



   154.06   Violation prohibited



Property Maintenance



   154.10   Purpose and application



   154.11   Nuisances defined



   154.12   Enforcement



   154.13   Inspections and investigations; reports



   154.14   Notice of violation



   154.15   Citations



   154.16   Removal by town



   154.17   Appeal; hearing procedure



Ratproofing Methods



   154.20   Floor foundation area



   154.21   Use of mesh wire



   154.22   Building on supports



Tax Abatement, Housing for Low- and Moderate-Income Persons



   154.25   Definitions



   154.26   Contracts for abatement



   154.27   Term



   154.28   Valuation



   154.29   State assistance



Blight Prevention



   154.30   Declaration of policy



   154.31   Blighted properties prohibited



   154.32   Definitions



   154.33   Enforcement



   154.34   Special consideration



   154.35   Notice of violations



   154.36   Citations



   154.37   Removal by town



   154.38   Appeal



Tax Relief for Elderly and/or Disabled Homeowners



   154.45   Intent and purpose



   154.46   Effective date of tax benefits



   154.47   Applications



   154.48   Determination of tax relief and relief allowed



   154.49   Real property tax relief for certain homeowners age 65 or
over or permanently and totally disabled



   154.50   Real property tax relief to certain elderly homeowners;
applications for real property tax relief



   154.51   No conflict with state statute



Tax Abatement for Certain Occupants



   154.60   Residence's exceeding 8% of occupant's income



Historic Properties



   154.65   Purpose



   154.66   Historic property



   154.67   Historic Properties Commission



   154.68   Powers of Commission



   154.69   Termination of Historic Study Commission



 



   154.99   Penalty



BUILDING ON UNACCEPTED STREETS



§ 154.01  INTENT.



   Sections 154.01 to 154.06, inclusive, are enacted pursuant to and in
keeping with "building on unaccepted streets," of the Conn. Gen. Stat., §
8-27.



(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75)



§ 154.02  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; TOWN ENGINEER TO CERTIFY.



   (A)   The building inspector of the town shall not issue a building
permit for the construction of a building on a tract, lot or parcel of land
which does not abut an accepted highway, unless the town engineer shall
certify, in writing, that such tract, lot, or parcel abuts an unaccepted
street which is equivalent to a road completed to a point of laying a
bituminous binder course in accordance with the specifications of the town
engineer, unless such proposed structure is a farm building or an accessory
building. The certification shall not be deemed to be an acceptance or
acknowledgment by the town of such street as a public highway.



   (B)   The building inspector of the town may issue a building permit
for the construction of a building located on a tract, lot or parcel which
abuts an unaccepted highway, provided that such tract, lot or parcel is
located in a subdivision approved by the planning section of the planning and
zoning commission and containing more than 200 dwelling units, provided that
no temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy or zoning permit may be
issued for any such building until the town engineer certifies that the road
abutted by the tract, lot or parcel containing such building has been
completed in accordance with the specifications required by the town
subdivision regulations for such road to be accepted as a public highway. 
The building inspector shall notify the zoning enforcement officer in writing
of any building permit issued pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75; Am. Ord. 318, passed 9-3-91) Penalty, see § 154.99
(A)



§ 154.03  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; APPLICANT TO CERTIFY.



   The building inspector of the town shall not issue a building permit
for the construction of a building on a tract, lot, or parcel of land which
does not abut an accepted highway, unless the applicant therefore certifies,
in writing, that he will inform, in writing, prior to sale, any and all
subsequent owners of the land that the street has not been accepted or
acknowledged as a public highway by the town. The obligation of the applicant
to so inform shall terminate when such street is accepted by the legislative
council as a town highway.



(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75) Penalty, see § 154.99 (A)



§ 154.04  WHEN EXEMPT.



   Any tract, lot, or parcel of land which is not shown on an approved and
recorded subdivision plan which is in single ownership and is of sufficient
size to be divided into two tracts, lots, or parcels each having sufficient
area to meet the lot size requirements of the town zoning regulations for the
zone in which such tract, lot or parcel is located shall be exempt from the
provisions of §§ 154.01 to 154.06, inclusive; provided however, that the
land-deed records do or shall show that each parcel of land has permanent
access with a minimum width of 12 feet to an accepted or acknowledged
highway. Such permanent access shall not be considered to be a public
right-of-way, unless approved as such by the town planning and zoning
commission and accepted by the legislative council.



(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75) Penalty, see § 154.99(A)



§ 154.05  BUILDING PERMIT TO RESTORE.



   Nothing in §§ 154.01 to 154.06, inclusive, shall prohibit the
issuance of a building permit for the restoration, or reconstruction  of any
building which may have been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion,
windstorm, or other such accident or natural cause, provided such
restoration, or reconstruction is undertaken within a period of 12 months.



(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75)



§ 154.06  VIOLATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Any building erected or occupied in violation of the
provisions of §§ 154.01 to 154.06, inclusive, shall be deemed an unlawful
structure or unlawfully occupied and the building inspector shall institute
or request the institution of legal proceedings to restrain, enjoin or abate
the erection or occupation of such structure or cause it to be vacated and
removed.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall erect, occupy or permit
to be occupied a structure in violation of §§ 154.01 to 154.06, inclusive.



(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75; Am. Ord. 318, passed 9-3-91) Penalty, see §
154.99(A)



PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



§ 154.10  PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.



   In order to prohibit and abate within the municipality nuisances and
causes thereof, as defined in § 154.11, it is declared that all structures,
including but not limited to one and two-family and multiple-family
dwellings, whether or not used for residential purposes, garden apartments,
and all other apartment complexes, condominiums, vacant lots, all shopping
centers, supermarkets, retail stores, discount houses, warehouses,
manufacturing or fabrication plants, factories, gasoline service stations,
public garages, motor vehicle repair shops or other business uses, and
accessory structures to all of the foregoing, whether occupied or vacant,
shall be maintained in conformity with the standards set out in § 154.10
through 154.15, so as to assure that none of these structures or properties
will adversely affect their neighborhood or the larger community. It is found
and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive
deterioration, certain structures and properties have the further effect of
creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are
not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and
will necessitate in time the expenditures of large amounts of public funds to
correct and eliminate the same. By reason of timely regulations and
restrictions, as herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be
prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the
desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and
neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected
and fostered.



(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.11  NUISANCES DEFINED.



   (A)   Open areas:



      (1)   Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately
drained to prevent the development of stagnant ponds.



      (2)   No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left
unattended or standing, and the baskets, carts or wagons shall be collected
as often as necessary and removed to the interior of the building or
buildings from which they were taken.



      (3)   All fences shall be maintained.  Such maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting as needed, and the replacement or
repair of fences which may become in disrepair.



      (4)   All landscaping shall be maintained so that lawns,
hedges, bushes and trees shall be kept neatly and free from becoming
overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same may
have a tendency to depreciate adjoining property.  The maintenance should
include, but not be limited to, the replacement of trees and shrubs which may
die or otherwise be destroyed.



      (5)   The planting strip fronting the property shall be
maintained in a safe condition, neat, mowed as necessary, and free of litter,
poison ivy, ragweed and any other noxious plant.



      (6)   Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar
paved areas shall be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use
and weather conditions.  Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be
filled, and necessary repairs or replacement accomplished.  All off-street
parking facilities shall be swept as often as necessary in the determination
of the enforcement agent.



      (7)   Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept clean and
free of physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and shall be
maintained in a manner that will prevent trash, garbage, litter, debris and
rubbish from being blown about them. The property owner or his/her agent
shall remove discarded or inoperative appliances, furnishings or machinery.



      (8)   All signs exposed to public view shall be maintained in
good repair.  Excessively weathered or faded signs shall be removed or put
into good repair.  Any nonoperative or broken electrical or other sign shall
be repaired or removed.



      (9)   Trash receptacles shall be emptied on a regular basis.



   (B)   Buildings and structures:



      (1)   The exterior of buildings and structures shall be
maintained so that their appearance shall not have a tendency to depreciate
adjoining property.



      (2)   The foundation walls of every building shall be
maintained in good repair and be structurally sound.



      (3)   Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs and
the areas around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a building shall
be so maintained as to keep water from entering the building and to prevent
undue heat loss from occupied areas.  Materials which have been damaged or
show evidences of dry rot or other deterioration shall be repaired or
replaced and refinished in a workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and
other parts of the building shall be free from loose and unsecured objects
and material.  Such objects or materials shall be removed, repaired or
replaced.



      (4)   Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of
insect, vermin and rodent harborage and infestation.



      (5)   Buildings and structures shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition free from health, safety and fire hazards.



(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)  Penalty, see §
154.99



§ 154.12  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor
(Enforcement Officer) is charged with the enforcement of this subchapter. It
shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated under this
subchapter. The Enforcement Officer may order any person who violates this
subchapter to abate such violation and shall be hereby authorized and
empowered to issue citations for violations of this subchapter in accordance
with § 154.15.



   (B)   In addition to, and not in substitution for, the penalty
provision of  § 154.99(B), upon failure of the owner(s) to comply with a
written notice of violation, the Enforcement Officer shall contact the Public
Works Department, who shall cause the abatement of any nuisance defined in §
154.11 at the expense of the owner(s) of the premises on which such nuisance
exists.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.13  INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS; REPORTS.



   The Enforcement Officer shall initiate inspections and investigations,
and shall receive information and complaints concerning compliance  with 
the provisions of this subchapter.  The Enforcement Officer shall provide
the Legislative Council with monthly written status reports, indicating the
number of complaints, violations identified, active and closed cases, and
other information as requested.



(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.14  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The town shall serve a written notice to any owner, agent, tenant
and/or person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or singularly referred
to as the "Owner") who violates this subchapter to the owner's last known
address by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall direct
the removal, correction or abatement of the violation within ten calendar
days after receipt of written notice and notify the owner that failure to
remove or correct the violation shall result in the issuance of a citation in
accordance with § 154.15; the fines and penalties imposed; and that if the
owner fails to remove or correct the violation, the town may cause the
abatement of the violation at the expense of the owner of the premises on
which such violation exists.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.15  CITATIONS.



   (A)   The town shall serve a written citation notifying the owner,
agent, tenant and/or person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or
singularly referred to as the "Owner") of a violation(s) of this subchapter
to the owner's last known address by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The citation shall inform the owner of the allegations against
him/her and the amount of fines; that he/she may contest his/her liability
before the town's duly appointed Citation Hearing Officer by delivering in
person or by mail, written notice to the Town Planner and/or other official
designated by the Mayor within ten calendar days from the date of the
citation(s); that if he/she does not demand such a hearing in accordance with
this section, he/she shall be deemed to have admitted liability; that an
assessment and judgment shall be entered against him/her; and that judgment
may issue without further notice.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of $100 for each day a violation exists and continues.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00) Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.16  REMOVAL BY TOWN.



   (A)   Notice to remove.  The Enforcement Officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any land or
property within the town of any violation(s) of this subchapter (citing the
Code sections) and to direct such owner to remove or correct such violation
which is dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare. The notice shall
be by registered mail, addressed to the owner at his/her last known address.



   (B)   Action upon noncompliance.  Upon the failure, neglect or
refusal of any owner or agent so notified to correct or remove any
violation(s) of this subchapter dangerous to the public health, safety or
welfare within ten days after receipt of written notice provided for in §
154.14 and division (A)  of this section, or within ten days after the date
of such notice in the event same is returned to the town because of inability
to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the
last known address of such owner or agent, the town may cause the abatement
of a violation of this subchapter at the expense of the owner(s) of the
premises where such violation exists. Costs shall include labor, materials
and equipment.



   (C)   Conference granted to owner/agent. Any owner or agent notified
under division (A) of this section shall be granted a conference with the
Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor upon his/her
request. Such conference shall be granted as soon as practicable, but the
conference shall in no way stay the abatement order.



   (D)   Recorded statement constitutes lien. Upon completion of such
work, the Enforcement Agent shall determine the actual cost thereof and bill
the owner or agent thereof. Upon the failure of the owner or agent to remit
to the town the amount of such charge within 30 days from the date of such
notice, the Enforcement Agent, within 90 days from the date of such notice,
shall cause to be recorded in the land records a sworn statement showing the
cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the
location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation of such
sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property. Any appeal from any
action taken following this section shall be in accordance with § 154.17.



(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.17  APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
other than police officers, employees, or persons who issue citations to
conduct the hearings authorized by this section.



   (B)   If any person who is sent notice pursuant to § 154.15 wishes
to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without requesting a
hearing, pay the full amount of the fine(s) admitted to, in person or by mail
to an official designated by the town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in
any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or
other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail
written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the first notice
provided for in § 154.15 shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the
designated town official shall certify such person's failure to respond to
the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for herein and shall follow the
procedures set forth in § 154.15 for placing a lien on real property.



   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing
of notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any
reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or continuance. An
original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the
issuing town official or Police Officer shall be filed and retained by the
town, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 52-180, and evidence of the facts contained therein. The
presence of the issuing official or Police Officer shall be required at the
hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his/her
liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his/her
behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may
present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If such person fails to
appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against
him/her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable
provisions(s) of this subchapter. The hearing officer may accept from such
person copies of police reports, investigatory and citations reports, and
other official documents by mail, and may determine thereby that the
appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct
the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he/she
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence
shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end
of the hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, he/she
shall dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in writing
accordingly. If he/she determines that the person is liable for the
violation, he/she shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees against such person as provided by this subchapter.



   (D)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the
hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than
12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West
Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. The
certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of
assessment. Within such 12-month period, assessments against the same person
may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter
judgment if the amount of such record of assessment and appropriate court
costs against such person favor of the town. Notwithstanding any other
provision of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so
entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment, and a
levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such
person.



   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-259, with the Clerk of the Superior Court,
Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall
entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the judges of the
Superior Court.



(C.G.S. § 7-152c)



(Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)



RATPROOFING METHODS



§ 154.20  FLOOR FOUNDATION AREA.



   Floor foundations should be of 4-inch thickness of concrete, with
foundations extending at least 2 feet below ground level.  From ground level
to a height of 12 inches, building should be ratproofed with metal or
1/2-inch mesh wire hardware cloth.



('66 Code, Appendix VII, § 1)



§ 154.21  USE OF MESH WIRE.



   Where the above is not practicable, 1/2-inch mesh wire hardware cloth
may approved by the town attorney, directing removal or correction of the
violation within 7 days after service of the notice, or shall cause the
posting of the notice in a prominent place upon such premises whenever a
responsible person reasonably cannot be located.  Immediately upon
expiration of any period for correction set forth in any violation notice,
the council enforcement agent shall determine whether correction has occurred
and, if not fully, shall without further delay of any kind file request for
arrest warrant with the prosecutor having jurisdiction.



(Adopted 8-3-70)



§ 154.22  BUILDINGS ON SUPPORTS.



   All buildings should be at least 2 feet above ground level, with
supports ratproofed with metal disks extending at least 9 inches out from
supports, and a clear space should be present underneath the building.  All
openings should be screened with wire mesh of not less than 1/2-inch mesh,
except that doors may be of wood, with metal flashings extending one foot
above the bottom of the doors, and doorsills and jambs flashed with metal.



('66 Code, Appendix VII, § 3)



TAX ABATEMENTS, HOUSING FOR LOW-  AND MODERATE-INCOME PERSONS



§ 154.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words, terms and
phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



   "LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING."  Housing, the construction or
rehabilitation of which is aided or assisted in any way, by federal or state
statute, which housing is subject to regulation or supervision of rents,
charges or sales prices and methods of operation by a governmental agency
under a regulatory agreement or other instrument which restricts occupancy of
such housing to persons or families whose incomes do not exceed prescribed
limits, and shall be deemed to include the property on which such housing is
situated.



   "OWNER."  A person or persons, partnership, joint venture, or
corporation who or which has executed, or will execute a regulatory agreement
or other instrument which a governmental agency which limits occupancy of the
low- and moderate-income housing owned or to be owned by such person or
persons, partnership, joint venture or corporation or persons or families
whose incomes do not exceed prescribed limits.



(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)



§ 154.26  CONTRACTS FOR ABATEMENT.



   The Mayor may, by resolution enacted by majority vote of the
Legislative Council, enter into contracts for the town with owners of low- or
moderate-income housing granting abatement, in whole, or in part, of the real
property taxes of such housing; provided, that such abatement need be not be
conditioned upon receipt of state reimbursement to the town for such
abatement; and provided, further that each such contract shall require that
the owner apply the money equivalent of the taxes abated to one or more of
the following specified purposes; (1) to reduce rents below the levels which
would be achieved in the absence of abatement and to improve the quality and
design of such housing; (2) to effect occupancy by persons and families of
varying income levels, within limits determined by the Commissioner of
Economic and Community Development by regulation; or (3) to provide necessary
related facilities or services in such housing.  Such abatement shall be
made pursuant to a contract between the town and the owner of any such
housing, which contract shall provide the terms of such abatement, the moneys
equal to the amount of such abatement shall be used for any one or more of
the purposes herein state, and that such abatement shall terminate at any
time when such housing is not solely for low or moderate income persons or
families.  The amount of such abatement shall be established in each such
contract, giving due consideration to the purposes to which the money
equivalent to the taxes so abated is to be applied.



(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)



§ 154.27  TERM.



   The abatement shall become effective on the date specified on the
contract between the town and the owner of low- or moderate-income housing.
The term of abatement shall extend for the remainder of the fiscal year in
which such abatement becomes effective and may continue as specified in the
contract; provided, that such abatement shall terminate at any time when the
property for which tax abatement had been granted is not used solely for low-
or moderate-income housing.



(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)



§ 154.28  VALUATION.



   For the purpose of determining the amount of taxes to be abated as
aforesaid, the present true and actual value of low- or moderate-income
housing on which rents and carrying charges are limited by regulatory
agreement with, or otherwise regulated by federal or state government or
department or agency thereof, shall be based upon and shall not exceed the
capitalized value of the net rental income of the housing project.  For
purposes of this section, "net rental income" shall mean gross income of the
project as limited by schedule of rents or carrying charges, less reasonable
operating expenses and property taxes.



(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)



§ 154.29  STATE ASSISTANCE.



   The Mayor of the town, may, when authorized by resolution enacted by a
majority vote of the Legislative Council, enter into contracts with the state
for financial assistance by the state in the form of reimbursement for all or
part of the tax abatement granted to an owner of low or moderate income
housing in accordance with this subchapter but the entering into such a
contract for financial assistance need not be a condition of any tax
abatement.



(Ord. 547, passed 12-4-06)



BLIGHT PREVENTION



§ 154.30  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   This subchapter is to be known as the Anti-Blight Ordinance
and is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the town under Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv).



   (B)   It is hereby found and declared that there exist within the
town a number of real properties which are vacant and/or in blighted
condition, and that the continued existence of such properties contributes to
the decline of neighborhoods.



   (C)   It is further found that the existence of such properties
adversely affects the economic well being of the town and is adverse to the
health, safety and welfare of its residents.



   (D)   It is further found that many of the properties can be
rehabilitated, reconstructed, demolished and/or reused so as to provide
decent, safe and sanitary housing and ancillary commercial facilities, and
that such rehabilitation, reconstruction, demolition and/or reuse would
eliminate, remedy and prevent the adverse conditions described above.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.31  BLIGHTED PROPERTIES PROHIBITED.



   No owner, agent, tenant or person in control of real property located
in the town shall allow, create, maintain or cause to be created or
maintained, any blighted premises.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.32  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words, terms and
phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



   "BLIGHTED PREMISES."  Any building or structure, or any parcel of land
in which at least one of the following conditions exists:



      (1)   It is determined by the Building Official, Director of
Health or other official designated by the town that the building, structure
or parcel of land is in a condition that poses a serious threat to the
safety, health and general welfare of the community.



      (2)   It is attracting illegal activity as documented by
Police Department reports;



      (3)   It is a fire hazard as determined by the Fire Marshal or
documented by the Fire Department;



      (4)   It is not being maintained as evidenced by the existence
of one or more of the following conditions: missing or boarded windows or
doors; collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor; seriously damaged or
missing siding; fire damages; a structurally faulty foundation; physical
hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, garbage, trash or abandoned motor
vehicles situated on the premises (unless the premises is a junk yard legally
licensed in the State of Connecticut); overgrown grass, brush, shrubs or
weeds of at least one foot in length; or front yards allowed to deteriorate
into unattended bare, dirt patches or containing litter, poison ivy, ragweed
or other noxious plants;



      (5)   It is a substantial factor causing serious depreciation
of the property values in the neighborhood;



      (6)   It is becoming dilapidated as documented by the Building
Official, Director of Health or other official designated by the town.



      (7)   It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable
interference with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other space
within the building or of other premises within the neighborhood as
documented by neighborhood complaints, or cancellation of insurance on
proximate properties.



   "BUILDING OFFICIAL." The building official as defined in Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 29-250.



   "CAPABLE INDIVIDUAL."  A person that can be reasonably expected to
perform maintenance and yard work around a property or premises. This shall
include children above 16 years of age without physical or mental disability
as defined herein.



   "DILAPIDATED."  A building or structure or part thereof, that would
not qualify for a certificate of occupancy if applied for, or which is deemed
an unsafe structure as defined by the State Building Code, and any dwelling
or unit which is designated as unfit for human habitation as defined in the
State Building code and/or the Town Code of Ordinances.



   "DIRECTOR OF HEALTH."  The town official authorized to administer the
provisions of Chapter 368e (Municipal Health Authorities) or any local
Housing Code.



   "DISABLED INDIVIDUAL."  In the case of an owner-occupied residence, an
individual who has a disability meeting the definitions for the mental or
physical disability as defined under the Americans With Disabilities Act of
1990, and does not have other household members capable of providing the
necessary maintenance.



   "ELDERLY INDIVIDUAL."  An individual over the age of 65, who does not
have a household member capable of providing the necessary maintenance.



   "HOUSING BLIGHT."  Blighted premises as defined in this section.



   "LEGAL OCCUPANCY."  Human habitation which is legal by virtue of
compliance with the State Building, State Fire Safety, Local Zoning, Local
Housing and all other pertinent codes, and which habitation must be
demonstrated by proof of occupancy through a bona fide lease agreement, rent
receipt or utility statement.



   "LOW INCOME INDIVIDUAL."  In the case of an owner-occupied residence,
an individual, or where more than one person resides on the premises, a
family unit, that has an income below the highest level of income established
by the State of Connecticut's Elderly Tax Relief Program. This level is in
the upper limit of step 5 as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(c).
It is immaterial that a person is not elderly with regards to this
subchapter, because the reference to Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(c) is only
for the purpose of providing a guideline for this subchapter.



   "NEIGHBORHOOD."  An area of the town comprised of premises or parcels
of land, any part of which is within a contiguous radius of 800 feet of any
other parcel within the town.



   "TOWN."  The Town of Hamden.



   "UNIT."  Any space within a building that is or can be rented by or to
a single person or entity for his or its sole use, and is intended to be a
single and distinct space.



   "VACANT."  A period of 60 days or longer during which a building or
structure or part thereof, or land, is not legally occupied.



   "VACANT PARCEL."  A parcel of land with no structure(s) thereon.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.33  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor
(Enforcement Officer) are charged with the enforcement of this subchapter. It
shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated under this
subchapter. The Enforcement Officer may order any person who violates this
subchapter to abate such violation, and shall be hereby authorized and
empowered to issue citations for violations of this subchapter in accordance
with § 154.36.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.34  SPECIAL CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   Special consideration shall be given to individuals that are
elderly or disabled if such individual cannot maintain a reasonable level of
upkeep of the owner-occupied residence because the individual is elderly or
disabled and no capable person resides in the residence. In such cases, the
enforcement officer shall give such elderly or disabled individual adequate
time to correct the problem.



   (B)   Where the owner of a blighted premises is found to be a low
income individual under this subchapter, the Enforcement Officer shall give
special consideration to the person by providing adequate time to correct the
problem. If the items designated as blighted have to do with lawn, brush,
weeds and shrub maintenance or keeping the grounds free from rubbish and
debris, the Enforcement Officer will not provide additional time to correct
the problem.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.35  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The town shall serve a written notice to an owner, agent, tenant and/or
person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or singularly referred to as
the "Owner") of a blighted premises of the violation(s) of this subchapter to
the owner's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The notice shall direct the removal, correction or abatement of the violation
within ten calendar days after receipt of written notice and notify the owner
that failure to remove or correct the violation shall result in the issuance
of a citation in accordance with § 154.36; the fines and penalties imposed;
and that if the owner fails to remove or correct the violation, the town may
cause the abatement of the violation at the expense of the owner of the
premises on which such violation exists.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.36  CITATIONS/PENALTIES.



   (A)   The town shall serve a written citation notifying an owner,
agent, tenant and/or person in control (hereinafter collectively and/or
singularly referred to as the "Owner") of a blighted premises of the
violation(s) of this subchapter to the owner's last known address by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Such citation shall inform the
owner of the allegations against him and the amount of fines; that he/she may
contest his/her liability before the town's duly appointed citation hearing
officer by delivering in person or by mail, written notice to the Town
Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor within ten calendar
days from the date of the citation(s); that if he/she does not demand such a
hearing in accordance with this section, he/she shall be deemed to have
admitted liability; and that the town shall file a lien against the real
property in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-148aa, for the amount of
any unpaid anti-blight fine imposed by the town in accordance with this
subchapter and that the lien may be enforced in the same manner as tax liens.



   (B)   Violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of $100 for each day a violation exists and continues.



Penalty, see 154.99



§ 154.37  REMOVAL BY TOWN.



   (A)   Notice to remove.  The Enforcement Officer or other official
designated by the town is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner
of any blighted premises within the town or the agent of such owner to
correct, remove or abate blighted conditions which are dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail,
addressed to said owner at his/her last known address.



   (B)   Action upon noncompliance.  Upon the failure, neglect or
refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to abate such blight which is
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten calendar days
after receipt of written notice provided for in § 154.35 and division (A) of
this section, or within ten days after the date of such notice in the event
same is returned to the town because of inability to make delivery thereof,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such
owner or agent, the town may cause the abatement of the blight at the expense
of the owner(s) of the blighted premises where such condition exists.



   (C)   Conference granted to owner/agent. Any owner or agent notified
under division (A) of this section shall be granted a conference with the
Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor or his/her
designee upon his/her request. Such conference shall be granted as soon as
practicable, but the conference shall in no way stay the abatement order.



   (D)   Recorded statement constitutes lien. Upon completion of such
work, the Town Planner and/or other official designated by the Mayor shall
determine the actual cost thereof and bill the owner or agent therefor. Upon
the failure of the owner or agent to remit to the town the amount of such
charge within 30 days from the date of such notice, the Town Planner and/or
other official designated by the Mayor, within 90 days from the date of such
notice, shall cause to be recorded in the land records of the town a sworn
statement, showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the
work was done and the location of the property on which said work was done.
The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the
property. Any appeal from any final action taken following this section may
be taken in accordance with § 154.38.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



§ 154.38  APPEAL; HEARING PROCEDURE FOR CITATIONS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers,
other than police officers, employees, or persons who issue citations, to
conduct the hearings authorized by this section.



   (B)   If any person who is sent notice pursuant to § 154.36 wishes
to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without requesting a
hearing, pay the full amount of the fine(s) admitted to, in person or by mail
to an official designated by the town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in
any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or
other person making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail
written demand for a hearing within ten days of the date of the first notice
provided for in § 154.36 shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the
designated town official shall certify such person's failure to respond to
the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the
fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for herein and shall follow the
procedures set forth in § 154.36 for placing a lien on real property.



   (C)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing
of notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any
reasonable request by an interested party for postponement or continuance. An
original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the
issuing town official or Police Officer shall be filed and retained by the
town, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Conn.
Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The
presence of the issuing official or Police Officer shall be required at the
hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his/her
liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence in his/her
behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may
present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If such person fails to
appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against
him/her upon a finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable
provisions(s) of this subchapter. The hearing officer may accept from such
person copies of police reports, investigatory and citations reports, and
other official documents by mail, and may determine thereby that the
appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct
the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he/she
deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence
shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or
affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end
of the hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, he/she
shall dismiss the matter and enter his/her determination in writing
accordingly. If he/she determines that the person is liable for the
violation, he/she shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties,
costs or fees against such person as provided by this subchapter.



   (D)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the
hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to
the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more than
12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment
with the Clerk of the Superior Court for Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West
Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, together with the appropriate entry fee. The
certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of
assessment. Within such 12-month period, assessments against the same person
may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter
judgment, if the amount of such record of assessment and appropriate court
costs against such person favor the town. Notwithstanding any other provision
of the General Statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as
a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of
execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such person.



   (E)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant
to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal
shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-259 with the Clerk of the Superior Court,
Geographical Area No. 7, 54 West Main Street, Meriden, CT 06450, which shall
entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the judges of the
Superior Court.



(C.G.S. § 7-152c)  (Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



TAX RELIEF FOR ELDERLY AND/OR DISABLED HOMEOWNERS



§ 154.45  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to provide optional
property tax relief for certain residents of the town as provided in Conn.
Gen. Stat., §§ 12-129n (Real Property Tax Relief for Certain Homeowners Age
65 or Over or Permanently and Totally Disabled), 12-170v (Real Property Tax
Relief to Certain Elderly Homeowners) and 12-170w (Application for Real
Property Relief).



(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)



§ 154.46  EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX BENEFITS.



   The tax benefit shall commence with the taxes due on the Grand List of
October 1, 2013, and thereafter until this subchapter shall be repealed,
amended and/or modified by action of the Legislative Council. All tax
benefits granted under this subchapter shall be subject to the availability
of funding by the Legislative Council.



(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)



§ 154.47  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   All applicants who apply for and are eligible for tax relief
under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa shall be deemed to have applied for
relief under this subchapter. Consistent with the requirements of Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-170aa, applicants shall file semi-annually for tax credits under
this subchapter, however, tax credits granted under this subchapter shall be
determined and granted on an annual basis according to the funding, if any,
of this program by the Legislative Council.



   (B)   Applicants shall provide the Assessor for the town any such
additional information as may be required by the Assessor to determine
eligibility.



(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)



§ 154.48  DETERMINATION OF TAX RELIEF AND RELIEF ALLOWED.



   (A)   The Assessor shall review applications and information
provided by applicants seeking tax relief under this subchapter; determine
eligibility in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-129n and/or §§
12-170v and 12-170w; and notify the Tax Collector of the amount of tax relief
granted, if eligible.



   (B)   The property tax credits provided by this subchapter shall be
in conjunction with property tax relief under Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-129b
to 12-129d, inclusive, and with § 12-170aa and shall not exceed in the
aggregate the total amount of tax which would, except for said §§ 12-129b
to 12-129d, inclusive, and 12-129aa and this subchapter, be laid against the
taxpayer. The property tax relief provided for under this subchapter may in
any case where title to real property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer
or his/her spouse and any other person or persons, be prorated to reflect the
fractional share in the property of such taxpayer or spouse or if such
property is a multi-family dwelling, such relief may be prorated to reflect
the fractional portions of such property occupied by the taxpayer and the
persons not otherwise eligible for tax relief shall not receive any credit.



(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 469, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 489, passed
7-7-03; Am. Ord. 504, passed 6-1-04; Am. Ord. 535, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord.
550, passed 5-29-07; Am. Ord. 561, passed 6-2-08; Am. Ord. 572, passed
5-6-09; Am. Ord. 583, passed 4-19-10; Am. Ord. 604, passed 4-13-11; Am. Ord.
617, passed 5-7-12; Am. Ord. 631, passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)



§ 154.49  REAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF FOR CERTAIN HOMEOWNERS AGE 65 OR OVER OR
PERMANENTLY AND TOTALLY DISABLED.



   (A)   Town credit.  For the 2016 Grand List Year and thereafter,
applicants who are determined eligible for tax credits under this subchapter
and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-129n, shall receive a tax credit toward the
payment of their real property on their principal residence as follows:



 


Town Credit




Income

 

Benefit




Over

 

To

 

Married

 

Unmarried




$0

 

$17,600

 

$2,000

 

$2,000




$17,601

 

$23,600

 

$2,000

 

$2,000




$23,601

 

$35,200

 

$1,350

 

$1,350




$35,201

 

$42,900

 

$1,350

 

$0




 



   (B)   The income limits in the above tables shall be adjusted
annually in the same manner as Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(b)(2).



   (C)   Additional town credit.  For the 2015 Grand List Year and
thereafter, with the exception of applicants whose increase is due to a
change in assessment not related to revaluation, applicants who have received
the local town credit set forth in division (A) above for at least one year,
and whose tax bill has increased from the immediately preceding year, shall
receive an additional credit equal to the amount of the increase in taxes but
not to exceed the amounts as follows:



 


Additional Town Credit




Income

 

Maximum Benefit




Over

 

To

 

Married

 

Unmarried




$0

 

$17,600

 

$2,250

 

$2,250




$17,601

 

$23,600

 

$2,250

 

$1,750




$23,601

 

$35,200

 

$1,750

 

$1,750




$35,201

 

$42,900

 

$1,750

 

$0




 



 



   (D)   The income limits in the above tables shall be adjusted in the
same manner as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa(b)(2).



   (E)   Recipients of tax relief under this subchapter shall be
required to pay a minimum of 25% of what his/her tax bill would be without
any benefits.



   (F)   Eligibility.



      (1)   Any person who owns real property in the Town of Hamden,
or who is liable for the payment of taxes thereon under Conn. Gen. Stat., §
12-48, and who occupies that property as his/her principal residence, shall
be eligible for real property tax relief pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat., §
12-129n in the form of a tax credit provided that all the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   Such person is 65 years of age or over at the
close of the calendar year preceding the period in which a claim for relief
is filed; or whose spouse living with him/her is 65 years of age or over at
the close of the calendar year preceding the period in which a claim for
relief is filed; or such person is 60 years of age or over and the surviving
spouse of a taxpayer qualified in Hamden under this subchapter at the time of
his/her death or with respect to real property on which such applicants or
their spouses are liable for taxes under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-48; or



         (b)   Such person is under age 65 and eligible in
accordance with applicable federal regulations to receive permanent total
disability benefits under Social Security, or has not been engaged in
employment covered by Social Security and accordingly has not qualified for
benefits thereunder, but has become qualified for permanent total disability
benefits under any federal, state, or local government retirement disability
plan, including the Railroad Retirement Act and any government-related
teacher’s retirement plan, in which requirements with respect to
qualifications for such permanent total disability benefits are comparable to
such requirements under Social Security.



      (2)   Applicants or their spouses under divisions (F)(1)(a) or
(b) above have been taxpayers of the Town of Hamden for one year immediately
preceding their receipt of tax credits under this subchapter and meet the
requirements with respect to maximum income allowance during the calendar
year preceding the year in which the application is made for the tax credit
provided in this subchapter; and



      (3)   Applicants own and occupy the real property in the town
for which this tax credit is claimed as their principal residence. Principal
residence shall be defined as residency of at least six months and one day in
each Grand List year for which the exemption is claimed; and



      (4)   Applicant’s qualifying income does not exceed the
requirements as set forth in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa.



      (5)   Applicants have applied for and are eligible for tax
relief under Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170aa.



      (6)   If any person with respect to whom a claim for property
tax relief in accordance with this subchapter has been approved for any
assessment year transfers, assigns, grants or otherwise conveys on or after
the first day of October but prior to the first day of August in such
assessment year the interest in real property to which such claim for tax
relief is related, regardless of whether such transfer, assignment, grant or
conveyance is voluntary or involuntary, the amount of such tax credit shall
be a pro rata portion of the amount otherwise applicable in such assessment
year to be determined by a fraction the numerator of which shall be the
number of full months from the first day of October in such assessment year
to the date of such conveyance and the denominator of which shall be 12. If
such conveyance occurs in the month of October the grantor shall be
disqualified for tax credit in such assessment year.



      (7)   The grantee shall be required within a period not
exceeding ten days immediately following the date of such conveyance to
notify the Assessor thereof, or in the absence of such notice, upon
determination by the Assessor that such transfer, assignment, grant or
conveyance has occurred, the Assessor shall determine the amount of tax
reduction to which the grantor is entitled for such assessment year with
respect to the interest in real property conveyed and notify the tax
collector of the reduced amount of the tax reduction applicable to such
interest. Upon receipt of such notice from the Assessor, the tax collector
shall, if such notice is received after the tax due date in the municipality,
within ten days thereafter mail or hand a bill to the grantee stating the
additional amount of tax due as determined by the Assessor. Such tax shall be
due and payable and collectible as other property taxes and subject to the
same liens and processes of collection, provided such tax shall be due and
payable in an initial or single installment not sooner than 30 days after the
date such bill is mailed or handed to the grantee and in equal amount in any
remaining, regular installments as the same are due and payable.



(Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14; Am. Ord. 658, passed 6-15-15; Am. Ord. 674, passed
6-6-16; Am. Ord. 688, passed 6-12-17)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-129n



§ 154.50  REAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF TO CERTAIN ELDERLY HOMEOWNERS;
APPLICATIONS FOR REAL PROPERTY TAX RELIEF.



   (A)   Local freeze.  For the 2013 Grand List Year only, applicants
who are determined eligible under this subchapter and Conn. Gen. Stat., §
12-170v, received the additional town credit on the 2012 Grant List, and
whose taxes would fall below 25% of what the tax bill would otherwise be
without any benefits, shall be entitled to pay the tax levied on such
property, calculated in accordance with the provisions of division (B) of
this section for the first year the claim for such tax relief is filed and
approved in accordance with the provisions of Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-170v
and 12-170w, and such person shall be entitled to continue to pay the amount
of tax or such lesser amount as may be levied in any year, during each
subsequent year that such person meets such qualifications, and the surviving
spouse of such owner or tenant, qualified in accordance with the requirements
pertaining to a surviving spouse in this division, or any owner or tenant
possessing a joint interest in such property with such owner at the time of
such owner’s death and qualified at such time in accordance with the
requirements in this subchapter and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170v, shall be
entitled to continue to pay the amount of such tax or such lesser amount as
may be levied in any year, as it becomes due each year following the death of
such owner for as long as such surviving spouse or joint owner or joint
tenant is qualified in accordance with the requirements in this subchapter
and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170v.



      (1)   After the first year a claim for relief is filed and
approved, application for such tax relief shall be filed biennially on a form
prepared for such purpose by the Assessor of the town. Any such owner or
tenant who is qualified in accordance with this subchapter and Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 12-170v, and any such surviving spouse or joint owner or joint
tenant surviving upon the death of such owner or tenant, shall be entitled to
pay such tax in the amount as provided in this section for so long as such
owner or tenant or such surviving spouse or joint owner or joint tenant
continues to be so qualified.



      (2)   To qualify for the tax relief provided in this section,
a taxpayer shall meet all of the following requirements:



         (a)   On December 31 of the calendar preceding the year
in which a claim is filed, be (A) 70 years of age or over, (B) the spouse of
a person 70 years of age or over, provided the spouse is domiciled with such
person, or (C) 62 years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer
who at the time of such taxpayer’s death had qualified and was entitled to
tax relief under this section, provided such surviving spouse was domiciled
with such taxpayer and the time of the taxpayer’s death;



         (b)   Occupy such real property as his/her home;



         (c)   Either spouse shall have resided within the State
of Connecticut for at least one year before filing the claim under this
section and Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-170w; and



         (d)   Otherwise meet the qualifications under Conn. Gen.
Stat., §§ 12-170v and 12-170w.



   (B)   The tax on the real property for which the benefits under this
section are claimed shall be the lower of: The tax due with respect to the
homeowner’s residence for the assessment year commencing October first of
the year immediately preceding the year in which the initial claim for tax
relief is made, or the tax due for any subsequent assessment year. If title
to real property is recorded in the name of the person or the spouse making a
claim and qualifying under this section and any other person or persons, the
claimant hereunder shall be entitled to pay the claimant’s fractional share
of the tax on such property calculated in accordance with the provisions of
this section, and such other person or persons shall pay the person’s or
persons’ fractional share of the tax without regard for the provisions of
this section. For the purposes of this section, a “MOBILE MANUFACTURED
HOME”, as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-63a, shall be deemed to be
real property.



(Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see Conn. Gen. Stat., §§ 12-170v and 12-170w



§ 154.51  NO CONFLICT WITH STATE STATUTE.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to conflict with any state
statute, rule or regulation.



(Ord. 439, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 646, passed 5-12-14)



TAX ABATEMENT FOR CERTAIN OCCUPANTS



§ 154.60  RESIDENCE'S EXCEEDING 8% OF OCCUPANT'S INCOME.



   (A)   Property taxes due for any tax year with respect to any
residential dwelling occupied by the owner or owners and for whom the
dwelling is the primary place of residence, may be abated to the extent that
such property taxes exceed 8% or more of the total income from any source,
adjusted for self-employed persons to reflect the allowance for expenses in
determining adjusted gross income for federal income tax purposes, of such
owner or owners and any other person for whom such dwelling is the primary
place of residence, for the calendar year immediately preceding the beginning
of the tax year for which such taxes are due; and



   (B)   Applications for such abatement shall be made not later than
30 days preceding the tax due date for such tax year, provided if the amount
of such taxes has not been determined on such date, within ten days following
determination of the amount of such taxes.



   (C)   If the town approves such application for abatement, then not
later than ten days following the tax due date for such taxes abated, the
owner or owners shall deliver to the tax collector, an agreement, on a form
executed and acknowledged in the form and manner required for the transfer of
an interest in real property, to reimburse the town in the amount of the
taxes abated, with interest at 6% annum (or such other rate as approved by
the Council) that contains a legal description of the real property with
respect to which such abatement is approved and shall be recorded in the
lands records of the town.



   (D)   Such agreement shall constitute a lien on such real property,
which shall remain valid until paid.  Such lien shall be due and payable in
full upon sale or transfer of such real property or upon the death of the
owner, or if owned by more than one person at the time such lien is created,
upon the death of the last of such owners surviving.  Such lien shall be
released by the tax collector in the town when the taxes are secured thereby
and have been paid. No lien recorded under the provision of this subchapter
shall take precedence over any mortgage recorded in the land records prior to
such certificate of lien.



   (E)   Approval of any request for abatement pursuant to this
subchapter shall be at the town's sole discretion and shall automatically
cease upon transfer or sale of the property or the death of the owner(s).



(Ord. 549, passed 5-7-07)



HISTORIC PROPERTIES



§ 154.65  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to designate an historic property,
provide for the creation of an History Property Commission and terminate the
Historic Property Study Commission.



(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)



§ 154.66  HISTORIC PROPERTY.



   Each property listed in Schedule A below is hereby established as an
historic property. The boundaries of each property are fixed and defined in
Schedule A.



 

SCHEDULE A: HISTORIC PROPERTY


PROPERTY
 
BOUNDARIES


Hamden Memorial Town Hall
 
South by Dixwell Avenue, 50 ft.; east by land of the Episcopal Church Society
and the land of the Town of Hamden; north by land formerly of John H.
Rochford, 53 feet; and west by land now or formerly belonging to Amadio
Mantovani. The east and west lines being 215 feet each, more or less.



 



(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)



§ 154.67  HISTORIC PROPERTIES COMMISSION.



   (A)   An Historic Properties Commission is hereby established to
promote the purposes set forth in this subchapter and to perform all
functions provided in this subchapter and as shall from time to time be
prescribed under the Connecticut General Statutes relative to the property
now or hereafter designated in § 154.66.



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of five regular and three
alternate members who shall consist of electors of the town, holding no
salaried municipal office in Hamden. The members of the Commission shall be
appointed and may be removed by the Mayor. The regular members shall be
appointed in such a manner that the term of at least one member shall expire
each year, with their successors to be appointed in like manner for terms of
five years. Alternate members shall be appointed for terms of three years.
The Mayor is further empowered to make appointments to fill vacancies, which
appointments shall be for the duration of the vacated unexpired term.



   (C)   Within a period of 30 days after the appointment of the
original members of the Commission, the regular members shall meet and elect
a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson. Alternate members shall not participate
in the vote for election of officers of the Commission. In all other matters,
in case of an inability to act because of absence, sickness or self-interest
on the part of any member of the Commission, an alternate member shall take
the Commissioner's place designated by the Chairperson.



   (D)   All members shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)



§ 154.68  POWERS OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission shall have such powers, shall perform such
functions and shall be subject to such limitations as shall from time to time
be prescribed by the applicable Connecticut General Statutes.



   (B)   The Commission may from time to time, in accordance with Conn.
Gen. Sta., § 7-147q, initiate the designation of additional historic
properties or the enlargement of the boundaries of an existing historic
property.



   (C)   The Commission shall adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent
with the provisions of the state statutes, and may, subject to appropriation,
employ clerical and technical assistance or consultants and may accept gifts
of money and expend the same for such purposes.



(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)



§ 154.69  TERMINATION OF HISTORIC STUDY COMMITTEE.



   The Historic Study Committee(s) shall be terminated as of September 27,
2002.



(Ord. 472, passed 9-3-02)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of §§ 154.02 to 154.04,
inclusive, or 154.06 shall be fined not more than $200 for each structure
erected or violation committed.  Each day's violation shall constitute a
separate offense. 



(Ord. 131, passed 6-2-75)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of  §§ 154.10 through 154.17
shall be fined $100. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 337, passed 7-6-93; Am. Ord. 425, passed 10-2-00)



   (C)   (1)   Violations of the provisions of §§ 154.130 through
154.138 shall be punishable by a fine of $100 for each day a violation exists
and continues.



      (2)   Any unpaid fine imposed pursuant to §§ 154.130 through
154.138 shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which the fine
was imposed from the date of such fine in accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat.,
§ 7-148aa. Each such lien shall be continued, recorded and released as
provided for in Conn. Gen. Stat., § 7-148aa.



(Ord. 424, passed 10-2-00)



CHAPTER 155:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Findings



   155.02   Purpose



Administration



   155.03   Planning and Zoning Commission



   155.04   Duties of Planning and Zoning Commission



   155.05   Zoning Board of Appeals



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  FINDINGS.



   The Special Flood Hazard Areas of the town, as identified on the
federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of
life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by
the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which
increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage
uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.



(Ord. 178, passed 6-4-79; Am. Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)



§ 155.02  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to do the following.



   (A)   Protect human life and health.



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions.



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard.



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so to minimize future
flood blight areas.



   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
an area of special flood hazard.



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their action.



(Ord. 178, passed 6-4-79; Am. Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 155.03  PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   The Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this chapter by approving and applying flood regulations as
mandated by FEMA, within the zoning regulations.



(Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)



§ 155.04  DUTIES OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.



   Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall include, but not be
limited to the following.



   (A)   Permit review.



      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the
permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



      (2)   Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.



      (3)   Review all development permits to determine if the
proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the
area of special flood hazard.



      (4)   For purposes of this section, "ADVERSELY AFFECTS" means
that the cumulative effects of proposed development when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development increases the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.



   (B)   Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data
has not been provided in accordance with the Flood Insurance Study, the
planning and zoning commission shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation data available from a federal or state agency, or
other source, in order to administer the requirements of residential and
non-residential construction standards.



   (C)   Information to be obtained and maintained.



      (1)   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures.



      (2)   For all new or substantially improved structures, verify
and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level).



      (3)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Alteration of watercourses.



      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and department of
environmental protection, State of Connecticut, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of the notification to FEMA.



      (2)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.



   (E)   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual filed conditions). The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in § 155.05.



(Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)



§ 155.05  ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the town shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances of the flood regulations contained
in the zoning regulations. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the enforcement
or administration of the flood regulations contained in the zoning
regulations.



(Ord. 598, passed 12-6-10)



CHAPTER 156:  PENALTIES FOR ZONING VIOLATIONS



Section



   156.01   Procedure of issuance of citations



   156.02   Compliance periods after citation is issued



   156.03   Payment of fines



   156.04   Hearing procedure for a citation



   156.05   Miscellaneous provisions



§ 156.01  PROCEDURE OF ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.



   (A)   The zoning enforcement officer, or his or her agent, shall
provide written notice to any person who violates any provision of any
section of the town's zoning regulations. Such written notice shall explain
the nature of the violation and the steps required for compliance, and shall
allow a 72-hour period within which to correct the violation or within which
a written plan for correction shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement
officer setting forth a reasonable time period for correction of the
violation as agreed upon by the zoning enforcement officer. A written notice
issued by the zoning enforcement officer pursuant to this division (A) shall
be served:



      (1)   By hand delivery, at which time the 72-hour period shall
begin; or



      (2)   By certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular first-class mail. Three business days shall be allowed for mail
delivery of the notice prior to the commencement of the 72-hour period.



   (B)   Within 48 hours after the period for correction established in
division (A) expires, the zoning enforcement officer or his or her agent
shall re-inspect the subject property to determine compliance.



   (C)   If the violations set forth in the written notice have not
been corrected at the time of re-inspection, the zoning enforcement officer
or his or her agent may issue a citation and fine for each violation. All
citations issued by the zoning enforcement officer or his or her agent shall
state the violation for which the citation is being issued, the fine imposed
for the violation, the time period within which the fine must be paid, and an
address for remittance of the fine. The fine for each violation shall be $150
for each day that such violation continues. Citations shall be issued by the
zoning enforcement officer or his or her agent by hand, or by delivery to the
abode or residence of the person in violation.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05)



§ 156.02  COMPLIANCE PERIODS AFTER CITATION IS ISSUED.



   Upon the issuance of a citation by the zoning enforcement officer or
his or her agent, the time period for correction of the violation cited in
such citation shall be in accordance with the following requirements:



   (A)   For violations that involve the illegal use of a property by a
non-structural object such as a sign, vehicle, junk and the like, compliance
with the regulations shall be within 48 hours of issuance of the citation.



   (B)   For violations that involve the illegal use of a property by
the conduct of an activity, which is not permitted, compliance with the
regulations shall be within 48 hours of issuance of the citation.



   (C)   For violations that involve the illegal placement of a
structure, all work on the structure shall immediately cease. Further, all
violations not included in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be
brought in compliance with the zoning regulations within 48 hours of the
issuance of the citation, or within such other time period as designated in
writing by the zoning enforcement officer or his or her agent.



   (D)   Any violation for which a citation is issued and which is not
corrected within the time period allowed in this section, shall be a new
violation of the zoning regulations, and every 24-hour period thereafter in
which the violation is not corrected shall constitute a new violation. For
repeated violations of the same section of the zoning regulations by the same
person, the zoning enforcement officer shall not be required to provide the
violator with another written notice or correction period, and may
immediately issue the citations and fines permitted by this chapter.



   (E)   The zoning enforcement officer shall not be responsible for a
daily re-inspection; rather the person to whom the citation has been issued
shall be responsible for reporting subsequent compliance to the zoning
enforcement officer or his or her agent. The zoning enforcement officer, or
his or her agent, shall re-inspect to confirm compliance within 24 hours of
such report.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05)



§ 156.03  PAYMENT OF FINES.



   (A)   All fines imposed under this chapter shall be made payable to
the Treasurer of the town and shall be received by the zoning enforcement
officer or his or her agent within ten business days from receipt of the
citation. All fines collected by the zoning enforcement officer shall be
directed to the Town Treasurer.



   (B)   No zoning permit shall be approved by the Planning Department
until the applicant provides the Planning Department with a statement, in
writing, that there are no delinquent fines or fees due for the property for
which an application is made or provides a statement in writing, from the
Town Planner or his or her agent that the owner of the property for which an
application is made has entered into a payment program approved by the
Finance Director to pay off any delinquent fines or penalties.



   (C)   The Town Planner may authorize the issuance of a zoning permit
without the satisfaction of the above if he or she certifies in writing, as
part of the file, that an emergency exists affecting the health or safety of
the occupants of the building upon which property the zoning application is
sought.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 542, passed 9-5-06)



§ 156.04  HEARING PROCEDURE FOR A CITATION.



   (A)   Appointment of citation hearing officer.  The Mayor, acting
within his or her capacity of chief executive officer, shall appoint one or
more citation hearing officers, other than police officers or employees or
persons who issue citations, to conduct the hearing authorized by this
section. Further, no zoning enforcement officer, building inspector or
employee of the municipal body exercising zoning authority may be appointed
to be a hearing officer for citations issued for zoning violations.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   At any time within 12 months from the expiration of the
final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees
for any citation issued under this ordinance adopted pursuant to Conn. Gen.
Stat., § 8-12a, as amended, for an alleged violation thereof, an official of
the town shall send notice to the person cited. Such notice shall inform the
person cited:



         (a)   Of the allegations against him or her and the
amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due;



         (b)   That he or she may contest his or her liability
before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written
notice within ten days of the date thereof;



         (c)   That if he or she does not demand such a hearing,
an assessment and judgment shall be entered against him or her; and



         (d)   That such judgment may issue without further
notice.



      (2)   If the person who is sent notice pursuant to division
(A) of this section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he
or she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines,
penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official
designated by the town. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding,
civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person
making the payment. Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand
for a hearing within ten days of the date of the first notice provided for in
division (A) of this section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and
the designated municipal official shall certify such person's failure to
respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and
assess the fines provided for within this article and shall follow the
procedures set forth in division (B)(4) of this section.



      (3)   Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written
notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be
held not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the mailing
of notice of hearing, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good
cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement
or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of
violation issued by the issuing official or police officer shall be filed and
retained by the municipality, and shall be deemed to be a business record
within the scope of Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-180 and evidence of the facts
contained therein. The presence of the issuing official or police officer
shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing
to contest his or her liability shall appear at the hearing and may present
evidence in his or her behalf. A designated municipal official, other than
the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the municipality. If
such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by
default against him or her upon a finding of proper notice and liability
under the applicable statutes, ordinances or zoning regulations. The hearing
officer may accept from such person copies of police reports, investigatory
and citation reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine
thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing
officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods
of proof, as he or she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the
admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony
shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce
his or her decision at the end of the hearing. If he or she determines that
the person is not liable, he or she shall dismiss the matter and enter his or
her determination in writing accordingly. If he or she determines that the
person is liable for the violation, he or she shall forthwith enter and
assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by
the applicable town ordinances.



      (4)   If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry,
the hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment
to the person found liable and shall file, not less than 30 days nor more
than 12 months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of
assessment with the clerk of the superior court for the geographical area in
which the town is located together with an entry fee of $8. The certified
copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment.
Within such 12-month period, assessments against the same person may be
accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter
judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment and court costs of $8,
against such person in favor of the municipality. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, the hearing officer's
assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil
money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without
further notice to such person.



      (5)   A person against whom an assessment has been entered
pursuant to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An
appeal shall be instituted within 30 days of the mailing of notice of such
assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry
fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 52-259, in the superior court for the geographical area
in which the town is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in
accordance with the rules of the judges of the superior court.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05)



§ 156.05  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The penalties established by this chapter shall not be
exclusive of any other enforcement remedy, which may be imposed by the zoning
enforcement officer or his or her agent for violations of the town's zoning
regulations, as authorized by any state statute, town ordinance, or the
town's zoning regulations.



   (B)   In construing this chapter, feminine or neuter pronouns shall
be substituted for those of masculine form and vice versa, and the plural of
the singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in
which the context may require.



(Ord. 509, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 627, passed 12-3-12)



CHAPTER 157:  MUNICIPAL FINES FOR VIOLATIONS OF
INLAND WETLAND AND WATERCOURSE REGULATIONS



Section



   157.01   Procedure for issuance of citations



   157.02   Compliance periods after citation is issued



   157.03   Payment of fines



   157.04   Hearing procedure for a citation



   157.05   Miscellaneous



§ 157.01  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.



   (A)   The wetlands enforcement officer, or his/her agent, shall
provide written notice to any person who violates any provision of any
section of the Hamden Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations. Such
written notice shall explain the nature of the violation and the steps
required for compliance, and shall allow a period of time as set forth in the
regulations to remedy the violation or within which a written plan for
remediation shall be submitted to the Inland Wetlands Commission setting
forth a reasonable time period for remediation of the violation as agreed
upon by the Inland Wetlands Commission . A written notice issued by the
wetlands enforcement officer pursuant to this division shall be served:



      (1)   By hand delivery; or



      (2)   By certified mail return receipt requested and by
regular first-class mail. Three business days shall be allowed for mail
delivery of the notice to be considered received.



   (B)   Within 48 hours after the period for remediation established
in division (A) of this section expires, the wetlands enforcement officer or
his/her agent shall re-inspect the subject property to determine compliance.



   (C)   If the violations set forth in the written notice have not
been corrected at the time of re-inspection, the wetlands enforcement officer
or his/her agent may issue a citation and fine for each violation. All
citations issued by the wetlands enforcement officer or his/her agent shall
state the violation for which the citation is being issued, the fine imposed
for the violation, the time period within which the fine must be paid, and an
address for remittance of the fine. The fine for each violation shall be $150
for each offense. Each violation is a separate and distinct offense, and in
the case of continuing violations each day's continuance of the offense is a
separate and distinct offense. Citations shall be issued by the wetlands
enforcement officer or his or her agent by hand, or by mail delivery to the
abode or residence of the person in violation.



(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)



§ 157.02  COMPLIANCE PERIODS AFTER CITATION IS ISSUED.



   (A)   Any violation for which a citation is issued and which is not
corrected within the time period allowed shall be a new violation of the
wetlands regulations, and every 24-hour period thereafter in which the
violation is not corrected shall constitute a new violation. For repeated
violations of the same section of the inland wetlands and watercourse
regulations, the wetlands enforcement officer shall not be required to
provide the violator with another written notice or correction period, and
may immediately issue the citations and fines permitted by this chapter.



   (B)   The wetlands enforcement officer shall not be responsible for
a daily re-inspection; rather the person to whom the citation has been issued
shall be responsible for reporting subsequent compliance to the wetlands
enforcement officer or his/her agent. The wetlands enforcement officer, or
his/her agent, shall re-inspect to confirm compliance within 24 hours of such
report.



(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)



§ 157.03  PAYMENT OF FINES.



   All fines imposed under this chapter shall be made payable to the
Treasurer, Town of Hamden and shall be received by the inland wetlands
enforcement officer or his/her agent within ten  business days from receipt
of the citation. All fines collected by the wetlands enforcement officer
shall be directed to the Town Treasurer.



   (B)   No permit to conduct regulated activity shall be issued by the
Planning Department of the Town of Hamden until the applicant provides the
Planning Department with a statement, in writing, that there are no
delinquent fines or fees due for the property for which an application is
made or provides a statement in writing, from the Town Planner or his/her
agent that the owner of the property for which an application is made has
entered into a payment program approved by the Finance Director to pay off
any delinquent fines or penalties.



(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)



§ 157.04  HEARING PROCEDURE FOR A CITATION.



   The provisions for a hearing under this chapter shall be in accordance
with Chapter 12: Hearing Procedure for Municipal Citations pursuant to Conn.
Gen. Stat. § 7-152c, as may be amended.



(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)



§ 157.05  MISCELLANEOUS.



   (A)   The penalties established by this chapter shall not be
exclusive of any other enforcement remedy, which may be imposed by the
wetlands enforcement officer or his/her agent for violations of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations, as authorized by any state statute,
town ordinance, or the Hamden Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Regulations.



   (B)   In construing this chapter, feminine or neuter pronouns shall
be substituted for those of masculine form and vice versa, and the plural of
the singular and singular of the plural shall be substituted in any case in
which the context may require.



(Ord. 625, passed 10-1-12)



CHAPTER 158:  WAIVER OF PENALTY FOR NOT DISCLOSING THE ACTUAL RENTAL
AND RENTAL RELATED INCOME AND OPERATING EXPENSES
IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONN. GEN. STAT., § 12-63c(d)



Section



   158.01   Waiver of penalty



§ 158.01  WAIVER OF PENALTY.



   In accordance with Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-63c(d) as may be amended,
the Assessor or Board of Assessment Appeals shall waive the ten percent
penalty imposed if the owner of the real property required to submit actual
rental and rental related income and operating expenses in accordance with
Conn. Gen. Stat., § 12-63c, as may be amended, is not the owner of such
property on the assessment date for the Grand List to which such penalty is
added upon receipt by the Assessor or Board of Assessment Appeals of such
information verifying that it was not the owner on the assessment date to
which such penalty shall be applied.



(Ord. 687, passed 5-1-17)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Tables



      A.   ANNEXATIONS



      B.   SCENIC ROADS



Table A: Annexations



 

Ord. No.
 
Description




'66 Code, § 78-1
 
Setting off a part of the town to City of New  Haven. L.D.


'66 Code, § 78-3
 
Annexing a part of North Haven to Hamden.  L.D.


'66 Code, § 78-5
 
Annexing a part of North Haven to Hamden.


'66 Code, § 78-6
 
Changing line adjacent to Wintergreen Ave.  changed.


'66 Code, § 78-7
 
Changing line a:Long Wooding St. changed.


'66 Code, § 78-8
 
Changing line extended easterly.


 




 



TABLE B:  SCENIC ROADS



 

Ord. No.
 
Description


253
 
Designating a portion of Hogan Road, beginning at a point 1438 feet from the
southerly side of Mount Carmel Avenue at the intersection of Hogan Road and
Mount Carmel Avenue, as a scenic road.


256
 
Designating Spruce Bank Road as a scenic road.


357
 
Designating Brookside Drive from Sante Fe Avenue north to Glen Parkway as a
scenic road.


358
 
Designating Hillfield Road from Johnson Road to West Todd Street as a scenic
road.


 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Connecticut General Statutes





References to 1966 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO CONNECTICUT GENERAL STATUTES



 

CONN. GEN. STAT.
 
CODE SEC.




4-124i - 4-124p
 
32.21


4-124o
 
32.22


4-176e – 4-181a
 
124.04


7-131a
 
33.25


7-136
 
33.38


7-147j
 
150A.07


7-147q
 
154.68


7-147y
 
150A.07


7-148
 
12.02


7-148aa
 
154.36, 154.99


7-148(b) - 7-148(f)
 
33.70


7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv)
 
154.30


7-149a
 
98.02


7-152c
 
94.20, 94.42, 101.07, 100.08, 154.17, 154.38, 157.04


7-163a
 
96.31


7-171 - 7-186
 
121.01


7-169
 
121.01


7-171
 
121.01


7-186
 
121.01


7-246 - 7-269a
 
51.75, 51.76


7-255
 
51.55


7-450(a)
 
31.50


8-12a
 
156.04


8-19a
 
33.61


8-23
 
151.03


8-25
 
151.01


8-28
 
98.03


8-31a - 8-37A
 
32.02


9-167A
 
32.03


9-372
 
Charter 1-4, 7-1


12-48
 
154.49


12-63a
 
154.50


12-63c
 
158.01


12-63c(d)
 
Ch. 158, 158.01


12-64
 
123.02, 123.08, 123.10


12-65b
 
123.07, 123.08


12-65e
 
123.09


12-65g
 
123.07


12-65h
 
123.07, 123.10


12-81
 
36.48 - 36.50


12-81(17), (18)
 
36.47


12-81(19)
 
36.48


12-81(20)
 
36.48


12-81(20), (21)
 
36.46


12-81(22)
 
36.48


12-81(55)
 
36.45


12-81(56)
 
36.51


12-81(57)
 
36.51


12-81(63)
 
36.51


12-81(72)
 
123.02, 123.10


12-81c
 
36.49


12-81i
 
36.45


12-81j
 
36.47


12-81l
 
36.45, 36.48


12-93
 
120.03


12-129b - 12-129d
 
154.48


12-129n
 
154.45, 154.48, 154.49


12-129aa
 
154.48


12-144c
 
36.52


12-170v
 
154.45, 154.48, 154.50


12-170w
 
154.45, 154.48, 154.50


12-170aa
 
154.47 - 154.49


12-170aa(b)(2)
 
154.49


12-170aa(c)
 
154.32


13a-149
 
96.31


14-1
 
111.15


14-164A
 
112.05


16-1
 
36.51


16-1(27)
 
36.51


16-1(27)(a)
 
36.51


19a-206((b),(c)
 
122.05


21-3
 
113.03


21-28
 
120.99


21-29
 
120.99


21-36
 
117.08


21-37
 
117.02, 117.08


21-38
 
117.99


22a-114 et seq.
 
94.21


22a-133w
 
123.11


22a-133x
 
123.11


22a-133y
 
123.11


22a-134
 
123.11


22a-226d
 
12.02


22a-226d(a)
 
94.11


22a-241(b)
 
52.03


22a-248(4)
 
94.10


22a-248(6)
 
94.10


22a-248(9)
 
94.10


22a-248(12)
 
94.10


22a-248(17)
 
94.10


22a-250
 
94.11


22a-250(b)
 
94.11


22a-260(7)
 
94.36


22a-354
 
33.67


22a-354p
 
33.67


22a-354v
 
33.67


22a-452c
 
123.11


23-65(a)
 
94.14, 94.22


23-65(c)
 
94.14, 94.22


23-65(d)
 
94.14


23-65(e)
 
94.14


25-84 - 25.98
 
33.152


27-103
 
117.08, 120.03


27-135
 
33.127, 33.128


29-129 - 29-143
 
112.05


29-250
 
154.32


29-292(a)(1)
 
93.33


30-1
 
111.01, 111.15


30-15
 
111.01


30-20
 
111.01


30-39
 
111.10


30-90a
 
111.08


33-421(K)
 
120.02


47a-20
 
33.78


47a-23c
 
33.78


50-9
 
36.40


50-10 - 50-14
 
36.40


52-180
 
12.02, 94.20, 96.32, 100.08, 154.17, 154.38, 156.04


52-259
 
12.02, 94.20, 96.32, 100.08, 154.17, 154.38, 156.04


Ch. 54
 
36.51


Ch. 99
 
Charter
Preamble


Ch. 100
 
33.12


Ch. 100 § 7-204
 
33.13


Ch. 103 § 7-246
 
51.01


Ch. 103a
 
36.25 - 36.27


Ch. 477 §§ 25-84 - 25-94
 
33.22


Ch. 530 §§ 29-96 - 29-101
 
93.01


Ch. 563
 
110.04, 110.05


Ch. 750 § 43-6
 
35.05


Title 8 § 8-27
 
154.01


Title 8 Ch. 126
 
151.14


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1966 CODE



 

1966 CODE SECTION
 
1977 CODE SECTION




4-1
 
91.10


4-2
 
91.11


4-3
 
91.12, 91.99


4-10
 
91.99


6-1
 
111.07


6-2
 
111.02


6-3
 
111.01


6-5
 
111.03


6-6
 
111.04


6-7
 
111.05


6-9
 
111.06


7-1
 
112.01


7-2
 
112.02


7-3
 
112.05


7-4
 
112.06


7-5
 
112.07


7-6
 
112.04


7-7
 
112.03


7-8
 
112.99


7-9
 
112.08


8-1
 
90.01


8-2
 
90.02


8-3
 
90.03


8-4
 
90.04


8-5
 
90.05, 90.99


10-1
 
113.01


10-2
 
113.02


10-3
 
113.03


10-4
 
113.05


10-5
 
113.99


10-6
 
113.06


16-1
 
92.01


16-2
 
92.02, 92.99


16-3
 
92.03


19-1
 
33.35


19-2
 
33.36


19-3
 
33.37


19-4
 
33.38


19-5
 
33.39


22-1
 
97.01


22-2
 
97.02


22-3
 
97.03


22-4
 
97.04


22-5
 
97.05


22-6
 
97.06


22-7
 
97.07


22-8
 
97.08


22-12
 
97.09


22-13
 
97.10, 97.99


25-1
 
93.01


25-2
 
93.02


25-3
 
93.03


25-4
 
93.04


25-5
 
93.05


25-6
 
93.06, 93.99


30-1
 
94.01


30-2
 
94.02, 94.99


30-3
 
94.05, 94.99


33-1
 
114.01, 114.02


33-2
 
114.03


33-3
 
114.04, 114.99


34-1
 
35.10


38-1
 
36.40


40-1
 
116.01


40-2
 
116.02, 116.10, 116.99


40-3
 
116.06


40-4
 
116.07


40-5
 
116.08


40-6
 
116.10, 116.99


40-7
 
116.05


40-9
 
116.09


40-10
 
116.10, 116.99


40-11
 
116.05


43-1
 
93.10


43-2
 
93.11


43-3
 
93.12


43-4
 
93.13


43-5
 
93.14


43-6
 
93.16, 93.99


43-7
 
93.15


45-1
 
33.10


45-2
 
33.11


45-3
 
33.12


45-5
 
33.13


45-6
 
33.14


45-7
 
33.15, 33.99


46-1
 
95.01, 95.02


46-2
 
95.03


46-3
 
95.04, 95.99


48-1
 
117.01


48-2
 
117.02


48-3
 
117.03


48-4
 
117.04


48-5
 
117.05, 117.99


50-1
 
35.01


50-2
 
35.02


50-3
 
35.03


52-1
 
32.01


52-2
 
32.02


52-3
 
32.03


52-4
 
32.04


54-1
 
35.05


56-1
 
70.15


56-2
 
70.16


56-3
 
70.17, 70.99


57-1
 
50.01


57-2
 
50.02


57-3
 
50.03


57-4
 
50.04


57-5
 
50.05


57-6
 
50.06


57-7
 
50.07


57-9
 
50.08, 50.99


57-11
 
50.10


57-12
 
50.11


57-13
 
50.12


57-14
 
50.13


57-15
 
50.14


57-16
 
50.15


57-17
 
50.16


57-18
 
50.17


57-19
 
50.18


57-20
 
50.19


57-21
 
50.20


57-22
 
50.21


59-9
 
96.10


59-10
 
96.11


59-11
 
96.12


59-12
 
96.13


59-13
 
96.14


59-14
 
96.15


59-15
 
96.16


59-16
 
96.17


59-17
 
96.18


59-18
 
96.19


59-25
 
96.35


59-26
 
96.36, 96.99


60-1
 
93.20


60-2
 
93.21


60-3
 
93.22


60-4
 
93.23


60-5
 
93.24


60-6
 
93.25, 93.99


62-1
 
118.01


62-2
 
118.02, 118.99


63-1
 
151.01


63-2
 
151.02


63-3
 
151.03


63-4
 
151.04


63-5
 
151.05


63-6
 
151.06


63-8
 
151.08


63-9
 
151.09


63-10
 
151.14, 151.99


63-13
 
151.10


63-14
 
151.11


63-15
 
151.12


63-16
 
151.13


65-1
 
70.20, 70.21


70-1
 
97.15


70-2
 
97.16


70-3
 
97.17


70-4
 
97.18


70-5
 
97.19


70-6
 
97.20


70-7
 
97.21, 97.99


77-1
 
36.01


77-2
 
36.02


77-3
 
36.03


81-1
 
11.01


81-2
 
11.02


85-1
 
36.35


90-9
 
33.63


90-10
 
33.64


App. V       § 1
 
31.15


      2
 
31.16


      3
 
31.17


      4
 
31.18


App. VII     § 1
 
154.20


      2
 
154.21


      3
 
154.22


App. VIII    § 1
 
153.01


      2
 
153.05, 153.07


      3
 
153.02


      4
 
153.03, 153.07


      5
 
153.06


      6
 
153.04


      7
 
153.08, 153.99


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
CODE SECTION




105
 
12-4-72
 
150.05 - 150.16


108
 
3-20-73
 
36.25 - 36.29


119
 
6-3-74
 
34.01 - 34.99


131
 
6-2-75
 
154.01 - 154.06, 154.99


134
 
9-2-75
 
70.07 - 70.09, 70.99


135
 
9-9-75
 
35.15


139
 
3-1-76
 
150.12


143
 
8-2-76
 
96.20


164
 
4-3-78
 
150.18


165
 
4-3-78
 
70.30, 70.99


166
 
4-3-78
 
90.06


167
 
4-18-78
 
50.05, 97.19, 152.06, 153.04


169
 
5-1-78
 
33.10 - 33.15


170
 
6-5-78
 
150.17


173
 
8-7-78
 
35.15


175
 
2-5-79
 
90.07


178
 
6-4-79
 
155.01, 155.02


185
 
9-10-79
 
70.31


187
 
11-5-79
 
33.70 - 33.88


191
 
4-7-80
 
70.32


197
 
7-7-80
 
Ch. 113


202
 
4-6-81
 
33.77 - 33.80


204
 
5-4-81
 
33.90 - 33.96


213
 
7-6-82
 
11.03


216
 
9-7-82
 
111.08, 111.09, 111.99


229
 
12-12-83
 
111.08, 111.09, 111.99


231
 
5-7-84
 
120.01 - 120.03, 120.99


232
 
6-4-84
 
32.20 - 32.24


233
 
8-6-84
 
Ch. 30


235
 
9-4-84
 
Ch. 51


240
 
11-5-84
 
11.05 - 11.13


241
 
11-5-84
 
111.15 - 111.17, 111.99


248
 
9-4-85
 
120.02, 120.03


251
 
4-7-86
 
98.01 - 98.04


252
 
5-5-86
 
150.05 - 150.16


253
 
5-5-86
 
Table B


256
 
8-5-86
 
Table B


260
 
2-3-87
 
94.20 - 94.25


261a
 
5-4-87
 
33.65


262
 
7-10-87
 
90.08


267
 
2-2-88
 
33.97


277
 
7-14-88
 
121.01


281
 
11-14-88
 
98.99


285
 
2-6-89
 
 


286
 
2-6-89
 
94.35 - 94.41, 94.43 - 94.47, 94.99


287
 
4-24-89
 
36.45


288
 
4-24-89
 
36.46


289
 
4-24-89
 
36.47


290
 
4-24-89
 
36.48


292
 
5-1-89
 
99.01 - 99.06


293
 
5-1-89
 
99.15 - 99.18


295
 
6-5-89
 
97.35


297
 
8-7-89
 
122.01 - 122.07, 122.99


301
 
1-2-90
 
150.19


302
 
1-8-90
 
150.06, 150.07, 150.09, 150.10


307
 
2-26-91
 
Ch. 122


308
 
5-7-90
 
33.65


309
 
5-7-90
 
36.50


312
 
1-7-91
 
Ch. 51, Ch. 96, Ch. 97


313
 
1-7-91
 
70.33


317
 
9-3-91
 
95.11, 95.99


318
 
9-3-91
 
154.02, 154.06


320
 
10-7-91
 
33.70 - 33.88


321
 
5-4-92
 
150.06, 150.07, 150.09, 150.10


323
 
9-8-92
 
36.60 - 36.66


324
 
9-8-92
 
33.67


325
 
12-7-92
 
95.20 - 95.23


326
 
12-7-92
 
95.04 - 95.06


331
 
5-3-93
 
33.65


332
 
5-12-93
 
11.05 - 11.13


336
 
7-6-93
 
95.20 - 95.23


337
 
7-6-93
 
154.10 - 154.15, 154.99(B)


339
 
9-7-93
 
36.80


340
 
9-7-93
 
33.66


343
 
2-7-94
 
52.01 - 52.07, 52.99


352
 
10-3-94
 
52.02, 52.04, 52.07


354
 
11-7-94
 
Ch. 71


355
 
5-1-95
 
96.25 - 96.32


357
 
10-11-95
 
T.S.O. B


358
 
10-11-95
 
T.S.O. B


365
 
5-6-96
 
35.10


368
 
12-4-96
 
70.20


369
 
2-3-97
 
33.45 - 33.48


370
 
2-3-97
 
150.20


371
 
2-3-97
 
51.02, 51.15


376
 
5-4-98
 
36.49


377
 
5-4-96
 
70.99


384
 
10-20-98
 
123.01


388
 
4-5-99
 
35.20


389
 
4-5-99
 
33.100 - 33.103


397
 
10-25-99
 
51.01, 51.02, 51.55 - 51.70, 51.75 - 51.81


401
 
2-7-00
 
150.04


405
 
5-1-00
 
33.01- 33.04


407
 
5-1-00
 
33.25 - 33.30


408
 
5-1-00
 
33.35, 33.37, 33.39


409
 
5-1-00
 
33.97


410
 
5-1-00
 
95.20


413
 
7-5-00
 
33.100


414
 
7-5-00
 
33.91


415
 
7-5-00
 
33.107 - 33.110


417
 
9-5-00
 
96.01


418
 
9-5-00
 
97.03, 97.07, 97.08


420
 
10-2-00
 
36.63


421
 
10-2-00
 
33.115 - 33.118


422
 
10-2-00
 
33.125 - 33.128


424
 
10-2-00
 
154.30 - 154.38


425
 
10-2-00
 
154.10 - 154.17, 154.99


426
 
11-6-00
 
123.03


428
 
12-4-00
 
101.01 - 101.08, 101.99, 123.02 – 123.08, 123.10 – 123.13


429
 
12-4-00
 
94.10 - 94.23, 94.99


432
 
2-5-01
 
97.01 - 97.08


433
 
3-12-01
 
33.135 - 33.137


434
 
3-12-01
 
51.15


435
 
3-12-01
 
31.30 - 31.47


436
 
4-2-01
 
150.06, 150.07, 150.09, 150.10


439
 
6-4-01
 
154.45 - 154.48, 154.51


440
 
7-2-01
 
123.03


446
 
10-1-01
 
123.01 - 123.08, 123.10 – 123.13


449
 
11-5-01
 
36.50


451
 
11-5-01
 
36.49


452
 
2-4-02
 
33.150 - 33.152


453
 
2-4-02
 
33.115


458
 
6-3-02
 
31.39, 31.47


459
 
6-3-02
 
36.80


460
 
6-3-02
 
51.15


461
 
6-3-02
 
96.01


462
 
6-3-02
 
97.04A


463
 
6-3-02
 
97.01b


464
 
6-3-02
 
33.66A


465
 
6-3-02
 
33.66


467
 
6-3-02
 
33.65


469
 
6-3-02
 
154.48


470
 
6-3-02
 
100.01 - 100.10, 100.99


472
 
9-3-02
 
154.65 - 154.69


476
 
10-7-02
 
36.03


478
 
11-4-02
 
95.10


481
 
12-16-02
 
95.05 - 95.07


483
 
4-14-03
 
70.34


488
 
5-27-03
 
11.05


489
 
7-7-03
 
154.48


490
 
11-6-03
 
100.02, 100.08, 100.09, 100.99


491
 
11-6-03
 
152.01, 152.46, 152.50, 152.62, 152.69


497
 
2-2-04
 
33.01


501
 
4-7-04
 
150A.01 - 150A.07, 150A.99


502
 
4-7-04
 
35.10


504
 
6-1-04
 
154.48


509
 
2-7-05
 
156.01 – 156.05


510
 
2-7-05
 
123.01 – 123.08, 123.10 – 123.13


512
 
3-7-05
 
12.01 – 12.03


513
 
3-7-05
 
111.08


514
 
3-7-05
 
111.99


517
 
4-4-05
 
124.01 – 124.04


520
 
4-4-05
 
33.160 – 33.163


529
 
8-1-05
 
123.13


532
 
10-31-05
 
36.51


533
 
4-3-06
 
33.125


535
 
6-12-06
 
154.48


536
 
6-12-06
 
150.04


538
 
7-5-06
 
31.39


539
 
8-7-06
 
33.66A


540
 
8-7-06
 
33.66


541
 
8-7-06
 
33.65


542
 
9-5-06
 
156.03


547
 
12-4-06
 
154.25 – 154.29


549
 
5-7-07
 
154.60


550
 
5-29-07
 
154.48


551
 
6-5-07
 
31.30, 31.33, 31.34


552
 
6-18-07
 
30.01 – 30.08, 30.10 – 30.14, 30.16


556
 
2-4-08
 
123.03


557
 
3-3-08
 
31.30


560
 
5-5-08
 
36.48


561
 
6-2-08
 
154.48


562
 
7-7-08
 
123.01 – 123.08, 123.10 – 123.13


564
 
9-2-08
 
33.67A


568
 
1-5-09
 
152.46, 152.68, 152.69


569
 
1-5-09
 
94.06, 94.99


570
 
1-5-09
 
101.04


571
 
3-2-09
 
31.37, 31.38


572
 
5-6-09
 
154.48


575
 
6-1-09
 
31.30, 31.34


576
 
7-6-09
 
117.01 - 117.08, 117.99


578
 
7-6-09
 
120.01 - 120.03, 120.99


580
 
9-8-09
 
33.125


581
 
9-8-09
 
95.30 - 95.33


582
 
11-24-09
 
33.65, 33.66, 33.66A


583
 
4-19-10
 
154.48


584
 
5-3-10
 
100.01 - 100.09, 100.98, 100.99


589
 
6-7-10
 
97.02


590
 
6-7-10
 
96.05


591
 
6-7-10
 
96.01


592
 
6-7-10
 
36.80


598
 
12-6-10
 
155.01 - 155.05


601
 
2-8-11
 
30.10


602
 
3-7-11
 
97.35


603
 
3-7-11
 
33.66A


604
 
4-13-11
 
154.48


607
 
5-2-11
 
90.08


608
 
6-6-11
 
36.51


609
 
7-5-11
 
123.03


612
 
8-1-11
 
94.42


613
 
1-3-12
 
123.01 – 123.08, 123.10 – 123.13


615
 
4-2-12
 
33.65, 33.66, 33.66A


616
 
5-7-12
 
36.52


617
 
5-7-12
 
154.48


618
 
6-4-12
 
95.12


620
 
8-1-12
 
11.20 - 11.29


621
 
8-6-12
 
150.12


622
 
8-7-12
 
33.62


623
 
9-4-12
 
33.55 - 33.61


625
 
10-1-12
 
157.01 - 157.05


627
 
12-3-12
 
156.05


628
 
12-3-12
 
52.01 - 52.07, 52.99


629
 
12–3-12
 
11.05 - 11.13


631
 
5-6-13
 
154.48


632
 
6-3-13
 
36.45


633
 
6-3-13
 
36.46


634
 
6-3-13
 
36.47


635
 
6-3-13
 
36.49


637
 
7-1-13
 
111.02, 111. 03, 125.01 - 125.11, 125.99


641
 
10-7-13
 
36.51


642
 
10-8-13
 
31.50


645
 
1-6-14
 
36.10 – 36.21


646
 
5-12-14
 
154.45 – 154.51


647
 
6-4-14
 
33.140 – 33.143


648
 
7-7-14
 
111.10


653
 
11-10-14
 
115.01 – 115.20, 115.99


654
 
1-5-15
 
123.01 – 123.13


658
 
6-15-15
 
154.49


661
 
7-6-15
 
123.03


664
 
9-28-15
 
11.06


665
 
10-5-15
 
121.01


666
 
12-7-15
 
31.30 - 31.47


667
 
1-19-16
 
11.06


669
 
2-1-16
 
152.01, 152.05, 152.85 - 152.87, 152.92


672
 
4-18-16
 
95.11


674
 
6-6-16
 
154.49


676
 
6-20-16
 
111.03


677
 
7-5-16
 
102.01 - 102.04, 102.99


682
 
9-19-16
 
93.30 - 93.36, 93.99


685
 
1-17-17
 
37.01, 37.02


687
 
5-1-17
 
158.01


688
 
6-12-17
 
154.49


689
 
9-18-17
 
36.48


692
 
11-20-17
 
31.30, 31.33


695
 
2-5-18
 
102.01 - 102.04, 102.99


696
 
2-5-18
 
33.127, 33.128


697
 
2-26-18
 
93.33


698
 
2-26-18
 
103.01


Town of Hamden, CT
Adopted July 25, 2017
Effective August 17, 2017
Z
O
N
I
N
R E G U L A T I O N S

Amendments To The Zoning Regulations
Twon of Ha mden, CT
(Hamden First Adopted ZONING REGULATIONS on December 24, 1930)
Adopted: December 7, 2009
Effective: January 1, 2010
Adopted: March 9, 2010
Effective: April 15, 2010
Amended July 27, 2010
Effective: August 15, 2010
Amended: December 14, 2010
Effective: December 17, 2010
Amended: October 23, 2012
Effective: November 15, 2012
Amended: December 18, 2012
Effective: January 8, 2013
Amended: June 11, 2013
Effective: July 8, 2013
Amended: July 2, 2013
Effective: July 8, 2013
Amended: October 8, 2013
Effective: October 29, 2013
Amended: April 22, 2014
Effective: May 15, 2014
Amended: November 18, 2014
Effective: December 9, 2014
Amended: April 14, 2015
Effective: May 15, 2015
Amended: April 14, 2015
Effective: May 15, 2015
Amended: October 20, 2015
Effective: November 6, 2015
Amended: October 27, 2015
Effective: November 10, 2015
Amended: November 10, 2015
Effective: November 15, 2015
Amended: November 24, 2015
Effective: December 4 2015
Amended: December 8, 2015
Effective: December 16, 2015
Amended: November 15, 2016
Effective: November 30, 2016
Amended: February 15, 2017
Effective: March 10, 2017
Amended: April 25, 2017
Effective: May 15, 2017
Amended: July 25, 2017
Effective: August 17, 2017
Note: The images and diagrams appearing in SmartCode Version 9.0 are the property of Duany Plater-Zyberk
& Company (DPZ). Their reproduction and use is freely permitted with “Credit: Duany Plater-Zyberk
& Co.” in print.
Table of Contents
Article I Introduction
Section 100 Authority
Section 110 Jurisdiction
Section 120 Purpose
Section 130 Application of Regulations
Section 140 Zoning Map and Districts
Section 150 Interpretation of Zoning Boundaries
Section 160 Interpretation of Regulations
Section 170 Validity
Section 180 Repealer
Section 190 Effective Date
Article II Residential Zones R1-R5
Section 200 Purpose
Section 210 Permitted Uses
Section 220 Area, Density and Dimensional Requirements
Section 230 Accessory Structures
Article III Transect Zones T1-T5 and Special Districts
Section 300 Purpose
Section 310 Building Location
Section 320 Building Massing
Section 330 Special Requirements T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
Section 340 Building Use
Section 350 Density and Parking Calculations
Section 360 Parking Location and Private Roadway Standards
Section 370 Landscape Standards
Section 380 Special Districts M, NC, TG, MIH
Article IV Overlay Zones
Section 400 Purpose
Section 410 Aquifer Protection Area (APA) (See Seperate Regulations)
Section 420 Coastal Area Management Zone (CAM)
Section 430 Flood Plain Zones and Special Flood Hazard Areas
Section 440 Open Space Development
Section 450 Village District Overlay Zones
Article V Basic Standards
Section 500 Purpose
Section 510 General Requirements
Section 520 Environmental Conditions
Section 530 Lot, Block and Building Configuration
Section 540 Site Amenities
Section 550 Sign Regulations
Section 560 Sidewalk Standards
Section 570 Fences and Walls
Section 580 Outdoor Lighting
Section 590 Infrastructure
Section 591 Traffic, Parking and Loading Requirements
Article VI Special Provisions
Section 600 Purpose
Section 610 Site Plan and Special Permit Uses
Section 620 Accessory Dwelling Units in Single-Family Homes
Section 622 Adult Oriented Establishments
Section 624 Agriculture
Section 626 Animals
Section 628 Cemeteries
Section 630 Civic Clubs, Lodges or Associations (Non-Profit)
Section 632 Community Residences
Section 634 Conference Center Development
Section 636 Day Care
Section 638 Food Service
Section 640 Health Care Facilities
Section 642 Heliports
Section 644 Home Occupation
Section 646 Lodging
Section 648 Manufacturing
Section 650 Motor Vehicles
Section 652 Multi-Family Dwellings
Section 654 Outdoor Storage in Non-Residential Zones
Section 656 Parking Garages and Big Box Retail
Section 658 Places of Worship
Section 660 Preservation of Historic Structures
Section 662 Public Uses and Public Utilities
Section 664 Resource Recovery, Volume Reduction and/or Transfer Station
Section 666 Retail
Section 668 Schools
Section 670 Student Housing
Section 672 Telecommunications Facility
Section 674 Transfer Station (See Section 664)
Section 676 Wind Energy Conservation Systems
Section 677 Medical Marijuana Production Facilities and Dispensaries
Article VII Application Standards and Procedures
Section 700 General Application Standards and Procedures
Section 702 Zoning Amendments and Standards
Section 704 Purpose
Section 706 Zoning Map Amendments
Section 708 Amendments to Regulations
Section 710 Referrals
Section 712 Public Hearing and Notice
Section 714 Adoption of Amendment
Section 716 Effective Date of Amendments
Section 718 Special Permit Standards and Procedures
Section 720 Site Plan Standards and Procedures
Section 722 Applications for Approval of Location of Use and Limited Repairer’s License Car Sales
Section 724 Temporary Permits
Section 726 Zoning Board of Appeals
Section 728 Staff Procedures
Section 730 Administrative Permits
Section 732 Digital Format Material
Article VIII Definitions and Abreviations
Section 800 Use of Terms
Section 810 Specific Terms
Section 820 Undefined Terms
Section 830 Defined Terms
Section 840 Zoning Regulations Abreviations
Article IX Appendix
Section 9.1 Planned Unit Developments
ARTICLE I INTRODUCTION
Section 100 Authority
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as
amended, Chapter 151 of the Town of Hamden Ordinances and the Town of Hamden Subdivision Regulations,
as amended, the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Hamden hereby adopts the following
Zoning Regulations for the Town of Hamden, Connecticut.
The existing State of Connecticut enabling legislation, Chapter 151 of the Town of Hamden Ordinances
and the Town of Hamden Subdivision Regulations (Existing Local Codes), shall continue to be applicable
to issues not covered by these Regulations except where these Existing Local Codes are in conflict with this
Section.
Section 110 Jurisdiction
These Regulations apply to all areas within the Town of Hamden and to the use and form to which any area
and any and all buildings and structures may be devoted.
Section 120 Purpose
The intent of these Zoning Regulations is to protect and enhance the health, safety and welfare of Hamden’s
population, environment, infrastructure and economic viability by enabling, encouraging and qualifying the
implementation of the following policies:
120.1 Health, Safety and Welfare
a. Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community with regard to living and working
conditions;
b. Design streets and buildings to reinforce safe environments, but not at the expense of accessibility;
c. Minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions;
d. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
e. Provide adequate light, air and privacy.
120.2 Environment & Natural Resources
a. Facilitate adequate provisions for water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
b. Protect existing and potential public surface, groundwater and drinking water supplies in recognition
of their importance to the health, safety and general welfare of the Town and its larger environs;
c. Conserve and protect the natural resources of the Town, the value of land and buildings and encourage
the most appropriate use of land throughout the town;
d. Distribute open space including parks, squares and playgrounds within neighborhoods and urban
centers;
e. Use green corridors to define and connect the urbanized areas;
f. Regulate development such that it is consistent with soil types, terrain and infrastructure and insure
that proper provisions are made for soil erosion and sediment control for any project for which a
permit is required or sought from the Town;
g. Encourage the use of solar and other renewable forms of energy and energy conservation and encourage
the development of housing opportunities for all citizens of the municipality.
1
2
120.3 Growth & Development
a. Guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and
Development;
b. Provide a guide for public policy and action for the efficient provision of public facilities;
c. Serve private enterprise in building development, investment and other economic activity relating to
uses of land and buildings throughout the Town;
d. Retain the natural infrastructure and visual character of the Town derived from topography, woodlands,
farmlands, and riparian corridors;
e. Develop architecture and landscape from local climate, topography, history and building practice;
f. Balance pedestrian with vehicular scales of development;
g. Use growth strategies that encourage infill and redevelopment to a greater extent than new community
construction;
h. Protect the character and the historic, social and economic stability of the Town and ensure that development
is orderly and beneficial; preserve and renew historic buildings to facilitate and affirm the continuity
and evolution of the Town;
i. Create, enhance and maintain compact, pedestrian-oriented and mixed-use neighborhoods;
j. Use a pattern for new development and infill development that is compatible with existing adjacent neighborhoods;
zones specializing in single-use should be the exception;
k. Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population;
l. Control development in residential areas to an amount commensurate with the capacity of the land and the
availability of public facilities;
m. Embed civic, institutional, commercial activity and public gathering places in downtown cores so as to reinforce
community identity. These uses should not be isolated in remote single-use complexes;
n. Situate civic buildings so they are distinctive and appropriate to a role more important than those of the
other buildings that constitute the fabric of the Town;
o. Develop in accordance with the POCD Conceptual Plans;
p. Organize development non-contiguous to urban areas in the pattern of clusters, traditional neighborhoods or
villages and regional centers;
q. Distribute affordable housing options through out the Town to match job opportunities and avoid concentrations
of poverty;
r. Provide a range of housing types and price levels within neighborhoods to accommodate diverse ages and
incomes;
s. Regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for specified
uses; consider the compatibility of adjacent uses;
t. Bring about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings to the Neighborhood Plans set forth in
the Plan of Conservation and Development and minimize conflicts between the uses of the land and buildings.
120.4 Circulation
a. Promote the most beneficial relationship between the form of buildings, the public realm, the uses of land
and circulation throughout the Town;
b. Use buildings and landscaping to contribute to the physical definition of thoroughfares as civic places;
c. Include a framework for the Town for transit, pedestrian and bicycle systems that provide alternatives to the
automobile;
d. Facilitate adequate provisions for the convenience of pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle circulation to avoid
undue congestion in the streets;
e. Accommodate automobiles while respecting the pedestrian and the spacial form of public areas;
f. Plan and reserve transportation corridors in coordination with land use;
g. Allow independence to those who do not drive by locating ordinary activities of daily living within walking
distance of most dwellings;
3
h. Design interconnected networks of thoroughfares to disperse and reduce the length of automobile trips;
i. Provide appropriate building densities and land uses within walking distance of transit stops;
j. Size and locate schools to enable children to walk or bicycle to them.
Section 130 Application of Regulations
130.1 Conformity Required
No land, building, structure or part thereof shall be constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, moved, arranged,
designed, intended to be used or altered except in conformity with these regulations. No lot shall be
less in area, width, required yards, nor shall any building or buildings or part thereof occupy in the aggregate a
greater percentage of the lot than as required by these Regulations. No building shall be greater in height than
as prescribed in the applicable section of these Regulations. Exceptions shall only be as specifically provided
herein. No lot shall be diminished in area nor shall any yard or other open space be reduced except in conformity
with these Regulations.
130.2 Consistency with Subdivision Regulations
The existing Subdivision Regulations shall continue to be applicable to issues not covered by these Regulations
Where the existing Subdivision Regulations are in conflict with these Regulations the conflict shall be resolved
in favor of these Zoning Regulations.
Section 140 Zoning Map and Districts
(See Zoning Map)
Section 150 Interpretation of Zoning Boundaries
a. Zoning Boundaries
The boundaries of these Zones are hereby established, as shown on a map entitled, "Zoning District Map,
Town of Hamden, CT," as amended, which, with all explanatory matter thereon, including the referenced
sectional maps, is hereby adopted and made a part of these Regulations. A copy of this map, henceforth
known and referred to as “the zoning map” indicating the latest amendments, shall be kept up to date in the
Planning and Zoning Office for the use and benefit of the public.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zones shown on the aforesaid map, the
following rules shall apply:
i. Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map, the zone boundary lines are the property lines, centerlines
of streets, the middle of the channel of waterways, the centerline of main tracks of railroad lines, or the
centerlines of utility rights-of-way.
ii. Where zone boundaries are shown graphically following property lines indicated on the zoning map, such
boundaries shall be the property lines as described by a duly recorded deed on file with the Town Clerk of
the Town of Hamden at the time of passage of these Regulations or any amendment thereto changing the
zone boundary affecting such property.
b. Multiple Zone Lots1
In lots that contain two or more Zoning Designations, the Zoning Designations will be applied as follows:
A use permitted in one of the zones may be extended throughout the lot, provided that a 25 foot deep landscape
and screened buffer is placed along the frontage in instances where the extended use would front on a
1 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
4
street with the immediate neighboring properties having an R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, T-1, T-2 or T-3 Zoning designation,
and/or in instances where the extended use would abut one or more properties having an R1, R2,
R3, R4, R5, T-1, T-2 or T-3 Zone designation currently used as residences, a 25 foot deep landscape and/or
ten foot screened and landscaped buffer is placed along the common border(s).
Section 160 Interpretation of Regulations
a. Any principal use of land, buildings or structures not expressly permitted by these Regulations in the various
zones is prohibited.
b. Any activity not expressly permitted in the Regulations is prohibited.
c. For a principal use permitted by these Regulations, accessory uses that are customarily incidental and are
actually subordinate thereto are permitted with the exception of Outdoor Wood-Burning Furnaces, which
are not permitted in any zone2.
d. No accessory use shall be established on a property until a principal use has first been established.
e. Where any conflict arises between the provisions of these Regulations and any other law, ordinance, regulation
or permit, the provision that imposes the highest standard or establishes the greatest restriction upon the
use of the land, buildings, structures or site shall control.
Section 170 Validity
If any portion of these regulations is judged to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to said portion and
the remainder of these regulations shall be deemed valid and effective.
Section 180 Repealer
The provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Hamden as adopted January 3, 1967 and subsequently
amended are hereby repealed as of the effective date of these Zoning Regulations, except that all terms and conditions
attached to Special Permits, Site Plans, Planned Unit Developments, and Variances granted under prior
regulations shall remain in effect. No new Planned Unit Developments shall be approved. In the case of Planned
Unit Developments previously approved, that are still in the process of development; said governing regulations
are included herein as an Appendix for reference.
Section 190 Effective Date
The effective date of these Regulations is January 1. 2010
2 Amended, September 28, 2010. Effective, October 15, 2010.
5
ARTICLE II RESIDENTIAL ZONES R1 – R5
Section 200 Purpose
Residential R-l Zone - The purpose of this zone is to encourage development of lowestdensity
residential uses generally in areas with difficult topographic or soil conditions and
without public water and sewer facilities. Its development should be in a manner that will
preserve the rural open space character as well as the physical and environmental amenities
of these areas. A limited number of other uses are permitted provided special conditions are
met.
Residential R-2 Zone – The purpose of this zone is to encourage development of lowdensity
residential uses generally in areas without public water and sewer facilities. Its
development should be in a manner that will preserve the open space character as well as
the physical and environmental amenities of these areas. A limited number of other uses are
permitted, provided special conditions are met.
Residential R-3 Zone – The purpose of this zone is to provide for one-family dwellings on
individual lots where public water supply and public sewage disposal facilities are generally
present. A limited number of other uses are permitted provided special conditions are met.
Residential R-4 Zone - The purpose of this zone is to provide for moderate-density onefamily
dwellings on individual lots where public water supply and public sewage disposal
facilities are generally present. A limited number of other uses are permitted provided special
conditions are met.
Residential R-5 Zone - The purpose of this zone is to provide for higher density residential
development on lots where public water supply and public sewage disposal facilities are
generally present. A limited number of other uses are permitted provided special conditions
are met.
Section 210 Permitted Uses
Permitted uses in Residential Zones are listed in the Table 6.1. All other uses are prohibited.
Special Permit uses are also subject to Site Plan approval. Specific uses may be subject to
the Basic Standards in Article V and Special Provisions in Article VI.
6
Section 220 Area, Density and Dimensional Requirements
Table 2.1 Residential Area and Coverage Requirements
Zone Min. Lot Aread Min. Lot Width a Max. Building
Coverage
Max. Total
Impervious
Coverage c
R-1 80,000 sq. ft. 200 ft. 15% 20%
R-2 40,000 sq. ft. 120 ft. 15% 20%
R-3 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 20% 25%
R-4 10,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. 25% 30%
R-5 b 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft. 30% 35%
a Measured at the required front yard setback
b Each dwelling unit shall have a lot area of at least 3,000 sq. ft.
c Equals building coverage plus all other impervious coverage
d Lot area is that which is free from wetlands and/or steep slopes in excess of 20% grade (See example below)
Table 2.2 Lot Area per Dwelling Unit
Zone Maximum Density c
R-1 1 du / 80,000sf
R-2 1 du / 40,000sf
R-3 1 du / 20,000sf
R-4 1 du / 10,000sf
R-5 1 du / 3,000sf a b
a Maximum of 3 dwelling units allowed per lot
b Minimum allowable lot size is 6,000 sq. ft.
c The density of dwelling units in a multifamily property is
governed by Section 652.
Front yard
on primary
street
frontage
Side yard
Rear
yard
opposite
Front
yard
Side yard
Figure 2.1a Setback for Corner Lot
Primary
street
frontage
Secondary street frontage
Front yard
on primary
street
frontage
Side yard
Rear
yard
opposite
Front
yard
Side yard
Figure 2.1b Setback for Corner Lot
Primary
street
frontage
Secondary street frontage
NOT
ALLOWED
12’-0” min.
3’ max,
3’
max.
7
EXAMPLE: Lot Area Calculation
Total Land Area
minus Wetlands
minus Slopes Exceeding 20% grade
Lot Area
80,000 sf
-10,000 sf
-10,000 sf
60,000 sf
This lot would be a legal and conforming lot in an R-2 zone, but not
an R-1.
Table 2.3 Residential Yard and Height Requirements for
PRIMARY STRUCTURES
Zone Min. Front Yard
from Street Linea b
Min. Front Yard
from Centerline a c Min. Side Yard Min. Rear Yard Max. Height
R-1 50 ft.a b 75 ft. a c 30 ft. 50 ft. 35 ft.
R-2 40 ft. a b 65 ft. a c 20 ft. 40 ft. 35 ft.
R-3 40 ft. a b 65 ft. a c 15 ft. 40 ft. 35 ft.
R-4 25 ft. a b 50 ft. a c 12 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft.
R-5 20 ft. a b 45 ft. a c 10 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft.
a On a corner lot, one front yard is required on the primary street frontage, and one side yard is required on the other yard adjacent to the secondary street. The yard
opposite the designated front yard shall be the rear yard and the remaining yard a side yard. The front yard shall be as required by the applicable zone.
b Where street lines have been established.
c From center line of the right-of-way where street lines have not been established.
Section 230 Accessory Structures
1. Accessory structures shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of 4/12.
2. Detached accessory structures shall not include structured parking.
3. Accessory structures not used for human habitation or for housing animals, located within 25 feet of the rear
property boundary may be located within three feet of the side boundary and three feet of the rear property
boundary.
4. Accessory structures not located within 25 feet of the rear property boundary are subject to the same setback
requirements as the primary structure.
5. With the exception of swimming pools, any detached accessory structure must be located at least ten feet
away from the primary structure, unless approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Official.
6. No swimming pool, tennis court or other recreational structure may be located in a required front or side yard
or within five feet of the rear property boundary.
7. Mobile storage containers may not be placed within a required front or side yard and may be used only for a
period not to exceed 90 days in any 12 month period.
8. “Roll-off” construction dumpsters may not be placed within a required front or side yard and may be used
for a period not to exceed 90 days in any 12 month period, renewable for an additional 30 days, but only
when associated with an active demolition or construction project approved by the Building Department.
Exception: The yard restriction may be waived by the Town Planner in cases where there are no reasonable
alternatives. a
a Effective November 15, 2012
8
3 Ft. min.
3 Ft Min
Table 2.5 Residential Yard and Height Requirements
for
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
NOT located within a rear yard setback
Zone Min. Front
Yard
Min. Side
Yard
Max. Height
R-Zones 12 ft. + the
required
building
setback
Same as
Primary
Structure
15 ft.
Figure 2.2 Location of Accessory Buildings on Lota
Table 2.4 Residential Yard and
Height Requirements for
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
located within a rear yard setback
Zone Min.
Side
Yard
Min.
Rear
Yard
Max.
Height
R-Zones 3 ft. 3 ft. 15 ft.
Specific to zones R1, R2, R3, R4, R5
Detached accessory buildings:
a. If an accessory building is not used for human habitation or for the housing of animals, it may be located in
the rear yard in accordance with Figure 2.2. Said structure shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch
of 4/12.
b. Detached Accessory Building shall not include structured parking.
c. No swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreational structure, including related improved areas shall be
permitted in any required side or front yard of any residential zone.
a Effective November 15, 2012 (Diagram moved from Article 5); “Rear” changed to “Side” in Table 2.5
Ft Min.
Ft Min.
ARTICLE III TRANSECT ZONES T1 - T5 AND SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Section 300 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to enable and encourage the implementation of the following policies
with the use of Transect Zones throughout the Town:
a. Future development in neighborhoods and regional centers shall be compact, pedestrianoriented
and mixed-use;
b. Ordinary activities of daily living should occur within walking distance of most dwellings,
allowing independence to those who do not drive;
c. Interconnected networks of streets should be designed to disperse traffic and reduce the
length of automobile trips;
d. Within neighborhoods, a range of housing types and price levels should be provided to accommodate
diverse ages and incomes;
e. Civic, institutional and commercial activity should be embedded in downtowns, not isolated
in remote single-use complexes;
f. Schools should be sized and located to enable children to walk or bicycle to them;
g. A range of open space including parks, squares and playgrounds should be distributed between
neighborhoods.
T1
natural
zone T2
RURAL
zone T3
SUB-URBAN
zone T4
GENERAL
URBAN
zone
T5
URBAN
CENTER
T3.5 zone
9
10
T1 T -1 Natural
T-1 Natural Zone consists
of lands approximating or
reverting to a wilderness
condition, including lands
unsuitable for settlement due
to topography, hydrology or
vegetation.
General Character: Natural landscape with some agricultural use
Building Placement: Not applicable
Frontage Types: Not applicable
Typical Building Height: Not applicable
Type of Civic Space: Parks, Greenways
T2 T -2 Rural
T-2 Rural Zone consists
of sparsely settled lands in
open or cultivated states.
These include woodland,
agricultural land, grassland,
and irrigable desert.
Typical buildings are farmhouses,
agricultural buildings,
cabins, and villas.
General Character: Primarily agricultural with woodland & wetland and scattered
buildings
Building Placement: Variable setbacks
Frontage Types: Not applicable
T ypical Building Height: 1- to 2-Story
T ype of Civic Space: Parks, Greenways
T3 T -3 Sub-Urban
T-3 Sub-Urban Zone consists
of low density residential
areas, adjacent to higher
zones that some mixed
use. Home occupations and
outbuildings are allowed.
Planting is naturalistic and
setbacks are relatively deep.
Blocks may be large and the
roads irregular to accommodate
natural conditions.
General Character: Lawns, and landscaped yards surrounding detached singlefamily
houses; pedestrians occasionally
Building Placement: Large and variable front and side yard setbacks
Frontage Types: Porches, fences, naturalistic tree planting
Typical Building Height: 1- to 2-1/2 story with some 3-story
Type of Civic Space: Parks, Greenways
T4 T 3.5 & T-4 Gener al
Urban
T3.5 & T-4 General Urban
Zones consist of a mixed
use but primarily residential
urban fabric. They may have
a wide range of building
types: single, sideyard, &
rowhouses. Setbacks & landscaping
are variable. Streets
with curbs and sidewalks
define medium-sized blocks.
General Character: Mix of houses, townhouses & small apartment buildings, with
scattered commercial activity; balance between landscape
and buildings; presence of pedestrians
Building Placement: Shallow to medium front and side yard setbacks
Frontage Types: Porches, fences, dooryards
Typical Building Height: 2- to 3-story
Type of Civic Space: Squares, Greens
T5 T -5 Urban Center
T-5 Urban Center Zone consists
of higher density mixed
use buildings that accommodate
retail, offices, rowhouses
and apartments. It has a tight
network of streets, with wide
sidewalks, steady street tree
planting and buildings set
close to the sidewalks.
General Character: Shops mixed with townhouses, larger apartment houses,
offices, workplace, and civic buildings; predominantly
attached buildings; trees within the public right-of-way;
substantial pedestrian activity
Building Placement: Shallow setbacks or none; buildings oriented to the street
defining a street wall
Frontage Types: Stoops, shopfronts, galleries
Typical Building Height: 3- to 5-story with some variation
Type of Civic Space: Parks, plazas and squares, median landscaping
FIGURE 3.1: TRANSECT DESCRIPTIONS
T3.5
11
Section 310 BUILDING LOCAT ION
310.1 Specific to zones T1, T2, T3, T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
a. Buildings in the T1 Zone are not permitted except for limited public use and utility purposes.
b. Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Table 3.4 and relevant transect tables.
c. Principal building(s) shall be built with frontage along a public or private roadway, and outbuilding(s) shall
be built to the rear of the principal building, and may be built on each lot as provided for in these Regulations.
d. Facades shall be built parallel to the street, as specified on Table 3.4 and relevant transect tables. Setbacks
for principal buildings shall be as shown in Table 3.4 and relevant transect tables. In the case of an infill lot,
setbacks shall match one of the existing adjacent setbacks.
e. Rear setbacks for outbuildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet measured from the centerline of the Rear Alley
or Rear Lane easement. In the absence of a rear alley or rear lane, the rear yard setback shall be 5 feet
from the rear property line.
f. Mobile storage containers may not be placed within a required front or side yard and may be used only for a
period not to exceed 90 days in any 12 month period.1
g. “Roll-off” construction dumpsters may not be placed within a required front or side yard and may be used
only for a period not to exceed 90 days in any 12 month period, renewable for an additional 30 days, but
only when associated with active demolition or construction project approved by the Building Department.2
Exception: The yard restriction may be waived by the Town Planner in cases where there are no other reasonable
alternatives.
310.2 Specific to zones T4 & T5
The Commission may, by Special Permit, allow an addition to an existing building which does not comply with
the frontyard setback/build-to line as of the effective date of these Regulations. The resulting structure shall be
in keeping with the intent of these Regulations and must comply with Section 530.3.
Section 320 BUILDING MASSING
320.1 General to zones T1, T2, T3, T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
a. Buildings on corner lots shall have two private frontages. Requirements for the second and third layers pertain
only to the principal frontage. Requirements for the first layer pertain to both frontages. (See Definitions
for Lot Line and Layers).
b. The first story of all facades shall be glazed with clear glass no less than 30% and shall be glazed at least
50% if a shopfront, except for facades of buildings located at least 200 feet from the front of the property
line, and side property line if a corner lot.3
c. Building heights and expression lines shall conform to Table 3.4.
d. Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for a first floor commercial
use, which shall be a minimum of 11 feet and may be a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level
exceeding 14 feet shall be counted as two (2) stories. Mezzanines extending beyond 33% of the floor area
below shall be counted as an additional story.
1 Effective November 15, 2012.
2 Effective November 15, 2012.
3 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
12
e. In a parking structure or garage, each level counts as a single story regardless of its relationship to habitable
stories.
f. Height limits may be increased by 15 feet for non-habitable spaces such as masts, chimney flues, water
tanks, or elevator bulkheads.
g. A spire, tower or belfry on a religious institution or public building may exceed the height limitations of the
underlying zone, but shall not:
i. Exceed the allowed height by more than 50 feet;
ii. Exceed 10% of the roof area.
h. Building heights in T1, T2, T3, T3.5 or T4 zones shall not exceed 35 feet and shall be measured in accordance
with these Regulations (See Article VIII Definition for Building Height).
i. Building heights in T5 zones shall not exceed 60 feet.
j. All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from view from the ground and adjacent buildings of equal
or lower height.
k. Sloped roofs are encouraged.
320.2 Specific to zones T3, T3.5, T4, M, TG, NC
a. No portion of the private frontage may encroach on the sidewalk.
b. Open porches may encroach on the first layer by 50% of its depth.
c. Balconies, open porches and bay windows may encroach on the first layer by 50% of its depth.
320.3 Specific to zones T5, M, TG, NC
a. Awnings, arcades, and galleries may encroach on the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb but must clear the
sidewalk vertically by at least 8 feet and shall not exceed 14 feet in height.
b. Stoops, lightwells, balconies, bay windows, and terraces may encroach on the first layer 100% of its depth.
c. Loading docks and service areas shall not be permitted in first layer.
d. In the absence of a building facade along any part of a frontage line, a streetscreen shall be built in the same
plane as the facade.
e. Streetscreens shall be between 3-1/2 and 4-1/2 feet in height. The streetscreen may be replaced by a hedge
or fence. Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow for pedestrian and one-way
automobile access.4
f. First floor residential or lodging use shall be raised a minimum of 2 feet from the average sidewalk grade.
Section 330 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, the following shall be required in the specified Transect Zones
and Special Districts: 5
Shopfront: A shopfront facade shall be provided on average every 30’ along the frontage. The shopfront shall be
no less than 50% glazed in clear glass and shaded by an awning overlapping the sidewalk as generally illustrated
in Figure 3.3 Table of Private Frontages and as specified in Article III; except for facades of buildings
located at least 200 feet from the front property line, and side property line if a corner lot 6,7
4 Effective November 15, 2012
5 Effective November 15, 2012
6 Effective November 15, 2012
7 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
13
Section 340 BUILDING USE
340.1 Specific to zones T2, T3, T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
a. Building uses in each Transect Zone shall conform to the uses on Table 6.1.
b. Accessory uses of lodging or office shall be permitted within an outbuilding. See Table 6.1.
340.2 Specific to zones T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
a. First story commercial uses shall be permitted.
Section 350 DENSITY AND PARKING CALCULAT IONS
350.1 Specific to zones T2, T3, T3.5, M, TG, NC
a. Density on a lot shall be determined by the actual parking provided within the lot as applied to the uses permitted
in Table 6.1, as well as landscaping, open space, building coverage and pervious surface regulations.
350.2 Specific to zones T4, T5, M, TG, NC
a. Maximum density on a parcel shall be determined by the availability of effective parking in conjunction
with Table 3.4 as it may apply. Such parking shall be provided:
i. Within the lot;
ii. Along the parking lane corresponding to the lot frontage, or;
iii. By purchase or lease for 25 years from a parking lot within 300 feet;
iv. In a public parking garage or lot available within 300 feet of the property line.
b. Parking requirements shall be adjusted according to the shared parking factor of Table 3.2 to determine the
effective parking.8
c. Based on the effective parking available, the density of the projected use shall be determined according to
Table 3.1 and Table 3.2.
d. At the discretion of the Commission, the effective parking may be further reduced by up to 30% within a
Transit-Oriented Development (TOD).
e. Liner buildings that are less than 30 feet deep and no more than two stories shall be exempt from parking
requirements.
350.3 Specific to zones T2, T3, T3.5, T4, T5 9
Parking calculations: Table 3.1 summarizes the parking requirement for each use by Transect Zone. This table
also enables the calculation of allowable building square footage and the number of dwelling units allowed on
each site given the parking available. To use the shared parking factor, first calculate the parking required for
each seperate use. Then divide the smaller number of parking spaces by the sharing factor and add the result to
the larger number of spaces required to find the actual number of spaces required. In the case of the two uses
requiring the same number of parking spaces, apply the shared parking factor to either one. 10
Table 3.1 Required Parking in Transect Zones
(See Table 5.5 for how uses are categorized by function)
Function T2 & T3, T3.5 T4 T5
Residential 2.0 / dwelling unit 1.5 / dwelling unit 1.0 / dwelling unit
Lodging 1.0 / dwelling unit 1.0 / dwelling unit 1.0 / dwelling unit
Office 3.0 / 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable space 3.0 / 1,000 sq. ft. 2.0 / 1,000 sq. ft.
Medical Office 5.0 / 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable space 4.0 / 1,000 sq. ft. 4.0 / 1,000 sq. ft.
8 Effective November 15, 2012
9 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
10 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
14
Table 3.1 Required Parking in Transect Zones
(See Table 5.5 for how uses are categorized by function)
Function T2 & T3, T3.5 T4 T5
Retail 4.0 / 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable space 4.0 / 1,000 sq. ft. 3.0 / 1,000 sq. ft.
Civic To be determined by the Commission a
Other To be determined by the Commission a
a The Commission may use Table 5.5 as a guide when determining required parking
Table 3.2 Shared Parking Factor
Example 1: T4 Zone, Mixed-use building with
20,000 s.f. of office and 100 dwelling units.
Office:
20,000 s.f. x 3 spaces / 1,000 s.f.
= 60 spaces
Residental:
100 dwelling units x 1.5 spaces / dwelling
= 150 spaces
Total without applying shared parking factor
60 + 150 = 210 required spaces
Apply shared parking factor:
60 required spaces / 1.4 sharing factor
= 43 actual spaces
43 + 150 = 193 required spaces
Bicycle Parking Stalls:
193 actual spaces x 1 stall / 10 actual spaces
(round following the standard convention)
TOTAL = 19 bicycle stalls
Table 3.2: SHARED PARKING FACTOR
Function with Function
RESIDENTIAL RESIDENTIAL
LODGING LODGING
OFFICE OFFICE
RETA IL 1.4 RETA IL
1.1
1.2 1.7
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.2
1
1
1
1
1.7
1.3
1.2
When three functions share parking,
the lowest Shared Parking
Factor shall be used to assure that
there is enough parking.
15
Example 2: T4 Zone, Mixed-use building with
10,000 s.f. of office and 20 dwelling units.
Office:
10,000 s.f. x 3 spaces / 1,000 s.f
= 30 spaces
Residental:
20 dwelling units x 1.5 spaces / dwelling
= 30 spaces
Sub-Total:
30 spaces + 30 spaces
= 60 required spaces
TOTAL:
30 required spaces / 1.4 sharing factor
= 21 actual spaces
30 required spaces + 21 required spaces = 51
Bicycle Parking Stalls:
51 actual spaces x 1 stall / 10 actual spaces
(round following the standard convention)
TOTAL = 5 bicycle stalls
----------------------------------------------------------------
Note: For projects meeting the requirments of a
Transit Oriented Development, do not use the shared
parking factor. Calculate total parking required and
then reduce the amount by 30%.
Section 360 PARKING LOCAT ION and PRIVAT E ROADWAY STAN DARDS
360.1 Specific to zones T1, T2, T3, T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
a. Where possible, parking shall be accessed by rear alleys or rear lanes.
b. Surface parking lots shall be masked from the frontage by a building or streetscreen.
360.2 Specific to zones T2, T3, M, TG, NC
a. Surface parking lots shall be located in the second and third lot layers. However, driveways, drop-offs and
unpaved parking areas may be located in the first lot layer and shall be limited to five spaces. These five
spaces may be used for temporary parking only.
b. Garages shall be located in the third layer. However, side- or rear-entry garages may be allowed in the first
or second layer by Special Permit.
360.3 Specific to zones T3, T3.5, T4, M, TG, NC
a. Driveways at frontages of single-family residential uses shall be no wider than 12 feet in the first layer.
b. Driveways at frontages of mixed-use and/or non-residential uses shall be no wider than 18 feet in the first
layer.
360.4 Specific to zones T3.5, T4, M, TG, NC
a. All parking areas and garages shall be located in the third layer.
b. A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within the public or private frontage for every ten
actual vehicular parking spaces.
16
360.5 Specific to zones T5, M, TG, NC
a. All parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be located in the third layer.
b. Vehicular entrances and exits to parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be no wider than 18 feet at
the frontage.
c. Pedestrian exits from all parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be directly to a frontage line (i.e., not
directly into a building) except on underground levels that may be exited by pedestrians directly into a building.
d. A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within the public or private frontage for every ten actual
vehicular parking spaces.
Table 3.3 Private Roadway Summary for Transect Zones
Design Speed Travel Lane Width T1 T2 T3 T3.5 T4 T5
Below 20 mph 8 feet • • • • • •
20-25 mph 9 feet • • • • • •
25-35 mph 10 feet • • • • • •
25-35 mph 11 feet • • •
Above 35 mph 12 feet • • •
Design Speed Parking Lane Width
20-25 mph (Angle) 18 ft •
20-25 mph (Parallel) 7 ft •
25-35 mph (Parallel) 8 ft • • • •
Above 35 mph (Parallel) 9 ft •
Design Speed Effective Turning Radius
Below 20 mph 5-10 ft • • • •
20-25 mph 10-15 ft • • • • • •
25-35 mph 15-20 ft • • • • • •
Above 35 mph 20-30 ft • • •
• Allowed
Section 370 LAN DSCAPE STAN DARDS
370.1 Specific to zones T2, T3, T3.5, T4, M, TG, NC
The first layer may not be paved, except for sidewalks and driveways as specified in Section 360.
370.2 Specific to zones T1, T2, TG
a. A minimum of two trees shall be planted within the first layer for each 30 feet of frontage line or portion thereof.
b. Trees may be of single or multiple species as shown on Table 5.2.
c. Trees shall be naturalistically clustered.
370.3 Specific to zones T3, T3.5, T4, M, NC
a. A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the first layer for each 30 feet of frontage line or portion thereof.
b. Trees shall be a single species to match the species of street trees on the public frontage, or as shown on Table
5.2.
370.4 Specific to zones T5
a. Trees shall not be required in the first layer.
b. The first layer may be paved to match the pavement of the public frontage.
17
a. Edgeyard: Specific Types - single family House, cottage, villa, estate house, urban
villa. A building that occupies the center of its Lot with Setbacks on all sides. This is
the least urban of types as the front yard sets it back from the Frontage, while the side
yards weaken the spatial definition of the public Thoroughfare space. The front yard is
intended to be visually continuous with the yards of adjacent buildings. The rear yard
can be secured for privacy by fences and a well-placed Backbuilding and/or Outbuilding.
T2
T3
T4
b. Sideyard: Specific Types - Charleston single house, double house, zero lot line house,
twin. A building that occupies one side of the Lot with the Setback to the other side.
A shallow Frontage Setback defines a more urban condition. If the adjacent building is
similar with a blank side wall, the yard can be quite private. This type permits systematic
climatic orientation in response to the sun or the breeze. If a Sideyard House abuts
a neighboring Sideyard House, the type is known as a twin or double House. Energy
costs, and sometimes noise, are reduced by sharing a party wall in this disposition.
T4
T5
c. Rearyard: Specific Types - Townhouse, Rowhouse, Live-Work unit, loft building,
Apartment House, Mixed Use Block, Flex Building, perimeter Block. A building that
occupies the full Frontage, leaving the rear of the Lot as the sole yard. This is a very
urban type as the continuous Facade steadily defines the public Thoroughfare. The
rear Elevations may be articulated for functional purposes. In its Residential form,
this type is the Rowhouse. For its Commercial form, the rear yard can accommodate
substantial parking.
T4
T5
d. Courtyard: Specific Types - patio House. A building that occupies the boundaries of
its Lot while internally defining one or more private patios. This is the most urban of
types, as it is able to shield the private realm from all sides while strongly defining the
public Thoroughfare. Because of its ability to accommodate incompatible activities,
masking them from all sides, it is recommended for workshops, lodging and schools.
The high security provided by the continuous enclosure is useful for crime-prone areas.
T5
e. Specialized: A building that is not subject to categorization. Buildings dedicated
to manufacturing and transportation are often distorted by the trajectories of
machinery. Civic buildings, which may express the aspirations of institutions,
may be included.
SD
fIGURE 3.2: BUILDING LOCATION
Building Location. This table approximates the location of the structure relative to the boundaries of each individual Lot, establishing
suitable basic building types for each Transect Zone.
T3.5
18
SECTION PLAN
LOT
PRIVATE
FRONTAGE
►►
◄◄
R.O.W.
PUBLIC
FRONTAGE
LOT
PRIVATE
FRONTAGE
►►
◄◄
R.O.W.
PUBLIC
FRONTAGE
Common Yard: A planted frontage wherein the facade is set back
substantially from the frontage line. The front yard created remains
unfenced and is visually continuous with adjacent yards, supporting
a common landscape. The deep setback provides a buffer from the
higher speed thoroughfares.
T2
T3
Porch & Fence: A planted frontage wherein the facade is set back from
the frontage line with an attached porch permitted to encroach. A
fence at the frontage line maintains street spatial definition. Porches
shall be no less than 8 feet deep.
T3
T4
Terrace or Lightwell: A frontage wherein the facade is set back from
the frontage line by an elevated terrace or a sunken lightwell. This
type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and removes the
private yard from public encroachment. Terraces are suitable for
conversion to outdoor cafes. Syn: Dooryard.
T4
T5
Forecourt: A Frontage wherein a portion of the facade is close to the
frontage line and the central portion is set back. The forecourt created
is suitable for vehicular drop-offs. This type should be allocated
in conjunction with other frontage types. Large trees within the
forecourts may overhang the sidewalks.
T4
T5
Stoop: A frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line
with the first story elevated from the sidewalk sufficiently to secure
privacy for the windows. The entrance is usually an exterior stair and
landing. This type is recommended for ground-floor residential use.
T4
T5
Shopfront: A frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage
line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. This type is
conventional for retail use. It has a substantial glazing on the sidewalk
level and an awning that should overlap the sidewalk to within 2
feet of the curb. Syn: Retail Frontage.
T4
T5
Gallery: A frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage
line with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight colonnade
overlapping the sidewalk. This type is conventional for retail use.
The gallery shall be no less than 10 feet wide and should overlap
the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb.
T4
T5
Arcade: A colonnade supporting habitable space that overlaps the
sidewalk, while the facade at sidewalk level remains at or behind
the frontage line. This type is conventional for retail use. The arcade
shall be no less than 12 feet wide and should overlap the sidewalk
to within 2 feet of the curb.
T5
FIGURE 3.3: private Frontages
Private Frontages. The Private Frontage is the area between the building Facades and the Lot lines.
T3.5
T3.5
T3.5
T3.5
* Any protrusion into the Town or State right-of-way will require approval from the appropriate entity.
19
Park: A natural preserve available for unstructured recreation.
A park may be independent of surrounding building
frontages. Its landscape shall consist of Paths and trails,
meadows, waterbodies, woodland and open shelters, all
naturalistically disposed. Parks may be lineal, following
the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size
shall be 8 acres. Larger parks may be approved by Site
Plan and Special Permit.
Green: An open space, available for unstructured recreation.
A green may be spatially defined by landscaping and/or
building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and
trees, naturalistically disposed. The minimum size shall be
1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 8 acres.
Square: An open space available for unstructured recreation
and civic purposes. A square is spatially defined by building
frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths, lawns
and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at
the intersection of important thoroughfares. The minimum
size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 5 acres.
Plaza: An open space available for civic purposes and
commercial activities. A plaza shall be spatially defined
by building frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily
of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas should be located
at the intersection of important streets. The minimum size
shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres.
Playground: An open space designed and equipped for the
recreation of children. A playground should be fenced
and may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be
interspersed within Residential areas and may be placed
within a block. Playgrounds may be included within parks
and greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size.
T1
T2
T3
T3
T4
T5
T5
T4
T5
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
fIGURE 3.4: CIVIC SPACES
T3.5
T3.5
T3.5
T3.5
T3
20
T3
building height
Principal Building 35’-0”max.
Outbuilding 20’-0”max.
BUILDING location : See Table 3.4
SETBACKS - PRINCIPAL BUILDING
(g.1) Front Setback Principal 24 ft. min
(g.2) Front Setback Secondary 12 ft min.
(g.3) Side Setback 12 ft min.
(g.4) Rear Setback 12 ft min.
Frontage Buildout 40% min at front lot line
SETBACKS - OUTBUILDING
(h.1) Front Setback 20 ft. min. + bldg setback
(h.2) Side Setback 3 ft.
(h.3) Rear Setback* 3 ft. min*
private fRONTAGEs : see Table 3.4
*or 15 ft. from center line of alley
BUILDING HEIGHT
1. Building height shall
be measured in number
of feet.
2. Stories may not exceed
14 feet in height from
finished floor to finished
ceiling, except for a first
floor commercial function
which must be a minumum
of 11 ft with a maximum
of 25 feet.
3. Where surrounding buildings
are typically more
than one story and/or
where the usable floor
area is at least 2,500 sf,
new structures shall be a
minimum of two stories.
SETBACKS - PRINCIPAL
BLDG
1. The facades and elevations
of principal buildings shall
be distanced from the lot
lines as shown.
2. Facades shall be built
along the principal frontage
to the minimum specified
width in the table.
SETBACKS-OUTBUILDING
1. The elevation of the outbuilding
shall be distanced
from the lot lines as shown.
PARKING PLACEMENT
Covered and uncovered
parking spaces may
be provided within the
second and third layer as
shown in the diagram
TRASH PLACEMENT
Trash containers shall be
stored within the 3rd layer.
(See also Section 520.7.1)
2
1
M a x .
h e i g h t
35’-0”
Max. height
20’-0”
1
2
(g.1)
(g.2)
(g.4)
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
(h.1) (h.3)
(h.2)
(g.1) (g.4)
(h.1) (h.3)
Secondary Frontage
Principal Frontage
FIGURE 3.5: Form-based Code Graphics - T3 & T3.5
2nd
Layer
1st
Layer
Front Yard
Setback,
Principal
Building
3rd
Layer
20 ft
T3.5
(g.3)
(h.2)
21
BUILDING HEIGHT
1.Building height shall
be measured in number
of feet.
2. Stories may not exceed
14 feet in height from
finished floor to finished
ceiling, except for a first
floor Commercial function
which must be a
minumum of 11 ft with a
maximum of 25 ft.
3. Buildings shall have an
Expression Line on the
exterior facade at the top
of the 2nd story level.
SETBACKS -
PRINCIPAL BLDG
1.The facades and elevations
of principal buildings
shall be distanced
from the lot lines as
shown.
2.Facades shall be built
along the principal frontage
to the minimum
specified width in the
table.
SETBACKS -
OUTBUILDING
1.The elevations of the
outbuilding shall be distanced
from the lot lines
as shown.
PARKING PLACEMENT
Covered and uncovered
parking spcovered and
unces may be provided
within the 3rd layer.
TRASH PLACEMENT
Trash containers shall
be stored within the 3rd
layer. (See also Section
520.7.1)
T4
building HEIGHT c
Principal Building 2 stories min /35’max
Outbuilding 20’-0” max.
BUILDING LOCATION
Edgeyard permitted
Sideyard permitted
Rearyard permitted
Courtyard not permitted
SETBACKS - PRINCIPAL BUILDING
(g1)aFront Setback Principal 6d ft. min. 20 ft. max
(g2)bFrontSetbackSecondary 6d ft. min. 20 ft. max
(g3) Side Setback 0 ft. min.
(g4) Rear Setback 5 ft. min.*
Frontage Buildout 60% min at setback
SETBACKS - OUTBUILDING
(h1) Front Setback 20 ft.min.+bldg. setback
(h2) Side Setback 3ft at corner
(h3) Rear Setback 3 ft. min
private fRONTAGEs**
Common Lawn not permitted
Porch & Fence permitted
Terrace or Light Court permitted
Forecourt permitted
Stoop permitted
Shopfront & Awning permitted
Gallery permitted
Arcade not permitted
*or 15 ft. from center line of alley
”N” stands for any Stories above those shown,
up to the maximum. Refer to metrics for exact
minimums and maximums
** Any protrusion into the Town or State rightof-
way will require approval from the appropriate
entity.
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
1
2 max.
2 min.
1
3 max.
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
2nd
Layer
1st
Layer
Front Yard
Setback
Principal
Building
3rd
Layer
Secondary Frontage
Principal Frontage
Max. height
35’-0”
Max. height
20’-0”
FIGURE 3.6: Form-based Code Graphics - T4
(g.1)
(g.1)
(g.2)
(g.4)
(h.1) (h.3)
(h.2)
(g.4)
(h.1) (h.3)
20 ft
Expression
Line
(h.3)
(g.3)
a In cases where there are existing buildings within 200 feet on adjoning properties or the property in question, the principal building may match one of the existing
buildings’ front yard setback in the same plane.
b In cases where there are existing buildings within 200 feet on adjoning properties or the property in question, the principal building may match one of the existing
buildings’ secondary front yard setback in the same plane.
c In cases where the principal building on at least one abutting property is only one story the new building may be one story.
d Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
22
BUILDING HEIGHT
1. Building height shall
be measured in number
of feet.
2. Stories may not exceed
14 feet in height from
finished floor to finished
ceiling, except for a first
floor commercial function
which must be a
minumum of 11 ft with a
maximum of 25 ft.
3. Buildings shall have an
Expression Line on the
exterior facade at the top
of the 2nd story level.
SETBACKS -
PRINCIPAL BLDG
1. The facades and elevations
of principal buildings
shall be distanced
from the lot lines as
shown.
2. Facades shall be built
along the principal frontage
to the minimum
specified width in the
table.
SETBACKS -
OUTBUILDING
1. The outbuilding, relative
to the property llines,
shall be located as shown.
PARKING PLACEMENT
Covered and uncovered
parking spaces may be
provided within the 3rd
layer as shown in the
diagram.
TRASH PLACEMENT
Trash containers shall
be stored within the 3rd
layer. (See also Section
520.7.1)
T5
building HEIGHT
Principal Building 5 stories max. / 2 min.
Outbuilding 20’ max.
BUILDING LOCATION
Edgeyard not permitted
Sideyard permitted
Rearyard permitted
Courtyard permitted
SETBACKS - PRINCIPAL BUILDING
(g.1)a Front Setback Principal 6d ft. min. 20 ft. max.
(g.2)b Front Setback Secondary 6d ft. min. 20 ft. max.
(g.3)c Side Setback 0 ft. min. 24 ft. max.
(g.4) Rear Setback 5 ft. min.*
Frontage Buildout 80% min at setback
SETBACKS - OUTBUILDING
(h.1) Front Setback 40 ft. max. from rear prop.
(h.2) Side Setback 0 ft. min. or 2 ft at corner
(h.3) Rear Setback 3 ft. max.
private fRONTAGEs**
Common Lawn not permitted
Porch & Fence not permitted
Terrace or Light Court permitted
Forecourt permitted
Stoop permitted
Shopfront & Awning permitted
Gallery permitted
Arcade permitted
*or 15 ft. from center line of alley
”N” stands for any stories above those shown, up to
the maximum. refer to metrics for exact minimums
and maximums
** Any protrusion into the Town or State right-of-way
will require approval from the appropriate entity.
1
2
2 min.
1
N
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
40 ft. max.
5 story max.
Corner Lot
Condition
Mid-Block
Condition
Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage
Max.
height
60’-0”
Max.
height
20’
FIGURE 3.7: Form-based Code Graphics - T5
2nd
1st Layer
Layer
Front Yard
Setback
Principal
Building
3rd
Layer
20 ft
(g.1)
(g.1)
(g.2)
(g.4)
(h.1)
(h.2)
(g.4)
(h.1)
(h.3)
Expression
Line
(g.3)
a In cases where there are existing buildings within 200 feet on adjoning properties or the property in question, the principal building may match one of the existing
buildings’ front yard setback in the same plane.
b In cases where there are existing buildings within 200 feet on adjoning properties or the property in question, the principal building may match one of the existing
buildings’ secondary front yard setback in the same plane.
c Does not apply to buildings behind the front building or row of buildings.
d Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
23
Table 3.4 Summary of Transect Zones
T1 T2 T3 & T3.5 T4 T5
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY
Minimum n/a no minimum no minimum 4 du / ac. net 15 du / ac. net
Maximum n/a 1 du /10 ac. net 4 du / ac. net 16 du / ac. net 24 du / ac. net
BLOCK SIZE
Block Perimeter no maximum no maximum 3,000 ft. max. 2,400 ft. max. 2,000 ft. max.
CIVIC SPACE
Park required where
development is
20 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
20 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
20 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
20 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
20 or more acres
gross
Green not permitted not permitted required where
development is
15 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
15 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
15 or more acres
gross
Square not permitted not permitted required where
development is
10 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
10 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
10 or more acres
gross
Plaza not permitted not permitted not permitted not permitted required where
development is
5 or more acres
gross
Playground required where
development is
5 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
5 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
5 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
5 or more acres
gross
required where
development is
5 or more acres
gross
BUILDING MASSING
Lot Width n/a 120 ft min. 120 ft max. 100 ft max. 180 ft max.
Building Coverage 3% max. 15% max. 25% max. 40% max. 60% max.
Lot Coverage (total impervious) 6% max. 20% max. 35% max. 80% max. 80% max.
Expression Line Height n/a n/a 17’-0” 17’-0” 17’-0”
SETBACKS-PRINCIPAL BLDG.
Front Setback - Principal n/a 48 ft min. 24 ft min. 6 ft min./20a,d ft
max.
0 ft min./20a,d ft
max.
Front Setback - Secondary n/a 48 ft. min. 12 ft min. 6 ft min./20b,d ft
max.
0 ft min./20b,d ft
max.
Side Setback n/a 20 ft min. 12 ft min. 0 ft min. 0 ft min./24 ft
max.c,d
Rear Setback n/a 40 ft min. 12 ft min. 5 ft min. 5 ft min.
Frontage Buildout n/a n/a 40% min. 60% min. 80% min.
SETBACKS - OUTBUILDINGS
Front Setback n/a 20 ft min. + bldg
setback
20 ft min. + bldg
setback
20 ft min. + bldg
setback
40 ft min. + bldg
setback
Side Setback n/a 3 ft 3 ft 3 ft 0 ft min. or 2 ft
at the corner
Rear Setback n/a 3 ft. min. 3 ft. min. 3 ft. min. 3 ft. min.
a In cases where there are existing buildings within 200 feet on adjoning properties or the property in question, the principal building may match one of the existing
buildings’ front yard setback in the same plane.
b In cases where there are existing buildings within 200 feet on adjoning properties or the property in question, the principal building may match one of the existing
buildings’ secondary front yard setback in the same plane.
c Does not apply to buildings behind the front building or row of buildings.
d Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
24
Table 3.4 Summary of Transect Zones
T1 T2 T3 & T3.5 T4 T5
BUILDING LOCATION
Edgeyard permitted permitted permitted permitted not permitted
Sideyard not permitted not permitted not permitted permitted permitted
Rearyard not permitted not permitted not permitted permitted permitted
Courtyard not permitted not permitted not permitted not permitted permitted
PRIVATE FRONTAGES*
Common Yard n/a permitted permitted not permitted not permitted
Porch & Fence n/a not permitted permitted permitted not permitted
Terrace or Light Court n/a not permitted not permitted permitted permitted
Forecourt n/a not permitted not permitted permitted permitted
Stoop n/a not permitted not permitted permitted permitted
Shopfront & Awning n/a not permitted not permitted permitted permitted
Gallery n/a not permitted not permitted permitted permitted
Arcade n/a not permitted not permitted not permitted permitted
BUILDING HEIGHT
Principle Building
(Also see Section 530.4)
n/a 35’-0” max 35’-0” max 35’-0” max 60’-0” max
Outbuilding n/a 20’-0” max.
1 story min.
2 stories max.
20’-0” max.
1 story min.
2 stories max.
a20’-0” max.
2 stories max.
a20’-0” max..
2 stories max.
* Any protrusion into the Town or State right-of-way will require approval from the appropriate entity.
Setback for an outbuilding in a T-4 Zone changed from 24’-0” to 20’-0” + bldg. setback. Effective November 15, 2012
Expression Line height changed from 24’-0” to 17’-0”. Effective November 15, 2012
a Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
25
Section 380 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
See TA BLE 6.1 for allowed uses.
The Commission shall designate areas as Special Districts that, by their intrinsic size, function, or configuration,
cannot conform to the requirements of any Transect Zone or combination of zones. Conditions of development
for new Special Districts shall be determined by amendment to these regulations and shall be consistent with the
most recently adopted Plan of Conservation and Development as it may have been amended from time to time.
380.1 Manufacturing Zone
Purpose
The purpose of the Manufacturing Zone is to provide for a broad range of industrial and commercial uses in an
open setting that will not have environmentally objectionable influences on adjoining residential and business
zones.
Table 3.5 Lot and Building Requirements for Manufacturing District
Zone Min. Lot
Area
Max.
Height
Max. %
Building
Coverage
Max. %
Impervious
Surface
Lot
Width
Frontage
Buildout
Front Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
Rear Yard
Setback
M 20,000
sf 40’-0” 40% 60% 100 ft 80% min. 25 ft max. 10 ft min. 25 ft min.
If a building is set back from the front lot line by 25 feet or more, there shall be:
a. A landscaped area at least 10 feet wide abutting the front of the building; and,
b. A landscaped strip of not less than 5 feet wide along and contiguous to the front lot line of the property, or;
c. An equal amount of landscaped area acceptable to the Commission in another location on the site.
Table 3.5.1 Setback Requirements for Accessory Structures in Manufacturing Districta
Front Setback 20 ft. min + bldg. setback
Side Setback 3 ft.
Rear Setback 3 ft.
a Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective 17, 2017.
26
380.2 N ewhall Center
380.2.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Newhall Center Zone is to improve the existing character of the area by:
a. Making the neighborhood complete by allowing for a mix of uses for living, playing and learning;
b. Providing for alternatives to the automobile by improving safe access within and through the neighborhood
for drivers, bicyclists and pedestrians;
c. Developing in harmony with natural systems by employing sustainable, green technologies and land-use
practices;
d. Raising the value of existing properties by combining remediation and redevelopment efforts;
e. Meeting the housing needs of the neighborhood by including new housing to replace homes lost due to
structural damage, as well as providing additional housing for families and elderly residents;
f. Coordinating the environmental remedy and redevelopment of infrastructure;
g. Honoring the spirit of the neighborhood by creating a sustainable village atmosphere;
h. Locating parks, neighborhood amenities, aesthetic streetscapes, native habitat areas and community gardens
that will enhance the quality of life for the area residents.
i. Providing appropriate opportunities and increased commercial tax base through public/private partnerships.1
Table 3.6 Lot and Building Requirements for Newhall Center District
Zone Min. Lot
Area
Max.
Height
Max. %
Building
Coverage
Max. %
Impervious
Surface
Lot
Width
Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
NC 10,000
sf 35’-0” 25% 50% 80 ft 6 ft min.
25 ft max. 12 ft min. 25 ft min.
380.3 T own Green District
380.3.1 Purpose
The Town Green District is a multi-use zone designed to allow for centrally located public and civic purposes
and amenities that are accessible and beneficial to all residents of the community. The Zone allows for the
following public and civic amenities:
a. Open space land for a Town Center Park/Green to be used for passive recreation and community events;
b. Multi-faceted athletic facilities for active recreation;
c. Undisturbed areas of natural and scenic beauty;
d. Bird and wildlife sanctuary areas;
e. A Town public educational facility; and
f. An area for arts, historic and visitor displays and instruction.
380.3.2 Special Standards
At least 80% of the Zone will be maintained as open space, park or recreation or wildlife and bird sanctuary use.
Table 3.7 Lot and Building Requirements for Town Green District
Zone Max. Height Front Yarda Min. Side Yard Min. Rear Yard
TG 40’-0” 50 ft min 50’-0” 50’-0”
a Public school shall have a front yard minimum setback of 100 feet.
1 Amended October 8, 2013. Effective October 29, 2013
27
380.3.3 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Approval
The following uses are permitted uses subject to site plan approval:
a. Community events, Active recreational uses;
b. Passive recreational uses;
c. Walking and biking trails and paths;
d. Historical structures, monuments, flag poles and public art;
e. Wildlife and bird sanctuary; and
f. Customary accessory uses.
380.3.4 Special Permit Uses
a. Town Park
b. Town Green
c. Museum
d. Outdoor Cafe
e. Public schools of the Town of Hamden are allowed subject to Special Permit approval and Site Plan review
provided the following conditions are also met:
i. The building footprint and the parking area of the facility, taken together, will not exceed
20% of the Zone;
ii. The facility is served by public water and public sanitary sewers;
iii. The facility will have a front yard minimum setback of 100 feet from the street;
iv. The building will not exceed 40 feet in height; and
v. The facility shall have a vehicular access, traffic and parking pattern including provision
for student pick-up and drop-off by bus and parent so designed as to represent an effetive access, traffic
and parking pattern that properly addresses the needs of public safety.
380.3.5 Z oning Permit Uses
a. Concerts and public festivals and events, including firework displays and farmers market; and
b. Arts, historic or visitor displays or instruction.
c. Community Garden
SECTION 380.4 MIXED INCOME HOUSING DISTRICT
380.4.1 Purpose
The Mixed Income Housing (“MIH”) District is intended to increase economic diversity of housing types
in Hamden by allowing well-designed and landscaped multi-family development that will be built without
governmental subsidies or expenditures, and in compliance with the long-term, workforce housing program
household income and rent restrictions set forth in General Statutes § 8-30g.
380.4.2 Properties Eligible for Rezoning to Mixed Income Housing District
To be eligible for rezoning to Mixed Income Housing, a parcel must be currently zoned T-4; be currently
undeveloped; have no less than 250 feet of frontage on West Woods Road; and have access to public sewers
and water supply.
380.4.3 Uses Permitted by Site Plan Approval
Multi-family residential dwellings with a total density of not more than ten residential units per gross acre,
withthirty percent (30%) of the units set aside in accordance with General Statutes § 8-30g and Sections
380.4.6 and 380.4.7 of this MIH Regulation
28
380.4.4 Dimensional Standards
a. Lot-Related Standards
Maximum building coverage 10 percent
Maximum combined building
coverage, parking, driveways 30 percent
b. Principal Building Standards
Maximum height 35 feet
Maximum stories 3 stories
Minimum front yard 150 feet
Minimum side yard 20feet
Minimum rear yard 75 feet
Parking 1.5 spaces per one-bedroom apartment;
2.0 space per two-bedroom apartment
380.4.5 Site Plan Standards
a. Driveways and entrance and exit drives shall:
(1) have a maximum width of eighteen (18) feet;
(2) be surfaced with asphalt or another suitable non-erodible surface; and
(3) be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances.
b. Outdoor lighting shall:
(1) be provided and maintained at all access points to streets, parking areas, building entrances, and
elsewhere where required for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
(2) not be directed into any abutting properties; and
(3) comply with Section 580.
c. Sidewalks shall:
(1) have a minimum width of four and one-half (4.5) feet;
(2) be concrete, brick, or other surface acceptable to the Commission; and
(3) be provided between the multi-family residential and parking areas, streets, and driveways.
d. Retaining walls shall:
(1) have a maximum height of 11 feet;
(2) when tiered, be separated by at least 4 feet;
29
(3) be no closer to a side property line than 10 feet;
(4) have a surface treatment / appearance that is suitable to a residential development; and
(5) shall be screened from abutting property by planting, landscaping, or existing vegetation.
e. Earth Materials Excavation and Removal
(1) Excavation and removal of trees, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, or stone and regrading shall
occur only as specifically approved by the Commission as part of site plan approval, and only as
essential to the construction or alteration of the multi-family building, and installation of
driveways, utilities, or amenities.
(2) The applicant shall provide the Commission, in connection with its site plan application, a calcu
lation and specification of the amount, lateral extent, and depth of earth materials to be
excavated; materials to be reused on-site; materials to be imported; and a net cut / fill calculation.
(3) The application erosion control plan shall specifically address controls tailored to the amount,
location, and timetable for cut, fill, excavation, and import / export.
(4) Notwithstanding Section 520.8 of these Regulations, no special permit shall be required for grad
ing, excavation, crushing, and soil disturbance in the MIH District.
(5) Use of an on-site rock crusher will not be permitted at any time.
(6) On-site handling or blasting, digging & removing of excavated earth material will be subject to
the following conditions:
(a) Not located within any inland wetlands upland review area;
(b) Not conducted on weekends or national holidays, or on any day before 8:00 a.m. or after
5:00 p.m.; and
(c) Limited to four months duration unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
(7) Any application involving more than 1,000 cubic yards of excavation, regrading or filling shall contain
the following information, unless waived by the Town Planner and the Town Engineer:
(a) Existing contours in the area to be excavated regraded or filled;
(b) Proposed contours after completion of excavation, regrading or filling;
(c) Proposed vehicular access to a street;
(d) An estimate of the number of cubic yards of material to be filled, excavated, graded, or
removed;
(e) An estimate of the number and types of trucks and other machinery to be used on the site;
(f) The location(s) and type(s) of buildings, including temporary buildings, to be erected;
30
(g) Hours of operation and number of calendar days anticipated to complete filling, excavat
ing, grading, regrading, or removal;
(h) Details of any proposed blasting and storing of explosives; and
(i) Sedimentation and erosion control plans with all information required per Section 520.9
of these Regulations.
(8) The Commission may require the applicant to submit periodic reports that demonstrate the progress of
the excavation, regrading, removal. or filling activity, including contours and cross sections. These reports
shall be prepared and certified by a civil engineer or a land surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of
Connecticut. If at any time the Commission finds that the excavation, regrading, removal or filling is not
being conducted or cannot be conducted in accordance with the approved plans, the Commission may issue
a cease and desist order.
(9) Activity occurring under this subsection shall meet the following conditions:
(a) Resulting slopes shall not increase the concentration or flow of water or sediment to ad
joining properties.
(b) Adverse drainage or sewage problems or other conditions which would impair the use of
the property shall not be created or exacerbated.
(c) Proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the collection and stagnation of water.
(d) No sharp declivities, pits, depression or soil erosion problems shall be created, and no
resulting slopes or banks shall exceed one foot of vertical rise to two feet of horizontal distance.
(e) Any soil stored on-site for more than 30 days shall be stabilized and seeded. All stockpiled soil
shall be protected by approved sedimentation and erosion controls.
(f) Topsoil shall be spread uniformly over the excavated or filled area and over exposed rock sur
faces that result from excavation or fill, to a minimum depth of four inches, in accordance with
the approved contour plan. No excavated rock will be stockpiled on the premises, except
that which is to be used on-site for erosion control or landscaping purposes.
(g) When the excavation, re-grading, removal or filling operations have been completed, these and
other vegetated areas destroyed shall be seeded with a perennial rye grass or similar planting.
(h) Truck egress site(s) shall be equipped with anti-tracking pads. Access to and from the excava
tion site shall be located so as to minimize conflict with existing traffic patterns.
(i) The premises shall be excavated, re-graded or filled in conformity with the approved plan.
(j) All materials used as fill shall be noncombustible. Broken blocks, bricks, concrete, rocks and
similar debris are allowable as fill when mixed with enough gravel or filler to create fill
that is void of air pockets.
31
(k) An excavation approval pursuant to this section shall be valid for two years from the date that
work commences. A two year renewal may be granted by the Commission in accordance with
the procedures and standards in this section, based on updated maps and data.
f. Sediment and Erosion Control
(1) The site plan shall comply with Section 520.9 of these Regulations.
g. Stormwater Management
(1) The site plan shall comply with Section 520.11 of these Regulations.
380.4.6 Standards and Regulations for Household Income and Sale / Resale Price Limitations
A development in a Mixed Income Housing District shall be a “set aside development” in compliance with
General Statutes § 8-30g and the definition of “set aside development” in these regulations.
380.4.7 Mixed Income Housing Unit Requirements
The purpose of the Mixed Income Housing District is to facilitate a residential community containing both
market-rate and household income / rent-restricted dwellings that comply with General Statutes § 8-30g.
The following requirements shall apply to MIH Units:
a. MIH Units shall be of a construction quality that is comparable to a baseline specification for marketrate
homes within the community. The floor plans for the development shall identify the loca
tions within the community of the MIH Units.
b. The MIH Units shall be built and offered for rent on a pro rata basis as construction proceeds.
c. Calculation of the maximum monthly payment for MIH Units, so as to satisfy General Statutes § 8-30g,
shall utilize the area median income data as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
in effect on the day of lease.
d. The maximum monthly payment that the owner of a Housing Opportunity Unit shall pay shall not be greater
than the amount that will preserve such unit as defined in General Statutes § 8-30g, insurance, heat, and utility
costs, including hot water, sewer and electricity, but excluding telephone, cable television, and information
/ Internet services.
e. A Housing Opportunity Unit shall be occupied only as an owner’s principal residence. Sub-leasing of MIH
Units shall be prohibited.
f. At the same time that the market-rate units in a Mixed Income Housing District are first advertised to the
general public, notice of availability of the MIH Units shall be provided by advertising such availability in
the real estate section of a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Hamden, by providing notice to
the Hamden Town Council, the Hamden Town Clerk, and the Hamden Planning and Zoning Commission,
and through the procedures outlined in the affirmative fair housing marketing plan in the Housing Affordability
Plan.
32
g. Each lease for a Housing Opportunity Unit will contain substantially the following provision:
For the duration of this covenant or restriction, this dwelling unit may be rented only to a household or family
whose annual income is equal to or less than eighty percent (80%) or sixty percent (60%), as applicable,
of the median income as defined in
section 8-30g-1(10) of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, and may be re-rented and only at a
rental rate equal to or less than the rental rate determined using the formula stated in section 8-30g-8(a) of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.”
h. The forty (40) year affordability period shall be calculated separately for each Housing Opportunity Unit in
a Mixed Income Housing district development, and the period shall begin on the date of occupancy of the
Housing Opportunity Unit.
i. A violation of the Regulations contained in this Section shall not result in a forfeiture or reversion of title,
but the Hamden Planning and Zoning Commission or its designated agent shall otherwise retain all enforcement
powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under § 8-12 to issue
notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief.
380.4.8 Undergraduate Students
Notwithstanding Section 670.3 of the Zoning Regulations, undergraduate college students shall not be permitted
as tenants in an MIH development authorized under this section. The property owner will report at
least annually to the Hamden Zoning Enforcement Officer as to compliance with this restriction.
33
ARTICLE IV OVERLAY ZONES
Section 400 Purpose
The purpose of an overlay zone is to impose additional requirements beyond those of the underlying zone in
cases where additional safeguards are necessary.
Section 410 Aquifer Protection Area (APA)
(See Separate Regulations)
Section 420 Coastal Area Management Zone (CAM)
421 Purpose
The purpose of Coastal Site Plan Review is to assure that development within the Coastal Area is consistent
with the goals and policies of the Coastal Area Management Act (Chapter 444, Section 22a-92 of the Connecticut
General Statutes) and with the goals and policies of the Town of Hamden Planning and Zoning Commission.
422 Location
The Coastal Area shall be defined as the area of Hamden that lies within the Coastal Area boundaries described
in Section 22a-94 (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Connecticut General Statutes and as shown on a map titled "Coastal
Boundary" 1980, as it may be amended from time to time, prepared by Coastal Area Management Program,
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, which is on file in the Planning and Zoning Office and in
the office of the Hamden Town Clerk.
423 Permitted Uses
In the Coastal Area, any use that is allowed in the underlying zone shall be permitted, subject to compliance
with the requirements of all pertinent sections of these Regulations and all pertinent sections of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
424 Authority
A Coastal Area Site Plan shall be approved by the Commission as outlined in Section II (b) of the Coastal Area
Management Act prior to the commencement of any activity.
425 Exceptions
A Coastal Area Site Plan shall be required for any activity or project as defined in Section II (b) of the Coastal
Management Act, which is proposed to be located either fully or partially within the Coastal boundary, with the
following exceptions:
a. Minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings or detached accessory buildings, such as garages
and utility sheds. A minor addition is an addition that does not exceed 10% of the first floor area or onethousand
square feet whichever is less, and which does not require more than a 10% addition to the number
of off-street parking spaces in order to comply with the parking requirements;
b. Construction of new or modifications of existing on-premise fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces,
underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, signs and
such other minor structures that will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources or
restrict access along tidal rivers;
c. Construction of an individual, conforming, single-family residential structure, except in or within one hundred
feet of tidal wetlands;
d. Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish,
wildlife and other coastal land and water resources;
e. Gardening, grazing and the harvesting of crops.
34
426 Application
An application for approval of a Coastal Area Management Site Plan shall be filed with the Commission and
shall comply with all provisions of the applicable zone, with all other pertinent requirements of these zoning
regulations, and with all provisions of Sections 11 and 12 of the Coastal Management Act.
726.4 Flood Damage Prevention Variances - Removed1
427 Impact Analysis
The Commission or its designated agent may require the applicant to provide an impact analysis to demonstrate
that any potential adverse impacts by the proposed activity is consistent with the goals and policies set forth in
these regulations and in Section 22a-92 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
28 Public Hearing
The Commission may, at its discretion, hold a hearing on a Coastal Site Plan. The time limits of Section 8-7d
(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be adhered to in acting on a Coastal Site Plan.
429 Commission Action and Referral
The Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, modify, or deny the application. It shall set forth the
reasons for its decision and shall notify the applicant of its decision by certified mail within fifteen days after
such decision is rendered. In approving any activity proposed in a Coastal Site Plan, the Commission shall make
a written finding that the proposed activity with any conditions or modifications imposed by the Commission:
a. Is consistent with all applicable goals and policies in Section 22a-92 of the General Statutes, as amended;
and
b. Incorporates, as conditions or modifications, all reasonable measures that would mitigate the adverse impacts
of the proposed activity on both Coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities.
Whenever an application for a variance is submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a use, structure or
activity that lies either wholly or partially within the Coastal Area boundary, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
refer review of the Coastal Area Site Plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission to assure compliance with
Section 720 of these regulations and with Section 22a-92 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Section 430 Flood Plain Zones and Special Flood Hazard Areas
430.1 Applicability1
These regulations shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Hamden. The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New Haven County, Connecticut, dated May 16, 2017, and accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated May 16, 2017 (Panels - 09009C0283J, 09009C0284J, 09009C0291J,
09009C0292J, 09009C0293J, 09009C0294K, 09009C0303J, 09009C0311J, 09009C0431J, 09009C0432K,
09009C0433K, 09009C0451K), July 8, 2013 (Panels - 09009C0429J, 09009C0434J), and December 17, 2010
(Panels - 09009C0280H, 09009C0290H, 09009C0426H, 09009C0427H), and other supporting data applicable
to the Town of Hamden, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this regulation. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this regulation it must take precedence
when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The
SFHA includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A and AE, including areas designated as a floodway on
a FIRM. SFHAs are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only
approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific
location.2
1 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010.
2 Amended July 2, 2013. Effective, July 8, 2013. Adopted April 25, 2017. Effective May 15, 2017
35
430.2 Permitted Uses
Agriculture, nurseries, truck farms, tree farms, recreation facilities without buildings, siltation ponds, open
space, and any usse and/or Special Permit allowed in the applicable zoning district and indicated within the
Flood Plain Zone or Special Flood Hazard Area.
430.3 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
430.3.1 General Standards:
When any new development or substantial improvement is located wholly or partially in a designated flood
plain zone as shown on the Zoning Map of Hamden, or wholly or partially within a Flood Hazard Area, Zones
[A and AE], as shown on the Community Flood Insurance Rate Map, all new construction and/or substantial
improvements shall be constructed:3
a. With materials resistant to flood damage, and;
b. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
c. Such that electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities
are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
d. Such that new construction and substantial improvements be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
e. Such that the flood-carrying capacity of any portion of a watercourse that is altered or re-located is maintained;
f. Such that accessory structures shall be subject to all general and specific standards contained in Section
430.3.
g. Such that all storage of petroleum liquids or hazardous materials are to be aboveground and above base
flood elevation. Storage tanks should be situated on a curbed impervious surface capable of containing at
least 110% of the volume of the tank(s). A roof should be provided to prevent accumulation of precipitation.
h. Such that storm water runoff management in flood plain areas promote
i. Renovation of runoff prior to discharge, and
ii. Aquifer recharge.
i. Stormwater drainage should be pretreated to remove particulate and dissolved pollutants associated with
road and parking lot runoff prior to discharge. Infiltration of clean or pretreated runoff should be maximized
except in areas subject to an unusually high risk of hazardous material spillage. Open vegetated basins,
ponds, artificial/man-made wetlands, and buffer strips are the preferred methods of treating and infiltrating
stormwater runoff.
j. Compensatory Storage: The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally
influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements
involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening
of the floodplain. storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent
property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used
for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of
flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced
by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the
same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality.
4
k. Equal Conveyance:. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction
or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless
the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting
3 Amended July 2, 2013. Effective, July 8, 2013.
4 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
36
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such
encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within
the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall
not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity.5
430.3.2 Specific Standards:
a. Residential Construction - New construction or substantial improvement to any residential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
b. Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation, at least two feet
of elevation above base flood level, which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely
anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures.
Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties. These requirements
pertain to all manufactured homes, including those outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in
a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.6
c. Recreation Vehicles - Recreation vehicles placed on sites within Zone A and Zones Al through 30 shall be
on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully ready for highway use. A recreation vehicle is ready
for highway use if it is on wheels or a jacking system, is attached to site only by quick-disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
d. Non-Residential Construction - New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial,
or non-residential structure located in Zones Al through 30, AE and AH shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated at least two feet above the level of the base flood elevation.
e. Above ground Storage Tanks - Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or
inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be
securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe
extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water.7
f. Portion of Structure in Flood Zone - If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction
requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sun
rooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more
restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone.8
g. Structures in Zones with Different Base Flood Elevations - If a structure lies within two or more zones or
areas with different base flood elevations, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the
entire structure. Any structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions,
garages, decks, sun rooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches
that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more
restrictive zone.)9
5 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
6 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
7 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
8 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
9 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
37
h. No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water - New construction, substantial improvements and repair to
structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over
water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility.10
430.3.3 Utilities
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system.
b. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from the system into floodwaters.
c. On-site waste-disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them.
430.3.4 Floodways
Floodways are located within Special Flood Hazard Areas as identified in the Hamden Flood Insurance Study
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and delineated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps.11
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris and
potential projectiles and have erosion potential, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, repairs to substantially damaged structures and other developments shall be permitted unless
certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating,
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that encroachments
shall result in no (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Fences in the floodway must be aligned with the flow and be of an open design.12
In any regulated floodway, no development or encroachment shall be permitted that would increase flood level
or sediment loads during base flood discharge.
430.3.5 Standards for Stream without Base Flood Elevations, Floodways and/or Flood Mapping
(Also See Section 520.11.9)
Base flood elevation data shall be provided by the applicant with any application for activity in an A Zone,
after which the Town Planner shall review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to Section 430.3, as criteria
for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A on the Town of
Hamden's Flood Insurance Rate Map meet the specific standards of these Regulations.
In A Zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new
construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted that will increase
base flood elevations more than one foot at any point along the watercourse, when all anticipated development
is considered cumulatively with the proposed development.
The Town Planner may request floodway data of an applicant for watercourses without FEMA-published floodways.
When such data are provided by an applicant or whenever such data are available from any other source
(in response to the Town's request or not), the Town of Hamden shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the
principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot at any point along the watercourse.
10 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
11 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
12 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
38
430.3.6 Additional Requirements
All requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements applicable to the zone in which the proposed
development is to be located.
430.4 Flood Plain Development Permit
A Flood Plain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of Section 430, after
Commission approval and prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit. When no Commission approval is required,
a Development Permit may be issued prior to the issuance of the Zoning Permit. The authority for a Development
Permit is the Town Planner.
430.5 Application
Such application shall be accompanied by two sets of plans drawn to scale showing, at a minimum, the property
lines and location of the parcel; existing and proposed contours; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. The following information shall also be submitted
to the Town Planner:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
b. The elevation and area flooded from the runoff of a 100-year storm utilizing standard hydrology and hydraulics
methods such as those described in the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual
2000, as amended, or other method approved by the Town Engineer and assuming development in accordance
with the Zoning Map upstream.
c. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
d. Any proposed alteration must be accompanied by a report from the Conservation Commission assuring that
the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse is maintained, and
e. F.E.M.A., the D.E.E.P., adjacent communities and the Regional Planning Agency must be notified of any
alteration.13
f. A statement as to whether or not the proposed alterations to an existing structure meet the criteria of the
substantial-improvement definition;
g. A statement as to whether there will be dry vehicular access to residential structures during the 100-year
storm event;
h. Certification by a professional engineer that the standards of this section are met; and
i. When the application for a Development Permit is a part of another application required by these Regulations,
the above information may be incorporated in the other application’s drawings.
430.6 Application Stages
The administration of Section 430 by the Town Planner shall include:
a. Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
b. Review all development permits to assure that requirements of Section 430 have been satisfied.
c. Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit
requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the
Development Permit. Such additional permit requirements may include, but not be limited to: Stream Channel
Encroachment Line Permit, Coastal Area Management Permit, Water Diversion Permit, Dam Safety
Permit, Army Corps of Engineers 401 and 404 Permits.
d. Notify adjacent communities and the D.E.P., Inland Water Resources Management Division prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
e. Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this section.
13 Amended July 2, 2013. Effective, July 8, 2013.
39
430.7 Construction Stage
Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction, the applicant shall provide the Zoning Enforcement
Officer with verification of the as-built lowest floor elevation, defined as the top of the lowest floor (including
the basement), or, in the case of flood-proofed buildings, the elevation to which the flood proofing is effective,
prior to his or her submission of Improvement Location Survey for complete construction required for a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance. The permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted
to proceed shall correct deficiencies in the lowest floor elevations. Failure to submit an acceptable survey or
failure to make corrections required hereby shall be cause for issuance of a stop-work order.
430.8 Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas, or uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or
flood damages. These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Hamden or any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any administrative
decision lawfully made there under.
430.9 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This regulation is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this regulation and another ordinance, regulation easement, covenant or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.14
430.10 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this regulation, all provisions shall be: 1) considered as minimum requirements;
2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; 3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any
other powers granted under State statutes.15
Section 440 Open Space Development
440.1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this provision to encourage flexibility and innovation in the design of residential development
that cannot be achieved through the application of traditional zoning and subdivision regulations. The
objectives of this section include:
a. Maximum reasonable conservation of land and creation of useable open space and recreation areas;
b. Variety in type and cost of residential development, thus increasing the choice of housing types available to
town residents;
c. Preservation of trees and outstanding natural features and prevention of soil erosion; and
d. A shorter network of streets and utilities and more efficient use of energy than would be possible through
strict application of standard zoning.
440.2 Applicability
An Open Space Development (OSD) may be permitted subject to Special Permit, and Site Plan approval and the
following conditions:
a. A minimum of 10 acres shall be required to enable a site to qualify as an OSD.
14 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
15 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
40
b. All permitted dwelling units shall be single-family attached and/or single-family detached units, located on
either individual lots or a common area, or a combination thereof.
c. The amount of common area and/or open space to be created shall be a minimum of 30% of the total development
site. Said common areas and/or open space shall have a suitable number of pedestrian accessways
and shall have shape, dimensions, character and location to accomplish the purpose and intent of this section.
d. The Commission shall make a finding that the application of standard zoning to the subject site will not be
consistent with the objectives set forth in this section. Specifically, the Commission shall find that the overall
layout of the development as permitted under this section allows for superior utilization of passive and/or
active open space areas, superior protection of natural resource areas, and more functional house sites than
possible under a standard subdivision layout.
440.3 Determination of Density and Zoning Modifications
In addition to items specifically required in an application for a Special Permit, including a Site Plan, the applicant
shall submit the following:
a. A conventional subdivision plan conforming to all applicable requirements of the Zoning Regulations and
Subdivision Regulations. The Commission shall use said conventional plan as a basis for determining the
maximum number of dwelling units to be permitted in the OSD. In no case shall the total number of dwelling
units to be approved exceed the number permitted by the existing zoning of the site.
b. If the OSD proposes single family homes, lot widths, setbacks and yards may be reduced by a percentage
not to exceed the total percentage of common area and/or open space to be created as part of the total
development site or 60%, whichever is smaller. In an R-4 Zone no reduction in lot sizes or standards will be
permitted.
c. If the OSD proposes a group of dwellings on a single lot or common area, each dwelling or other structure
shall be set back from all lot lines a distance not less than the minimum front yard as required by the applicable
zone. In addition, unless attached, the minimum distance between dwellings on the same lot shall be
20 feet.
d. A statement specifically setting forth the nature of the requested modifications, changes or supplementations
of existing zoning provisions, the location of the open space, building lots, streets, site easements and
recreational facilities, and any other additional information and requirements as determined necessary by the
Commission.
Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the owner of a proposed development from receiving final subdivision
approval in accordance with Town's Subdivision Regulations if the OSD proposes dwellings on individual
lots.
The Planning Section may give consideration to the final subdivision plan simultaneously with the Special
Permit and may conduct a public hearing upon said subdivision plan concurrently with the conduct of a public
hearing on the Special Permit and may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove said plan. In this
case, the Special Permit Application shall be accompanied by such other data as are required by the Subdivision
Regulations.
440.4 Common Areas and Open Space
The Commission shall establish such conditions on the ownership, use, and maintenance of common areas,
including open space, as it deems necessary to assure the preservation of such areas for their intended purpose.
A homeowners’ association comprised of the residents of the development shall be formed to maintain common
areas and/or open space reserved for their use. An alternative maintenance mechanism to a homeowners’
association, may be used provided that it is acceptable to the Town Attorney and the Commission and assures
the ownership, use and maintenance of the “open space” for the intended purpose. An OSD shall require and be
conditional upon organization and creation of one of the following entities for purposes of assuring maintenance
of all common open space:
41
a. A homeowners' association approved, as to form, by the Town Attorney and by the Commission, as to substance;
or
b. Any other arrangement approved by the Town Attorney, as to form, and by the Commission, as to substance,
as satisfying the intent of this section.
Any homeowners' association so approved shall meet the following standards:
a. The homeowners' association shall be incorporated as a not-for-profit corporation under the laws of the
State of Connecticut.
b. Each dwelling unit owner shall automatically become a member of said homeowners' association, and this
requirement shall be placed in the deed to each unit and shall run with the land or dwelling. Each dwelling
unit owner shall have a right to and easement of enjoyment in the common area, and shall be subject to a
charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities, including the maintenance
and operation of the common land and facilities. Each property shall be subject to a lien in the event of nonpayment
by the owner thereof of this proportionate share of the expenses for the association's activities as
aforesaid. Dedication of all common areas to the common use of all the owners of property in the development
shall be recorded directly on the subdivision plan or site plan or by reference on the plan to a declaration
of covenants, conditions, and restrictions in a separately recorded document, in such fashion and by
such instrument as shall reserve the title to the homeowners, free of any cloud of implied public dedication,
and such deed restriction or covenant shall specifically prohibit any development for other than open space
on the specified open land and/or conservation area; and
c. Permit the development owner to convey title to the common areas to the homeowners at an approved time.
Prior to recording an approved OSD in the office of the Town Clerk, the owner shall file with the Commission
a performance bond to insure the proper installation of all improvements shown on the subdivision plan or site
plan and maintenance of all common areas and open space until the homeowners' association or other acceptable
organization is established. The Commission shall approve the amount and period of said bond. The Town
Attorney shall approve the form, sufficiency, manner of execution, and surety of the bond. Each approved OSD
shall be recorded in the office of the Town Clerk in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Connecticut
General Statutes for the recording of subdivision plans.
The Charter or Certificate of Incorporation of such organization shall contain the following provisions and notice
of said provisions shall be specifically given in any brochure or prospectus issued by the owner, namely:
a. That such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not be relieved of the obligation to maintain any
common open space or other common areas, except by transfer to an organization conceived and established
to maintain such common open space and other common areas herein above referred to.
b. That, in the event the organization established to maintain common open space or other common areas, or
any successor organization, shall at any time fail to maintain the common open space and other common
areas in reasonable order and condition in accordance with approved plan, the Commission may serve written
notice upon such organization and the residents of the development, setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the common open space and other common areas in reasonable order
and condition in accordance with the plan, and said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be cured within 30 days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon to be
held within 45 days of the notice.
At such hearing, the Commission may modify the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies and may
give an extension of time within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice
or in the modifications thereof are not cured within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the Commission,
in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the OSD and to prevent the common open
space and other common elements from becoming a public nuisance, may institute proceedings to have the
Town or its designee enter upon said common space and other common areas and maintain the same for a
42
period of one year. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common
open space or other common areas. Before the expiration of said year, the Commission shall, upon its own
initiative or upon the request of the organization responsible for the maintenance of the common open space
and other common areas, call a public hearing upon notice to such organization or to the residents of the
development, at which hearing such organization or the residents of the development shall show cause why
such maintenance by the Town or its designee shall not, at the election of the Town, continue for a succeeding
year.
If the Commission determines that such organization is ready and able to maintain said common open space
and other common areas in reasonable condition, the Town or its designee shall cease to maintain said open
space and other common areas at the end of said year. If the Commission shall determine such organization
is not ready and able to maintain such common open space and other common areas in a reasonable condition,
the Commission may, at its discretion, continue to have the Town or its designee maintain said common
open space and other common areas during the next succeeding year and subject the issue to a similar
hearing and determination in each year thereafter.
c. That the cost of such maintenance by the Town or its designee shall be assessed ratably against the property
owners within the OSD. In the event of the failure or refusal of the owners of such property to pay any
such charges when due, the unpaid amount thereof shall become a lien against such property and, together
with interest thereon from due date thereof, shall be included in the annual tax levy of the Town upon such
property for each fiscal year, and the amount so levied shall be collected in the same manner as other Town
taxes.
43
Section 450 Village District Overlay Zones
Section 452 Spring Glen Village District
452.1 Purpose
The purpose and intent of the Spring Glen Village District Regulations is to protect the unique character of
Spring Glen, which is a primarily residential neighborhood bounded to the North by the Spring Glen School on
Whitney Avenue, to the South by Lake Whitney, to the West by the Mill River and the north basin of Lake Whitney,
and to the East by the Hartford Turnpike and the North Haven Town Line. The Spring Glen Village District
(“SGVD”) extends along both sides of Whitney Avenue from Walden Street to Glendower Road. The SGVD
includes in their entirety every first and second property back from this part of Whitney Avenue in Hamden, on
both the East and West sides of the Avenue. It includes several properties on Ford Street that are the second
property back from Whitney Avenue but located on the east side of Ford Street. The SGVD also includes every
property, and structure on a property, that is commercial or mixed use in Spring Glen and every property that
abuts these commercial and mixed use properties. (See the Spring Glen Village District Map. This map shall
take precedence over the text in determining which properties are included and excluded from the SGVD Overlay
Regulations.)
452.2 Authority
These Regulations are enacted pursuant to C.G.S. §§ 8-2 and 8-2j, as amended, to protect the distinctive character,
landscape, and historic structures within the SGVD assuring that new construction, demolition, renovation,
substantial reconstruction, and rehabilitation of property or properties within the SGVD and in view from Whitney
Avenue will be in keeping with the established architectural features, scale and character of Spring Glen.
The SGVD shall be an overlay district, the regulations of which shall be in addition to the regulations applicable
to the underlying zone districts.
452.3 Neighborhood Character
The SGVD includes several homes of historical significance on Whitney Avenue, exhibiting Colonial, Federal,
and Greek revival design. In the 20th century, residential development was primarily in the Colonial Revival
style, and commercial architecture in the Tudor Revival style. Spring Glen grew as a result of early suburbanization
of the New Haven area from the early 20th century through the 1930s. This growth was supported by
public transportation on Whitney Avenue, such as trolleys, and resulted in small residential lot development
around a village center. This circular residential neighborhood with a small nodal business district on Whitney
Avenue is one of the defining characteristics of the Spring Glen neighborhood.
The fact that the form and size of the Spring Glen business district have remained relatively constant, and not
spread down Whitney Avenue or encroached more deeply upon existing residential properties, has helped define
Spring Glen as a unique village and walkable neighborhood. The Spring Glen business district has traditionally
been the location of retail and service establishments serving the adjacent residential neighborhood. “No physical
expansion” of the existing business district in Spring Glen should be permitted, as stated in the “Hamden
Plan of Conservation and Development, 2004,” page 131.
In addition to well-defined residential and commercial districts, Spring Glen is home to several religious institutions,
private schools, and a public school along Whitney Avenue within walking distance of any home in the
neighborhood. These institutions further define the SGVD of Spring Glen. The conversion of these properties
to higher density housing than permitted under R-4 zoning regulations or commercial uses would negatively
impact the village character, diversity, “walkability,” and the public safety of pedestrians, especially children, of
the Spring Glen neighborhood.
44
452.4 Criteria for Application of Village District Standards
In applying these regulations, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall consider the design, relationship, and
compatibility of structures and site improvements including: plantings and landscaping, exterior signs, roadways
and streetscape, lighting, street furniture, sidewalk paving, public art, fencing in regard to commercial
and mixed use properties, and other objects in public view. These Regulations encourage the conservation and
preservation of existing buildings and sites in a manner that maintains the historic and distinctive character of
the SGVD. The goals of these regulations are consistent with the distinctive characteristics of the district identified
in the Hamden Plan of Conservation and Development (effective September 1, 2004) at pages 118, 125, and
131.
452.5 Applicability of Regulations
452.5.1 These Regulations apply to the following activities: new construction, renovation, substantial reconstruction,
or rehabilitation of any structure, property or properties within the SGVD. The scope of application
of these regulations includes:
a. The design and placement of buildings;
b. The maintenance of public views, which includes the size and placement of signs;
c. Parking and vehicular circulation;
d. Pedestrian circulation and safety;
e. The hours and manner of operation of businesses; and
f. The uses of buildings and structures, as well as any other element or aspects that the Planning & Zoning
Commission deems appropriate in order to protect the distinctive character of the SGVD.
452.5.2 The following projects and activities shall be exempt from review under the SGVD Overlay section of
the zoning regulations:
a. Repairs, minor alterations, and maintenance of an existing structure, as well as exterior steps, walkways and
driveways. These repairs, alterations and maintenance include, painting, choice of paint color, replacing roof
shingles or other forms of roofing, adding windows, shutters, siding, stonework, brickwork, utility services,
fencing, non-enclosed decks, adding a second story to an existing single story room of a house, or other changes
in a structure’s features that do not result in a significant impact on the design, function, architectural character
or visual appearance of the structure;
b. Exterior architectural modifications that do not substantially alter the existing height, bulk or façade of an
existing building or structure (with the exception of activities listed in I.B.1, above) and do not increase the lot
coverage or footprint of the building (with the exception of non-enclosed decks);
c. Interior modifications that do not result in a change in use of the building.
452.6 Residential Zones
452.6.1 Permitted Uses and Structures in SGVD in Areas Zoned R-4
452.6.1.1 The SGVD, as it applies to properties in residential zones, is an overlay district for R-4 zoning. The
areas of the SGVD zoned R-4 are primarily used for single-family homes and non-commercial civic institutions,
such as schools and religious institutions. Any new construction or modification of existing structures shall not
detract from the residential character of the R-4 areas.
a. Allowed by Zoning Permit: Accessory building; Keeping of Animals; Family Day Care Home (Children);
Roomers and Boarders; Student Housing; and other uses which are required to be permitted by federal or state
law;
b. Allowed by Site Plan: Residence- Single Family, Community Garden; Farmers Market; Telecommunications
Facility;
c. Allowed by Special Permit: Civic Club, Lodge or Association (non-profit); Adult Day Care; Child Day Care,
Nursery School & Group Day Care Home; Home Occupation; Library and Museum; Place of Public Assembly;
Place of Worship; Preservation of Historic Structure; Multi-family Dwellings-Adaptive reuse to multifamily;
College and University (non-profit); Elementary and Secondary School.
45
452.6.2 The following activities in SGVD R-4 zones shall require a special permit unless a property is exempt
from such permitting requirements by state or federal law:
a. Any addition to the front or sides of a structure which increases its lot coverage, with the exception of nonenclosed
decks.
b. The conversion of any property or structure into a use other than a single-family dwelling;
c. The conversion of any multi-family dwelling into any other use than a single-family dwelling.
452.6.3 Lot and Building Requirements in SGVD Area Zones in R-4
452.6.3.1 Many lots and structures in the R-4 area of the Spring Glen Village District are non-conforming. The
following regulations apply to all new construction and modification of existing structures. Among other goals,
these regulations are designed to preserve a small-scale, residential appearance, architectural integrity and pedestrian
safety of the neighborhood:
a. Accessory structures shall not be located in front of buildings;
b. No parking lot shall be permitted in any required front or side yards of a single or multifamily residence, or
any building that once had a residential use. Note: this provision concerns parking lots but not driveways;
c. No drive-through window is permitted for any purpose, and no kiosk for retail sales or rentals is permitted;
d. No structure, whether by new construction or modification of an existing structure, shall exceed 35 feet in
height measured to the middle-peak of the roof-line excluding chimneys, antennas and similar features;
e. All structures must have pitched roofs. Pitch must be at least 6/12;
f. If any structure is destroyed for any reason to an extent exceeding 50% of its assessed value, it may be rebuilt
or replaced but in such cases rebuilding or replacement will be considered new construction and subject to all
the provisions of the SGVD Overlay that apply to new construction.
452.7 Commercial/Mixed Use Zones
452.7.1 Permitted Uses in SGVD Areas Zoned for Commercial or Mixed Use
452.7.1.1 The SGVD as it applies to non-residential zones is an overlay district for a commercial/mixed use
district appropriate in uses and scale for Spring Glen.
452.7.1.2 The areas of the SGVD zoned for commercial/mixed use are bounded on the West side of Whitney
Avenue by Park Avenue and Harmon Street, excluding the last lot on Harmon Street abutting Whitney Avenue,
and on the East side of Whitney Avenue by Gilles Road and Haverford Street, excluding those lots adjacent to
the south side of Haverford Street that are R 4. (See the SGVD Overlay Regulations Map for the location of
commercial or mixed use areas in the SGVD). The purpose of the SGVD is to encourage appropriate development
within Spring Glen’s existing neighborhood commercial and mixed use areas by providing for limited
retail, service, office, and multi-family development in a mixed-use district.
452.7.1.3The following are the only uses and accessory uses allowed in the SGVD areas zoned for commercial
or mixed use:
a. Allowed by Zoning Permit: Accessory Building; Business and Personal Service less than 1,500sf of gross
leasable space; Family Day Care Home (Children); Roomers and Boarders; Student Housing; Retail less than
1,500sf of gross leasable space; and other uses which are required to be permitted by federal or state law;
b. Allowed by Site Plan: Accessory Use; Community Garden; Animals/Grooming; Veterinary Hospital; Cemetery;
Catering Facility; Home Occupation; Single Family Accessory Dwelling Unit; Residence-Single family;
Farmers Market; Telecommunications Facility;
c. Allowed by Special Permit: Civic Club, lodge or Association (non-profit); Adult Day Care, Child Day Care,
Nursery School and Group Day Care Home; Outdoor Café; Restaurant; Rehabilitation Facility-Out Patient
less than 10,000sf of gross leasable space, Library and Museum; Bed and Breakfast; Office Building 1,500
to 10,000sf of gross leasable space; Place of Public Assembly; Place of Worship; Preservation of Historic
Structure; Public Use and Public Utilities; Public Parking Lot; Recreation and Fitness less than 10,000sf of
46
gross leasable space; Multi-Family Dwellings-Adaptive Reuse to Multi-Family; Multi-Family Dwellings-New
Construction; Retail-1,500sf to 10,000sf of gross leasable space; Sale of Alcohol, Package Store; College and
University (non-profit); Elementary and Secondary School.
452.7.1.4 The following limitations, which do not apply to currently existing non-conforming uses and structures,
apply to all areas zoned for commercial or mixed use in SGVD:
a. A restaurant shall have a minimum seating capacity of 10 persons.
b. No business may operate between 11:00pm and 6:00am unless it is a restaurant that has a permit to serve
alcoholic beverages by the drink and thus for consumption on the premises.
c. No drive-through window is permitted for restaurants or food service of any kind. Drive-through windows
are permitted for banks, pharmacies and dry cleaners. No kiosk for retail sales or rentals is permitted.
452.7.2 Lot and Building Requirements in SGVD Areas Zoned for Commercial and Mixed Use
452.7.2.1 The area zoned for commercial and mixed use in the SGVD is less homogeneous than the structures
in the R-4 areas of the SGVD. In assessing the compatibility of a proposed structure, or modification of a structure,
with the Spring Glen neighborhood in regard to such issues as its massing and site orientation, the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Spring Glen Village District Consultant should draw upon the commercial/
mixed use district on the West side of Whitney Avenue from Park Avenue to Harmon Street, excluding the
last lot on Harmon Street abutting Whitney Avenue. In regard to architectural style, proposed structures should
compliment, rather than imitate, the architectural styles found in the commercial/mixed use district on the West
side of Whitney Avenue from Park Avenue to Harmon Street, excluding the last lot on Harmon Street abutting
Whitney Avenue. The present structures on the East side of Whitney Avenue from Gilles Road to Haverford
Street shall not be used as a model or to establish standards for evaluating proposals in regard to such matters as
massing, site orientation and style.
452.7.2.2 The following regulations apply to all areas zoned for commercial and mixed use in Spring Glen:
a. No building shall exceed 16,000 square feet in gross space whether it is one or two story, or has one or more
than one use.
b. There shall be no more than four dwelling units per acre.
c. Buildings shall have pitched roofs: pitch must be at least 6/12.
d. Structures shall be one or two stories and no structure shall exceed 35 ft measured to the middle-peak.
e. Roof- top mechanical equipment should be shielded from view. The peak of a pitched roof on new structures
should enclose roof-top mechanical equipment such as water tanks, air conditioners or elevator bulkheads
wherever this is technically feasible. No mast, chimney or other structure shall extend more than 8 feet above a
pitched roof.
f. A-frame signs are not permitted. The location of signage which is permitted by underlying zoning regulations
may be altered on the recommendation of the SGVD Village District Consultant in order to protect pedestrian
and automotive safety, preserve public views (e.g., of architecturally significant or historically significant buildings)
or for other reasons which fall under section I.A, above.
452.8 Residential, Commercial and Mixed Use
452.8.1 The Application Process
a. All applications for new construction, renovation, and/or substantial reconstructions of any structure or structures
whether occupied or not that is within the SGVD shall be consistent with the distinctive characteristics of
the district identified in the Hamden Plan of Conservation and Development, effective September 1, 2004, and
subject to review and recommendation by a Village District Consultant who must be a registered architect, landscape
architect, or certified planner with relevant experience and who is appointed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission after consultation with town staff and neighborhood associations, to serve for a period of one year
with the possibility of annual renewal.
47
b. The Village District Consultant shall review every application made in the SGVD which is not exempt under
I.B. and report to the Planning & Zoning Commission within thirty-five days of receipt of the application. If the
Village District Consultant finds that the application complies with the letter and intent of the SGVD Overlay
Regulations the application shall proceed to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for the normal permitting process
provided in the town-wide zoning regulations. If the Spring Glen Village District Consultant determines that an
application is not consistent with the SGVD Overlay regulation, or the intent of the regulations, the matter will
be referred to the Planning & Zoning Commission for further review. Such report and recommendations shall
be considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission and entered into any public hearing record (e.g., a hearing
regarding a Special Permit application) prior to the Planning & Zoning Commission making its decision on the
application. Failure of the Village District Consultant to report within the specified times shall not alter or delay
any other time limit imposed by the regulations.
c. The Planning & Zoning Commission may seek the recommendation of any town agency, regional agency or
outside specialist with which it consults, including, but not limited to: the regional planning agency; the municipality’s
historical society; the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation; and The University of Connecticut
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources. Any reports or recommendations from such agencies or organizations
shall be entered into the public hearing record.
d. If the Planning & Zoning Commission grants or denies an application, it shall state upon the record the
reasons for its decision. If the Planning & Zoning Commission denied an application, the reason for the denial
shall cite the specific regulations under which the application was denied. Notice of the decision shall be published
in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the municipality. An approval shall become effective
in accordance with subsection (b) of C.G.S. §§ 8-3c.
452.9 Information Required in Applications
452.9.1 The following information, in addition to the information listed in Special Permit Uses, sec. 8.6; Site
Plan Approval, sec. 8.8; and Zoning Permits, sec 8.29.1, shall be required for all permit applications within the
SGVD:
a. Detailed drawings showing site plan, roof plan, floor plans, exterior elevations, sections, and three-dimensional
views to determine compatibility with the local architecture and a harmonious relationship with the surrounding
neighborhood;
b. Building elevations and façades, including a description of materials, color, and texture of all major building
materials including roof treatments;
c. The design, choice of paving materials, and placement of public walkways, roadways, passageways, and open
plazas;
d. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including a detailed site plan indicating size and species of proposed
plantings.
452.9.2 In addition, submission of the following information shall be required for all applications in the commercial
or mixed use zone:
a. Details showing design, size, color, texture, and type of materials being used for such elements as light
fixtures, light poles, street furniture, bicycle parking elements, and walkways, so that such features are complementary
with the architecture of the neighborhood;
b. Signs, including details showing design, size, color, texture, and type of materials being used;
c. A pedestrian and automobile circulation plan which includes siting of building(s) to minimize the impact of
automobile parking and driveways on the pedestrian environment, adjacent properties, and pedestrian safety;
d. Utilities, including designs which hide from pedestrian view utilities, loading docks, dumpsters, and other
service equipment or service entrances, as well as designs which screen rooftop equipment, including but not
limited to, air handling units, satellite dishes, and exhaust stacks;
e. Features related to human activity and safety, ensuring that entrances, porches, balconies, seating, and other
elements promote use of the street front and provide places for neighborly interaction;
48
f. Any other elements that the Planning & Zoning Commission deems are appropriate to review in order to protect
the distinctive character of the SGVD.
452.10 Criteria for Assessing Applications
Any application for new construction, renovation, substantial reconstruction, or rehabilitation of any structure,
property or properties within the SGVD will be evaluated based upon the following criteria:
452.10.1. Impact on Public Views. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall consider the design, relationship,
and compatibility of structures, plantings, signs, roadways, street hardware, and other objects in public view.
452.10.1. Standards in Other Sources. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall follow the conditions and
goals identified in the “Hamden Plan of Conservation and Development 2004” (effective September 1, 2004)
at pages 118, 125, and 131, and any amendments to the Hamden Plan of Conservation and Development 2004
regarding Spring Glen. In applications the Spring Glen Village District Consultant or the Planning and Zoning
Commission deem appropriate, the “Connecticut Historical Commission – The Secretary of Interior’s Standards
for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings” revised through 1990, as amended, may
provide criteria of evaluation.
452.10.1. Statutory Standards. Applications shall comply with any and all specific standards and criteria set
forth in applicable provisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, including but not limited to those in C.G.S.
§8-2j.
452.10.1. Additional Standards and Criteria. Applications shall also be evaluated by the standards and criteria
listed below:
a. The scale, proportion, massing, and detailing of any proposed building shall be in proportion to the
scale, proportion, massing, and detailing of the district;
b. The proposed structure or modification to an existing structure shall be harmoniously related to its surroundings,
to the terrain in the part of the SGVD in which it is located, and to the use and architecture of existing
buildings in the vicinity that have a functional or visual relationship to the proposed building or modification;
c. The building and layout of a building and included site improvements shall reinforce existing buildings and
streetscape patterns, and the placement and uses of a building and included site improvements shall not adversely
impact pedestrian safety;
d. Proposed private roadways shall connect to the town road network wherever possible, and open spaces
within any proposed project shall reinforce open space patterns of the district in form and siting;
e. The preservation of homes with significant architectural features shall take high priority in evaluating proposals;
f. The demolition, removal, or any other form of significant disruption or visual obstruction of structures with
historical and/or traditional architectural elements shall be avoided;
g. In the commercial or mixed use zone, exterior signs, site lighting, accessory structures and landscaping shall
work harmoniously with the existing architectural styles in the SGVD Overlay zone (which include buildings
in the Colonial, Colonial Revival, Greek Revival and Tudor styles), and be compatible with their surroundings;
h. In the commercial or mixed use zone, utilities and other features shall be screened from pedestrian and most
vehicular views where possible.
452.10.2. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall state on the record the reasons for any decision and, if the
Planning & Zoning Commission denies an application, it shall cite the specific regulations under which the application
was denied.
49
50
51
ARTICLE V BASIC STANDARDS
Section 500 Purpose
The use of land, buildings and structures, within the Town of Hamden, shall be established and constructed so
as to conform to this Article and these Regulations. These standards establish certain nuisance factors that, if
committed or exceeded in the use of land, buildings and structures, will be detrimental to the use, enjoyment
and value of other land, buildings and structures and will be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to make surveys and take measurements to determine compliance.
No application for a Zoning Permit and no Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be approved or issued
by the ZEO until it has been determined that the proposed use of the land, building(s), and structure(s) will be
established and conducted in accordance with these standards and with the standards stated in other relevant
Town, State and Federal codes, ordinances and/or regulations. The standards specified in these Regulations shall
be of continuing application.
Section 510 General Requirements
The following general regulations pertaining to lots, yards, visibility at intersections, height limits and dwellings
are applicable to all zones and are to be applied in addition to the specific requirements of the applicable zone.
510.1 Hours of Outdoor Construction
Unless otherwise explicitly allowed by the Commission outdoor construction shall only occur between the
hours of 7am and 5pm Monday through Friday.
510.2 Continuation of Use
The continuation of an existing use where there is a change in ownership of a business requires a Zoning Permit.
510.3 Change in Use
A change of use may be allowed subject to Zoning Permit approval provided that:
a. The proposed use does not require Special Permit approval;
b. No significant site work is required, and;
c. The required parking is currently available.
A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use subject to approval of a Special Permit
and the following conditions:
a. The proposed use will not have an increased impact upon the surrounding area;
b. The number of required parking and loading spaces will not increase, and;
c. The amount of impervious surface will not increase.
Once changed to a more conforming use, no use shall be changed again to a less conforming use. Bulk standards
of the underlying zone shall apply.
Section 520 Environmental Conditions
520.1 Preservation of Special Features
The applicant shall preserve special features that enhance the value of a development and/or a community.
Special features to be preserved include, but are not limited to, large individual trees, groves or stands of trees;
brooks, streams, ponds, creeks, waterfalls, lakes, wetlands and their adjacent buffer areas; historic landmarks;
scenic vistas, overlooks, and ridgelines.
52
The planning and design of the site, including related streets, drainage and other improvements, shall provide
for preservation of natural features of the site by:
a. Avoiding cuts or fills that result in potential soil erosion and excessive tree removal or that disturbs water
resources;
b. Avoiding relocation of or encroachment upon natural wetlands, watercourses and their buffer areas;
c. Avoiding removal of mature trees, desirable woods and other vegetation, particularly those existing plant
materials that serve as wind barriers in the winter or offer passive cooling of buildings in the summer;
d. Minimizing driveway and road width and curbing to reduce necessary clearing and retain the natural landscape;
e. Identifying these special features on the topographic maps submitted in accordance with these Regulations.
520.2 Alternative Preservation Plans
Should the applicant propose to remove, alter, or in any way change the features described above, he/she shall
submit documentation acceptable to the Commission demonstrating that the proposed plans to preserve special
features are reasonable.
520.3 Air Pollution
No dust, dirt, fly ash, smoke, gas, fumes or odors shall be emitted into the air from any lot so as to endanger the
public health and safety, to impair safety on or the value and reasonable use of any other lot, or to constitute a
critical source of air pollution or to create a nuisance.
520.4 Danger
No material that is dangerous due to explosive potential, extreme fire hazard or radioactivity shall be used,
stored, manufactured, processed or assembled except in accordance with applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations of the Town of Hamden, State of Connecticut and Federal Government.
520.5 Noise
(See Ordinance 100.02 enforced by the Hamden Police Department and Section 510.1 of these Regulations)
520.6 Vibration
With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the construction or demolition of buildings, no vibrations
shall be transmitted beyond the lot where they originate.
520.7 Refuse and Pollution
520.7.1 Dumpster & Solid Waste Disposal Location and Design
All dumpsters and trash compactors shall be appropriately screened and maintained and placed on concrete
pads. Concrete pads shall be bermed on three sides to retain fluids. Dumpsters shall be plugged and covered.
Dumpsters shall not be located within required setbacks when abutting a residential or mixed-use property.
520.7.2 Pollution
No refuse or other waste materials shall be dumped on any lot except as provided for in these Regulations. No
refuse or other waste materials and no liquids shall be dumped on any lot or dumped or discharged into any
river, stream, water course, storm drain, pond, lake or swamp so as to constitute a source of water pollution.
a. All hazardous materials and waste chemicals shall be stored inside on an impervious floor with some form
of secondary containment.
b. Solid waste material shall be stored in an appropriately sized, covered, solid waste dumpster or other watertight
container that is plugged to prevent the release of any liquids.
c. Waste material shall be disposed of by a licensed waste hauler in accordance with all applicable federal,
state and local Regulations.
53
d. All servicing of vehicles and equipment shall be conducted indoors on an impervious surface.
e. All vehicle and equipment washing shall be conducted indoors.
f. There shall be absolutely no discharges of motor vehicle fluids or detergent chemicals to the environment.
g. If the property is located within the Mill River Watershed or an Aquifer Protection Area, the RWA shall be
notified of any spills of hazardous materials.
h. RWA inspectors shall be granted access to any property located within the Mill River Watershed or an Aquifer
Protection Area during the Authority’s annual inspection program.
i. All fuel, oil, paint and other hazardous materials stored on-site shall be placed in a secondary container and
kept in a locked indoor area with an impervious floor when not being used.
j. If fuel for construction equipment is stored on-site it shall be placed in a secondary containment system in a
secured area.
k. Any on-site fueling and repairs shall be conducted over a portable spill containment system.
l. A supply of absorbent spill response material shall be kept on-site to clean up any spills of hazardous materials.
m. The RWA shall be notified of any spills of hazardous materials occurring within any public water supply
watershed or aquifer1 protection zone.
520.8 Natural Resource Removal, Re-grading & Filling, Accessory Use
Trees, loam, topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or stone may be excavated, or removed from any lot, and land may be
re-graded or filled, subject to Special Permit and Site Plan approvals and the following conditions:
a. Demolition debris consisting of brick, block and concrete may be screened, sifted, washed, crushed or processed
in conjunction with the demolition of existing on-site structures in any zone subject to Special Permit
and Site Plan approval and the following qualifying standards and conditions:
i. The site is one acre or more in size;
ii. The site is located on and has access to a major thoroughfare as designated on the Town Road classification
map;
iii. Structures to be crushed are at least 5,000 square feet in footprint; and
iv. Crushing activity is limited to no more than four months.
b. Clear-cutting of one-half acre or more is not permitted.
c. Commercial excavation, and clay and gravel mining operations are prohibited.
520.8.1 General Requirements
a. Natural resource removal, re-grading and filling equal to or in excess of 1,000 cubic yards, exclusive of that
earthwork falling within the area delineated by the footprint of an approved structure, shall only be allowed
when it is part of site development that is essential to an application that requires Site Plan and/or Special
Permit approval.
b. Natural resource removal, re-grading and filling in excess of 60 cubic yards but less than 1,000 cubic yards,
exclusive of that earthwork falling within the area delineated by the footprint of an approved structure, shall
only be allowed when it is part of site development that is essential to an application that requires a Zoning
Permit, Site Plan and/or Special Permit approval.
520.8.2 Exceptions
The following shall not require a Zoning Permit:
a. Excavation, removal, re-grading or filling in conjunction with an approved subdivision grading plan, provided
that no more than 10,000 cubic yards of material are deposited or removed.
b. Incidental excavation, removal, re-grading or filling in connection with maintenance or landscaping, provided
that no more than 60 cubic yards of material are deposited or removed per calendar year.
c. Agricultural excavation, re-grading or filling operations, provided that no more than 250 cubic yards of
material are deposited or removed per calendar year.
1 Adopted, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
54
d. Maintenane activities, such as dredging of ponds, steams and basins are allowed but may also require approval
from the Inland Wetlan Commission, the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental
Protection or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.1
e. Repairs of existing driveways, bridges, detention basins, retention basins, washed out/eroded slopes with fill
amounts less than or equal to 2,000 cubic yards are allowed subject to obtaining a Zoning Permit. They
may also require approval from the Inland Wetland Commission, the Connecticut Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.2
f. Repairs of existing driveways, bridges, detention basins, retention basins, washed out/eroded slopes with fill
amounts greater than 2,000 cubic yards are allowed subject to obtaining Site Plan and Special Permit approval.
They may also require approval from the Inland Wetland Commission, the Connectiut Department
of Energy and Environmental Protection and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers.3
520.8.3 Required Information
Any application involving more than 1,000 cubic yards of excavation, re-grading or filling shall contain the following
information, unless waived by the Town Planner and the Town Engineer:
a. Existing contours in the area to be excavated re-graded or filled;
b. Proposed contours after completion of excavation, re-grading or filling;
c. Proposed vehicular access to a street;
d. An estimate of the number of cubic yards of material to be filled, excavated, graded, or removed;
e. An estimate of the number and types of trucks and other machinery to be used on the site;
f. The location(s) and type(s) of buildings, including temporary buildings, to be erected;
g. Hours of operation and number of calendar days anticipated to complete filling, excavating, grading, regrading
or removal; and
h. Details of any proposed blasting and storing of explosives.
i. To reasonably review an application, the Commission may require the submission of additional information
about soil conditions, locations and depths of rockledge, ground water conditions, and other such information.
The Commission may request such information for both pre- and post-development conditions.
j. Sedimentation and erosion control plans with all information required per Section 520.9 of these Regulations.
520.8.4 Standards
Permits issued for natural resource removal, re-grading and filling activity in excess of 1,000 cubic yards shall
be valid for up to two years and will require permit renewal for such activity every two years.
The Commission may require the applicant to submit periodic reports that demonstrate the progress of the
excavation, re-grading, removal, or filling activity, including contours and cross sections. These reports shall be
prepared and certified by a civil engineer or a land surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. If
at any time the Commission finds that the excavation, re-grading, removal or filling is not being conducted or
cannot be conducted in accordance with the approved plans, the Commission shall order the applicant to cease
operation and may revoke the permit.
At the time of expiration or renewal of the permit, the property owner or his/her authorized agent shall file with
the Commission a report by a civil engineer or surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, certifying
that the excavation, re-grading or filling completed to date conforms with the approved plans. A 2-year
renewal may be granted by the Commission in accordance with the procedures and standards of these Regulations,
based upon updated maps and data.
1 Effective November 15, 2012
2 Effective November 15, 2012
3 Effective November 15, 2012
55
If the Commission finds that excavation, re-grading, removal or filling will not result in the creation of any
drainage or sewage problems or other conditions that would impair the use of the property in accordance with
these Regulations and that such excavation, re-grading, removal or filling will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the Zoning Regulations, the Commission shall issue a Special Permit and/or Site Plan with
the following conditions:
a. Resulting slopes shall not increase the concentration or flow of water or sediment to adjoining properties;
b. Adverse drainage or sewage problems or other conditions which would impair the use of the property shall
not be created or exacerbated;
c. No screening, sifting, washing, crushing or other processing of excavated or fill material shall be conducted
on the premises unless said premises are located in a Manufacturing Zone or unless approved as part of a
Special Permit and Site Plan application in accordance with Section 520.8.
d. There shall be no excavation within 20 feet of any street line or any other lot line unless one of the folllowing
conditions is met:
i. Excavation is of an elevation equal to or above the grade of an adjoining lot or street at the lot line or
street line;
ii. Excavation is within the area delineated by the footprint of an approved structure;
iii. The adjoining property owners file a joint application that is approved by the Commission;
iv. The adjoining property owner(s) document(s) that he/she/they have no objections to the proposed activity;
v. The Town Engineer determines that the proposed activity will not adversely affect the adjoining properties.
e. Proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the collection and stagnation of water.
f. No sharp declivities, pits, depression or soil erosion problems shall be created, and no resulting slopes or
banks shall exceed one foot of vertical rise to two feet of horizontal distance.
g. Any soil stored on-site for more than 30 days shall be stabilized and seeded. All stockpiled soil shall be
protected by approved sedimentation and erosion controls.
h. Topsoil shall be spread uniformly over the excavated or filled area and over exposed rock surfaces that
result from excavation or fill, to a minimum depth of four inches, in accordance with the approved contour
plan. No excavated rock will be stockpiled on the premises, except that which is to be used on-site for erosion
control or landscaping purposes.
i. When the excavation, re-grading, removal or filling operations have been completed, these and other vegetated
areas destroyed shall be seeded with a perennial rye grass or similar planting.
j. Truck egress site(s) shall be equipped with anti-tracking pads. Access to and from the excavation site shall
be located so as to minimize conflict with existing traffic patterns.
k. The premises shall be excavated, re-graded or filled in conformity with the approved plan.
l. All materials used as fill shall be noncombustible. Broken blocks, bricks, concrete, rocks and similar debris
are allowable as fill when mixed with enough gravel or filler to create fill that is void of air pockets.
520.9 Sediment and Erosion Control Regulations
520.9.1 Purpose
Sedimentation and erosion controlls shall be installed whenever soil disturbance may cause sedimentation on or
erosion of neighboring property and/or the deposition of sediment into the public water supply or public storm
management system or into a wetlands or watercourse.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development when the disturbed
area of such development is cumulatively more than 1/2 acre.
520.9.2 Exemptions
a. A single-family dwelling that is not part of a subdivision of land;
56
b. Any application for development where the disturbed area is one-half acre or less; and
c. Agricultural activities.
520.9.3 Procedures
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plans shall be submitted as part of a Special Permit or Site Plan application.
Plans for development not requiring Special Permit or Site Plan review shall be submitted as part of a Zoning
Permit application.
The Commission and/or its designated agent may refer any Soil Erosion and Sediment Control plan to the New
Haven County Soil and Water Conservation District or to any other agency or consultant for review and comment.
520.9.4 Application
The application shall include the following:
a. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall provide for the adequate control of accelerated erosion and
sedimentation and reduces the danger from stormwater runoff at the proposed site based on the best available
technology, found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as
amended. Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission.
The plan may be submitted as part of a Special Permit or Site Plan application as set forth in these
Regulations. Plans shall include:
i. A narrative describing the proposed project, a schedule for grading and construction activities including
start and completion dates, sequence of grading and construction activities, sequence for installation and/
or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures, and the sequence for final stabilization of
the project site.
ii. The design criteria, construction details, installation and/or application procedures, and operations and
maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management
facilities.
b. A site plan complying with Article 7 and containing the following additional information:
i. The proposed alterations on the site, including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas;
ii. The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm
water management facilities;
iii. The sequence of grading and construction activities;
iv. The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures; and
v. The sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
c. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission
or its designated agent.
520.9.5 Standards
The Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall meet the following minimum standards:
a. Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these Regulations using
the principles outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control (2002), as amended.
b. The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control (2002), as amended.
c. The appropriate method from the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual 2000 as
amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is
approved by the Town Engineer.
d. The Commission may grant exceptions to the minimum standards when requested by the applicant if technically
sound reasons are presented.
e. All erosion controls shall be installed prior to the commencement of construction activities.
57
f. All stockpiles of excavated material remaining on-site for more than a month shall be temporarily seeded or
covered.
g. Erosion controls shall be inspected regularly and immediately after each rainfall, as well as maintained and
modified as necessary.
h. Hay bales proposed for use on paved surfaces shall be replaced with a combination of filter fabric, concrete
blocks and gravel, or by silt sack inserts.
i. If the property is located within the Mill River Watershed or an Aquifer Protection Area:
i. The RWA shall be notified three days prior to the start of any construction activity.
ii. RWA inspectors shall be granted access to the site to conduct routine inspections.
520.9.6 Conditions of Approval
The Commission, or its designated agent, may include conditions deemed necessary, including, but not limited
to:
a. Installation of measures necessary for sediment and erosion control prior to start of construction;
b. Receipt of a bond to cover costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation; and
c. Progress reports from the applicant assuring installation and maintenance of controls.
520.9.7 Inspections
Inspections shall be made by the Commission and/or its designated agent(s) during development to ensure:
a. Compliance with the approved plan, and
b. Control measures and facilities are properly performed, installed and maintained.
520.10 Grading of Slopes
520.10.1 Grading Standards
a. Slopes of paved surfaces must not be less than 1.0% in grade, nor greater than 5%..
b. Slopes of earth surfaces must not be less than 2.0% in grade in the general vicinity of buildings, to ensure
drainage away from the buildings.
c. Unpaved driveways may not exceed 10% in grade. Paved driveways may not exceed 12% in grade. Changes
in driveway grades require vertical transition curves. Lots recorded on the land records prior to the adoption
of this section of the Zoning Regulations may exceed the above percentages only with the approval of the
Town Engineer and the Town Planner.
520.11 Stormwater Management
520.11.1 Purpose
Changes to the land without proper consideration of stormwater impacts can be a significant source of pollution
to Long Island Sound, its tributaries, the public water supply and other waters of the State of Connecticut and
the Town of Hamden. These are valuable natural, economic, recreational, cultural and aesthetic resources. The
protection and preservation of these waters is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and
safety of the citizens of the Town of Hamden.
The intent of these Regulations is to establish requirements for Stormwater Management Plans. Such plans
should include design practices and technical standards that address any proposed change to the land that may
alter hydrologic conditions. Stormwater Plans should also:
a. Preserve pre-development site hydrology to the extent possible;
b. Reduce the average total suspended solids (TSS) loadings by 80%;
c. Manage runoff velocity and volume such that the physical and biological character of the existing drainage
systems is maintained or improved;
d. Prevent increases in downstream flooding and/or streambank erosion.
58
520.11.2 Applicability
No person shall develop land without having provided stormwater management measures that control or manage
runoff from such development, except as provided within these Regulations. The stormwater management
measures must be consistent with the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended.
A Stormwater Management Plan shall be prepared for all development proposals, when it is determined by the
Commission, the Town Planner or Town Engineer, that changes to the land associated with the proposal may
significantly alter hydrologic conditions resulting in potential pollution and/or other adverse impacts to the surface
water, ground water or other natural resources of the Town of Hamden.
520.11.3 General Requirements
Stormwater Management Plans shall include:
a. A narrative describing the project, the objectives of the Stormwater Management Plan including the potential
impacts resulting from the proposed development, and a description of the practices, techniques, structures
and facilities proposed in the Stormwater Management Plan to mitigate such impacts.
b. The existing features and proposed improvements;
c. The potential impacts resulting from the proposal or activity;
d. A description of the practices, techniques, structures and facilities proposed to mitigate such impacts,
e. A construction schedule including phasing and sequencing.
f. Identification of the Owner(s) of the property on which the development is proposed and identification of
the Applicant submitting an application for approval and/or a permit.
g. Identification of the Responsible Person(s) for implementation of the Stormwater Management Plan during
the construction period of the development including mailing address, 24-hour contact telephone number(s),
facsimile number(s) and email address.
h. A description of the procedures to be implemented in the case of emergency environmental or severe rainfall
events during the construction period of the development.
i. Identification of all known local, State and/or Federal regulatory approvals and/or permits that may be required
to be obtained for the development.
j. A map based on United States Geological Survey quadrangle mapping depicting the following:
i. Site of the development and vicinity,
ii. Sub-regional drainage basin(s),
iii. Identifying hydrologic unit code(s) within which the site of the development is located.
k. A description of the surface water and ground water resources, including identification of water quality classifications
and the presence of impaired water-bodies as identified by the Connecticut DEP, on and in the
vicinity of the site of the proposed development.
l. A description of the development, construction limitations and constraints of the site of the proposed development
including:
i. Areas of exposed bedrock.
ii. Areas of shallow depth to bedrock surficial soils as defined by the U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation
Service Soil Survey.
iii. Areas of high erosion hazard surficial soils as defined by the U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation
Service Soil Survey.
iv. Areas of ground surface slopes greater than or equal to twenty (20) percent.
v. Areas of potential shallow depth to ground water.
No increase in stormwater peak flows will be allowed unless downstream increases are compatible with an
overall flood plain management system. The following items should be considered in determining whether increased
peak flows are compatible with an overall flood plain management system:
a. Timing of peak flows from sub-watersheds
b. Increased duration of high flow rates
59
c. Stability of the downstream channels
d. Distance downstream that the peak discharges are increased
e. Run-off prior to development from the 2 year to the 100 year flood events.
When stormwater detention structures are required, they shall be designed so that the peak flow after development
shall not exceed the pre-construction peak
The applicant shall furnish projections of the increase of stormwater runoff created by the proposed development
from the 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100 year frequency, 24-hour duration Type III Distribution
Storms, as computed with Technical Release #55, Urban Hydrology, Engineering Division, Soils Conservation
Service, USDA, January 1975, as amended or by use of other methods conforming to sound engineering practice
as set forth in this section. Rational method shall not be used in computing drainage flows in drainage basin
areas in excess of two hundred (200) acres and shall not be used to compute drainage volumes or to design
detention facilities.
520.11.4 Design Guidance and Recommendations
The following documents, incorporated in these Regulations by reference, give guidance and recommendations
for the analysis and design of practices, techniques, structures and other facilities to be incorporated in the
Stormwater Management Plan. Other standards of practice, engineering analysis and design, computational or
sizing methodologies may be used upon review and approval of the Commission, or the Town Planner or Town
Engineer.
The following documents are incorporated in these Regulations by reference:
a. Town of Hamden Engineering Standards, as amended;
b. Connecticut Council on Soil and Water Conservation and Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection,
Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, Bulletin No. 34, 2002, as amended.
c. Connecticut Department of Transportation, Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual
2000, as amended.
d. Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual (Final
Draft), as amended.
e. Hamden Engineering Department, The Hamden Stormwater Management Plan, 2004, as amended.
520.11.5 Design Practices and Technical Standards
Stormwater Management Plans shall incorporate the design practices and technical standards appropriate for the
site conditions and proposed development.
The Commission, the Town Planner and/or the Town Engineer may require additional design practices and/
or technical standards to be incorporated in the Stormwater Management Plan where a proposal will discharge
stormwater runoff to an area identified as a sensitive surface water, ground water or other natural resource,
which is impaired and/or experiencing existing flooding, stream channel instability or water quality problems.
520.11.6 Site Planning and Design
Site planning and design practices, best management practices (especially those referred to as non-structural
practices) and practices referred to as Low Impact Development (LID) and Alternative Site Design techniques
intended to mitigate the effects of changes to the land hydrologic conditions, shall be considered in the design of
a development proposal.
These planning and design practices should:
a. Protect and preserve a site’s natural features and systems including drainage systems, resource protection
and buffer areas
60
b. Preserve vegetation
c. Avoid creating steeply sloped areas
d. Avoid excessive site grading
e. Minimize the area of impervious and managed surface coverage including sidewalks, streets, driveways and
walkways
f. Encourage the disconnection of impervious and managed surfaces
g. Minimize changes in surface water drainage patterns
h. Promote temporary storage of stormwater runoff
i. Promote infiltration of stormwater runoff
j. Reduce increases in volume of stormwater runoff and changes in magnitude, frequency and duration of
stormwater discharges to receiving waters
k. Generally prevent and minimize impacts to surface and ground water resources
l. Reduce or eliminate the use of curbing
m. Reduce use of storm sewers
n. Encourage use of permeable paving materials where practicable
o. Encourage use of bio-retention basins, rain gardens and swales
520.11.7 Stormwater Infiltration
The guidance and recommendations given in the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual, as amended,
shall be the minimum used in the design of stormwater infiltration practices and techniques, and structures or
facilities. Protection and improvement of the water supply is essential.
Where stormwater runoff is proposed to be infiltrated into natural soils and/or fill material, subsurface investigations
including field testing to determine soil infiltration rates shall be made of the hydro-geologic conditions of
the site and vicinity of the infiltration practice, technique, structure or facility.
If a stormwater infiltration practice, technique, structure or facility is also intended to function to control peak
rates of discharge of stormwater runoff, the practice, technique, structure or facility shall be designed in accordance
with the recommendations and guidance given in the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage
Manual 2000, as amended.
520.11.8 Concentrated Stormwater Runoff
a. Where concentrated stormwater runoff is proposed to be discharged to a stormwater collection and conveyance
system, man-made or natural channel, culvert, bridge, or other hydraulic structure due to site and
design conditions, the hydraulic adequacy of the system, channel and/or structure shall be verified by the
applicants civil engineer.
b. Where concentrated stormwater runoff is proposed to be discharged directly to the ground surface or directly
to a wetland or watercourse, the stability of the outlet at the discharge location and the requirement for
outlet and slope protection measures beyond the discharge location shall be determined.
c. Where it is determined that a system, channel, structure or discharge outlet location is hydraulically inadequate
under existing conditions and/or will be hydraulically inadequate due to the proposed design, the
Applicant shall:
i. Improve stormwater collection and conveyance systems to a condition where the systems are hydraulically
adequate to convey the peak discharges developed from the design post proposal or activity 10-year
recurrence interval precipitation event,
ii. Improve man-made or natural channels to a condition where the channels are hydraulically adequate to
convey the peak discharges developed from the design post proposal or activity 10-year recurrence interval
precipitation event,
61
iii. Improve culverts or bridges to a condition where the culvert or bridge will safely convey the design post
proposal or activity peak discharges
iv. Determine the stability of the outlet of the conveyance system, channel or structure and the requirement
for outlet protection measures at the discharge location and for slope protection measures beyond the
discharge location if applicable, or
v. Develop a site design that attenuates post construction peak rates of discharge equal to or less than levels
of existing peak rates of discharge.
520.11.9 Stream Channel Protection
Where a development proposal will discharge stormwater runoff to a natural channel, the following criteria
for stream channel protection shall be incorporated in the design of the proposal where the Commission or the
Town Planner or Town Engineer, has determined that stream channel protection measures are required.
a. When stormwater runoff is discharged to a natural channel, the Applicant shall either:
i. Improve the channel using methods and materials that will minimize the impacts on the physical, chemical
and biological integrity of the natural channel system, and will preserve the natural channel characteristics
to the maximum extent practicable, or;
ii. Develop a site design that meets one or both of the “over-control“ method criteria for stream channel
protection by either:
a) Attenuating the design post proposal or activity 24-hour duration, 2-year recurrence interval peak rate
of discharge of stormwater runoff to the channel to one-half of its pre-development magnitude or less, or;
b) Attenuating the post construction a 24-hour duration, 2-year recurrence interval peak rate of discharge
of stormwater runoff to the channel to be less than or equal to the pre-development 24-hour duration,
1-year recurrence interval peak rate of discharge of stormwater runoff to the channel.
b. Where concentrated stormwater runoff is discharged to a natural channel that is experiencing channel instability
under existing conditions, or has been identified by the Commission, or the Town Planner or Town
Engineer as requiring additional protection, the Applicant shall either:
i. Improve the channel using methods and materials that will minimize the impacts on the physical, chemical
and biological integrity of the natural channel system, and will preserve the natural channel characteristics
to the maximum extent practicable, or
ii. Develop a site design that provides extended detention of the design post proposal or activity 24-hour
duration, 1-year recurrence interval peak rate of discharge of stormwater runoff to the channel for a minimum
period of 24-hours.
520.11.10 Over-Bank Flooding Protection
Where stormwater runoff is proposed to be discharged from the site of the proposal, the hydraulic adequacy of
hydraulic structures and/or receiving channels to convey the design post proposal or activity 25-year, 50-year
and 100-year recurrence interval peak rates of discharge shall be verified.
Where it is determined that a structure or receiving waterway is hydraulically inadequate under existing conditions
and/or will be hydraulically inadequate due to the development proposal, redevelopment proposal or activity,
the Applicant shall either:
i. Improve the hydraulic structure or waterway to a condition where the design post proposal or activity 25-
year, 50-year and 100-year recurrence interval peak rates of discharge can be conveyed, or
ii. Develop a site design that will attenuate the design post proposal or activity 25-year, 50-year and 100-
year recurrence interval peak rates of discharge to be less than or equal to the design existing condition
25-year, 50-year and 100-year recurrence interval peak rates of discharge.
62
520.11.11 Erosion and Sediment Control
The guidance and recommendations given in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,
2002, as amended shall be the minimum standards used in the design of erosion and sediment controls.
520.11.12 Specific Data Required
All storm drainage calculations must be certified by a Connecticut licensed Professional Engineer. The Commission
or the Town Planner or Town Engineer may require that the preparation of the Stormwater Management
Plan include other professionals in the disciplines of landscape architecture, environmental sciences and others.
Copies of the Stormwater Management Plan shall be submitted with each application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for approval.
520.11.13 Design information shall include the following:
a. Drawings presented at a scale that will allow for clear identification of all existing conditions and post construction
conditions on and in the vicinity of the site of the development. These drawings shall include:
General Data
i. Property boundaries
ii. Adjoining property owners
iii. Buildings and other structures
iv. Zoning District(s) and/or boundaries
v. Existing and proposed land use
vi. Existing ground cover conditions including vegetation types
vii. Proposed ground cover conditions
viii. Existing and proposed impervious surface and managed surface coverage areas
ix. Existing and proposed easements including those for access, utilities, drainage, maintenance and conservation
or resource protection purposes
x. Existing and proposed areas subject to deed restrictions including those for conservation or resource
protection purposes
Engineering Data
i. Existing ground surface elevation contours preferably referenced to the North American Vertical Datum
of 1988 (NAVD88) and proposed ground surface elevation contours. Benchmark(s) should also be
shown.
ii. Utility company facilities and services
iii. Drinking water supply reservoir and well locations
iv. Ephemeral, intermittent and/or perennial watercourses
v. Surface water bodies
vi. Special Flood Hazard Areas or boundaries and base flood elevations where determined, floodways or
boundaries and/or stream channel encroachment lines
vii. Resource protection areas and boundaries
viii.Aquifer protection district areas or boundaries
ix. Public water supply watershed areas or boundaries
x. Areas of ground surface slope greater than or equal to twenty (20) percent
xi. Areas of exposed bedrock
Hydrological and Soil Data
i. Inland Wetland areas or boundaries
ii. Inland Wetland regulated areas or boundaries
iii. Surfical soil types classified by hydrologic soil group as defined by the Natural Resources Conservation
63
Service Survey
iv. Areas of shallow depth to bedrock surficial soils as defined by the U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation
Service Survey
v. Areas of high erosion hazard surfical soils as defined by the U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation
Service Survey
vi. Areas of potential shallow depth to groundwater
vii. The locations of all subsurface investigations
viii.Surface water drainage patterns and watershed and/or catchment boundaries
ix. The locations of all stormwater collection, conveyance and management systems and other hydraulic
structures including, culverts, bridges and dams
x. Tributary land areas to appropriate points for purposes of hydrologic and hydraulic analysis and hydrologic
and hydraulic design of proposed practices and techniques, and structures or facilities
xi. Travel time component and time of concentration flow paths for purposes of hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis and design of proposed practices and techniques, and structures or facilities
b. Subsurface soil investigation information for the design of all practices, techniques, structures and facilities
where the determination of soil classifications and depths to groundwater, restrictive soil layers and/or rock
are required, and where the determination of particle gradation analyses and in-situ soil properties including
soil infiltration rates are required.
c. A description of design methodologies and computer models used, and hydrologic, hydraulic and water
quality design computations for all practices and techniques, and structures and facilities. In general, this
information should be submitted in the form outlined in the hydrologic and hydraulic design and analysis
documentation requirements of the Connecticut Department of Transportation Drainage Manual 2000, as
amended.
d. Structural design and supporting information and geo-technical design and supporting information for
certain stormwater management system components including, storm sewers, channels, outlet protection
measures, culverts, bridges, dams, spillways, outlet works and other structures, as required by the Town
Engineer.
e. Drawings including plans, profiles, sections and typical details of all stormwater management system components
at adequate scale(s) and containing sufficient detail to clearly depict the intent of the design and the
details of construction and/or installation.
f. The Commission may, at its sole discretion, require the applicant to submit a hydrologic study of predevelopment
site conditions conducted at a level of detail commensurate with the probable impact of the
proposed activity as determined by the Town Engineer.
g. Post Proposal or Activity Stormwater Management Operation and Maintenance Plan including:
i. A description of the operation and maintenance tasks and an implementation schedule.
ii. Identification of the Responsible Person(s) for implementation of the Stormwater Management Operation
and Maintenance Plan including mailing address, 24-hour contact telephone number(s), facsimile number(s)
and email address.
iii. Agreements, declarations of covenants and restrictions, easements and/or other legal instruments governing
the requirements for operation and maintenance of all post construction proposal or activity stormwater
management measures as required by the Commission, or the Town Planner or Town Engineer as its administrative
agent, and the Town of Hamden Attorney.
64
The applicant shall submit the following data for review by the Town Engineer:
a. Topographic Contour Map(s) showing drainage area(s)
b. Narrative and computations including, but not limited to, the following:
i. Method used to calculate stormwater runoff
ii. Runoff characteristics of the property pre- and post-development
iii. Drainage calculations
iv. Maximum velocity and quantity at point(s) of discharge from the system
v. Design calculations for all drainage piping and structures
c. Narrative and computations for detention structures including, but not limited to, the following:
i. Inflow and outflow hydrographs for detention area
ii. Maximum storage volume
iii. Design of spillway or other measures for the release of excess flows beyond that of the design capacity of
the structure
iv. Flood routing of all runoff greater than the design capacity of the detention facility
v. Time required for the facility to drain completely
vi. Materials used in facility construction
vii. Methods employed to avoid clogging the discharge mechanism
viii. Safety measures
ix. Proposed landscaping and vegetative measures used to stabilize slopes and bottom surfaces.
520.11.14 Exemptions
a. Upon written request, the Commission, at the request of the Town Planner or Town Engineer, may waive
these Regulations in whole or in part, when the development proposal, redevelopment proposal or other activity
will upon completion, have less than five-thousand (5000) square feet of impervious surface coverage,
and disturb less than one (1) acre of land surface area, or where due to special conditions related to the site
or vicinity of the proposal or activity, the requirements of these Regulations, in whole or in part, may not be
feasible or prudent. No waiver request shall be approved that would cause an adverse impact to the surface
water, ground water and other natural resources of the Town of Hamden. The Applicant shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer, that approval of a waiver request will meet this standard.
b. Activities defined as Agricultural Uses shall be exempt from these Regulations.
c. Development that does not require Special Permit and/or Site Plan approval are exempt from demonstating
that there will be no increase in runoff.
520.11.15 Standards and Criteria for Decision
No stormwater management plan may be approved without a finding that the plan is consistent with these Regulations
and the following general criteria:
a. Design and planning for site development shall provide for minimal disturbance of pre-development natural
hydrologic conditions, and shall reproduce such conditions after completion of the proposed activity, to the
maximum extent feasible.
b. Pollutants shall be controlled at their source to the maximum extent feasible in order to contain and minimize
contamination. Methods include but are not limited to sweeping of pavements, especially in the early
spring, the use of sediment basins prior to infiltration and encouragement of sheet flow to filter strips.
c. Stormwater management systems shall be designed and maintained to manage site runoff in order to eliminate
surface and groundwater pollution, prevent flooding and, where required, control peak discharges and
provide pollution treatment.
d. Stormwater management systems shall be designed to collect, retain and treat the first inch of rain on-site,
so as to trap floating material, oil and litter. On-site storage methods include but are not limited to landscaped
depressions, grass swales, infiltration trenches and retention or detention basins.
65
e. Stormwater management systems shall use the best available technology to treat stormwater quality prior to
off-site discharge. Stormwater shall be treated as recommended in the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality
Manual (or later version), including design of treatment practices for the Water Quality Volume or Water
Quality Flow, as appropriate.
f. Stormwater runoff rates and volumes shall be controlled by slowing runoff velocities and encouraging
infiltration. BMP methods for controlling runoff and encouraging infiltration include but are not limited to:
the minimization of impervious surfaces, the use of grass or vegetative filter zones, landscape depressions,
slotted curb spacers, perforated pipes for conveying stormwater, establishment of buffers from streams, wetlands
and water bodies, and any combination of methods, where appropriate.
g. Stormwater treatment systems shall be employed where necessary to ensure that the average annual loadings
of total suspended solids following the completion of the proposed activity at the site are no greater
than such loadings prior to the proposed activity. Alternatively, stormwater treatment systems shall remove
80% of total suspended solids from the site on an average annual basis. BMP methods for stormwater treatment
include infiltration through vegetative strips, grass swales and detention basins.
520.11.16 Maintenance Covenents
Upon approval of the application but prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit, the applicant shall file Covenants
on the Land Records committing current and future landowners to ongoing maintenance of the approved stormwater
treatment facilities. At a minimum the covenants shall include:
a. Provisions for annual inspection and maintenance of the facilities.
b. Submittal of annual reports to the Town Engineer documenting inspection dates, observations and actions.
c. An easement to Town personnel for “inspection” purposes.
Section 530 Lot, Block and Building Configuration
530.1 Front Yards / Build-To Lines
Specific to Zones R3, R4, R5, T3, T3.5, M and NC
The purpose of this section is to create a uniform location for buildings by requiring a build-to line.
Where buildings exist on adjacent lots, the Commission or its agent may require that a proposed building match
one or the other of the adjacent front yard setbacks and heights rather than the provisions of these Regulations.
Specific to All Zones1
Yard Projections: Nothing in these Regulations shall prohibit the projection of not more than one foot into a
required yard of pilasters, belt courses, columns, sills, cornices, or similar architectural features, nor the planting
of landscaping in such spaces.
In the case of one-, two- and three-family homes existing at the effective date of this amendment, uncovered
ramps required for handicapped accessibility may project as necessary into a required yard. The ramps should
be compatible with the architecture of the structure and neighborhood and should not adversely affect property
values. Uncovered ramps shall not be considered when calculating area coverage.
In the case of one-, two- and three-family homes, unenclosed stoops or verandas and associated roof overhangs
may project not more than six feet into any required yards. See also Section 591.2 Visibiity at Intersections
1 Effective November 15, 2012
66
530.2 Rear Lots
No building or structure shall be built on any lot unless the lot has a frontage of at least 25 feet on a public street
or in an approved subdivision, unless otherwise authorized by the Town Engineer under Chapter 154 of the
Code of Ordinances regarding building on unaccepted streets.
530.2.11 Access to the rear lot shall be provided by an access way that shall:
a. Not exceed a length of 400 feet;
b. Not be less than 25 feet wide at any point;
c. Not be included in the minimum required lot area; and
d. Contain a driveway from the public street to the building or structure;
e. Contain only one driveway and provide access for one lot only. The Commission may approve a shared
access-way only where there is an environmentally sensitive crossing;
f. The maximum number of abutting access ways shall not exceed two.
530.2.22 All rear lots created after the effective date of this amendment must comply with the following
standards:
a. Each lot must be at least 50% larger than the standard minimum lot permitted in that zone.
b. There must be a buffer of at least 50 feet between any structures on the rear lot and the boundary between
the front and rear lots. The buffer must contain evergreens or fencing that provides adequate screening.
c. Rear lots shall be limited to 15% of the total lots proposed for a subdivision and may only be approved in
conjunction with a subdivision.
530.3 Non-conforming Lots, Buildings and Uses
These Regulations shall not prohibit the construction of an otherwise permitted structure on, or an otherwise
permitted use of, any lot, the area or width of which does not meet the minimum area or does not meet the minimum
width requirements of the zone in which it is located, provided:
a. The lot was of legal size on the date it was created as a lot; and
b. All setbacks, coverage and other zoning requirements can be met. However; in those instances where the
lot area or shape prevent conformance with one or more setback requirements, the requirement for that setback
shall be the same as that in the most restrictive zone to which the lot area most nearly conforms;
c. The owner of the lot presents satisfactory evidence of compliance with this section.
Specific to Zones T4 and T53
Existing buildings and appurtenances that do not conform to the provisions of these Regulations may continue
in the same use and form until a substantial modification occurs or is requested, at which time the Commission
shall determine the provisions of this Section that shall apply. The modification of existing buildings is permitted
by Special Permit and/or Site Plan Approval only if such changes are in compliance with the specifications
of these regulations. Additions to the rear of a building are allowed subject to Special Permit and/or Site Plan
approval4.
On parcels of 10 or more acres, proposed increases to existing building coverage that do not comply with these
Regulations are permitted subject to Special Permit approval, provided that a plan for full build-out that meets
these Regulations is approved by the Commission as part of the Special Permit application.5 The purpose of full
build-out plans is to, where possible, limit curb cuts, link driveways, internal roadways and greenspace on adjacent
parcels. Unless waived by the Commission, such linkages and coordinated development between adjacent
properties shall be required.
1 Adopted, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
2 Adopted, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
3 Effective November 15, 2012
4 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective 17, 2017.
5 Effective November 15, 2012
67
Exceptions: Where pre-existing non-conforming structures do not meet the frontyard setback and/or the buildto-
line as of the effective date of these Regulations, the applicant shall be exempt from complying with these
requirements once when the proposed additional building coverage meets the following criteria:
Table 5.1 One-time Additional Building Coverage Allowed
Existing Building Coverage* One-time Additional Building Coverage Allowed
1 to 10,000 sf 5% of the existing building coverage**
10,001 to 50,000 sf 4% or 500 sf, whichever is greater
50,001 to 100,000 sf 3% or 2,000 sf, whichever is greater
100,001 to 250,000 sf 2% or 3,000 sf, whichever is greater
250,000+ sf 5,000 sf
*As of the effective date of these Regulations as shown on the Town Assessor’s1 field card(s).
** Effective November 15, 2012
530.3.1 Reconstruction
Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the reconstruction of a building or structure suffering structural damage
due to a fire or other casualty amounting to 50% or less of the building relative to its condition prior to such
damage, as determined by the Building Inspector, or prevent the restoration of a wall or structural member or
reconstruion order by any lawful jurisdiction provided the reconstruction shall in no way increase any former
non-conformity, and further provided the reconstruction is started within six months of such casualty and is
completed within two years following such casualty.2
530.4 Height Limitations
Building height shall be measured from the average elevation of the finished grade adjacent to the exterior walls
of the building to the :
a. Highest point of the roof, including any parapet, in the case of a flat roof;
b. Top of the lower slope of a mansard roof;
c. Average height between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof or other roof type.
The building height limit shall be applied separately for each wing or other distinct portion of a building or
structure.
When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior wall, the vertical distance will be calculated based
upon the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line, or when the lot line is more than
ten feet from the building, between the building and a point ten feet from the building.
The height limitations of these Regulations may be exceeded as follows, provided that such features are only
erected to such heights as are necessary to accomplish the purpose they are intended to serve:
530.4.1 A spire, tower or belfry on a religious institution, school, public library, or public museum provided
that:
a. The height of the spire, tower or belfry shall not exceed 50 feet; and
b. The total area covered by such features shall not exceed 10% of the roof area.
530.4.2 Cupolas or chimneys provided that:
a. The height of the cupola or chimney shall not be more than 20% higher than the total building height allowed;
and,
b. The total area of such features which exceed the total building height limitation shall not exceed 5% of the
roof area.
1 Adopted, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
2 Adopted, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
68
530.4.3 Flagpoles of up to 75 feet in height;
530.4.4 Water tanks, of any height, where the Commission has granted a Special Permit.
530.4.5 Roof-top equipment for non-residential buildings (such as HVAC equipment, ventilators, sky
lights, bulkheads, or similar features) provided that:
a. Adequate appropriate screening shall be provided; and
b. Such equipment which exceeds the total building height limitation shall not have a horizontal
area greater than 5% of the roof area of the building on which it is located.
530.4.6 See Section 672 regarding height limits of amateur radio antennas.
530.4.7 Gas station, Drive-in Teller and similar canopies that are accessory structures shall provide a
minimum clearance of 14 feet and may not exceed 18 feet in height.
530.5 Calculation of Lot Area
To determine compliance with the minimum lot size required in any zone or for any use, the area of wetlands,
watercourses and steep slopes exceeding 20% grade shall be subtracted.
Figure 5.1 EXAMPLE: Lot Area Calculation
Total Land Area
minus Wetlands
minus Slopes Exceeding 20% grade
Lot Area
80,000 sf
-10,000 sf
-10,000 sf
60,000 sf
This lot would be a legal and conforming lot in an R-2 zone, but not
an R-1.
530.6 Lot Splits and Lot Line Revisions
All Simple Splits and Lot Line Revisions must be reviewed and approved by the Town Planner prior to recording
on the Land Records and may not result in creation of a rear lot or a non-conforming lot.
Section 540 Site Amenities
540.1 Accessory Buildings
See Section 230 Accessory Structures for accessory building requirements in Residential Zones and Table 3.4
Summary of Transect Zones for accessory building requirements in Transect Zones.1
540.2 Landscape Standards
The following standards are intended to enhance the appearance and natural beauty of the Town and to protect
property values through preservation and planting of vegetation, screening and landscaping material. Specifically,
these standards are intended to reduce excessive heat, glare and accumulation of dust; to provide privacy
from noise and visual intrusion; and to prevent the erosion of the soil, excessive run-off of drainage water, and
the consequent depletion of the ground water table and the pollution of water bodies.
Any tree/plant selected to be planted in a Hamden right-of-way that is not listed below must be approved by the
Commission:
1 Effective November 15, 2012
69
Table 5.2 List of Recommended Street Trees for Town Rights-of-Way*
Species Mature
Size
Preferred for: Possible Negatives Best Cultivars
English Oak, Quercus robur 40-60 ft easy to transplant,
tolerant
acorns, mildew problems
Fastigiata (upright forms for
street planting)
Oriental Flowering Cherry, Prunus
serrulata
20-35 ft spring flowers, less
wire interference
spreading habit, life
expectancy
Kwansan
Paperback Maple, Acer griseum 20-30 ft bark, fall color availability, winter
dieback
Eastern Redbud, Cercis canadensis
20-30 ft flowers, highly tolerant stem canker, seed pods Forest Pansy, Oklahoma
Kousa Dogwood, Cornus kousa 20-30 ft flowers later, more disease/
insect-resistant
low branching, wide
crown, fruit
C. x rutgersensis hybrids (C.
florida x C. kousa), Milky
Way
Sargent Cherry, Prunus sargentii 20-30 ft spring flowers, bark Columnaris
Sawtooth Oak, Quercus acutissima
35-45 ft better transplanter,
longevity
availability, acorns
Shingle Oak, Quercus imbricaria 50-60 ft highly tolerant, longevity
acorns, size
Japanese Maple, Acer palmatum 20-25 ft red foliage, fall color,
less wire interference
Bloodgood
Dogwood, Cornus florida 25-30 ft white or pink spring
flowers
dogwood borer, anthracnose
Cherokee Chief/Princess,
Cloud Nine
Honey Locust, Gleditsia triacanthos
var. inermis
30-70 ft fall color, open habit bean pod, fruit Shademaster
(plant seedless varieties only)
Ginkgo, Ginkgo biloba 50-80 ft fall color wet soil, plant only male
trees
London Planetree, Platanus x
acerifolia
70-100ft highly tolerant, interesting
bark
anthracnose, disease
susceptible
Bloodgood
Linden, Tilia cordata 40-70 ft highly tolerant, pyramidal
habit
Greenspire
Japanese Zelkova, Zelkova serrata 50-80 ft resemblance to Elm,
highly tolerant
Green Vase, Village Green
Red Maple, Acer rubrum 40-60 ft fall color, columnar &
spreading cultivars
October Glory, Red Sunset
Katsira tree, Cercidiphyllum
japonicum
20-40 ft fall color trunk splitting in young
trees
Trident Maple, Acer buergerianum 25-35 ft fall color, bark,
drought tolerant, less
wire interference
availability, winter
dieback
Hedge Maple, Acer campestre 25-35 ft tolerant to stress, less
wire interference
availability, heavy seed
crops
Queen Elizabeth
American Elm Ulmus americana 60-120 ft high arching limbs DED, plant resistant
cultivars only
Valley Forge
American Hornbeam, Carpinus
carolinian
20-30 ft fall color, less wire
interference
Turkish Filbert, Corylus colurna 40-50 ft pyramidal habit,
drought tolerant
availability, nuts
70
Table 5.2 List of Recommended Street Trees for Town Rights-of-Way*
Species Mature
Size
Preferred for: Possible Negatives Best Cultivars
Pin Oak, Quercus palustris 60-70 ft easy to transplant,
pyramidal habit, fall
color
acorns, size
Lace-bark Elm, Ulmus parvifolia 40-50 ft bark, resistant to
Dutch Elm disease,
highly tolerant
availability Allee
* Effective November 15, 2012
No tree listed on the Connecticut Invasive Plant List, issued by the Connecticut Invasive Plants Council, as
invasive or potentially invasive, may be planted in a Hamden right-of-way.1
540.3 Landscaping, Screening and Buffer Areas
540.3.1 General Requirements
The following provisions shall apply to any use in all zones:
a. Landscaping materials, trees, and other plants required by these Regulations shall be installed according
to accepted horticultural practices and all plants shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. Any
landscaping materials, trees, and/or plants that are in a condition which does not fulfill the intent of these
Regulations shall be replaced in kind by the property owner during the next planting season.
b. The property owner shall maintain any screening fence or wall required by these Regulations in good condition
throughout the period of the use of the lot.
c. All landscaping materials, trees and plants adjacent to parking areas, loading areas or driveways shall be
properly protected from damage by vehicles, barriers, curbs or other means.
d. To the extent possible, existing trees, vegetation and unique site features, such as stonewalls, shall be retained
and protected. Existing healthy, mature trees, if properly located, shall be fully credited against the
requirements of these Regulations.
e. Where it is not feasible to comply with the requirements for a front landscaped area or landscaped parking
area due to lot size and shape or existing structures, the Commission may approve the substitution of planters,
plant boxes or pots containing trees, shrubs, and/or flowers to comply with the intent of these Regulations.
f. In cases where the edge of the pavement within a public right-of-way does not coincide with the front lot
line, the property owner shall landscape the area between the front lot line and the edge of the street pavement.
g. All trees planted shall have a diameter at breast height (DBH) of at least 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 inches, depending
on the type of tree. 2
540.3.2 Front Landscaped Area
The purpose of landscaping is to enhance the appearance of the use on the lot but not to screen the use from
view. A front landscaped area shall be required in all zones except for T3.5, T4 and T5. Where front yard landscaping
is required, grass or other ground cover shall be used and appropriate trees and shrubs shall be included.
At a minimum, one shade tree having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of at least 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 inces, depending
on the type of tree, shall be planted within the front landscaped area for each 50 feet or fraction thereof of
lot frontage. 2
1 Effective November 15, 2012
2 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
71
In all residental zones, the require front yead, except for the driveway, shall be landscaped with grass or other
suitable ground cover, trees, and/or shurbs.
540.3.3 Screening of Surface Parking Lots
a. In the absence of a building facade along any part of a frontage line, a streetscreen shall be built in the same
plane as the facade.
b. Streetscreens should be between 3-1/2 and 4-1/2 feet in height. The streetscreen may be replaced by a hedge
or fence. Streetscreens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow for pedestrian and one-way
automobile access.
540.3.4 Buffer Area
The purpose of the buffer area is to provide privacy from noise, headlight glare, and visual intrusion to residential
dwellings. A buffer area shall be required along all side and rear boundaries of a Special Permit use, a T3.5,
T4, T5 or Special District lot abutting any lot in a Residential Zone (R1 – R5), T2, T3 zone. Such buffer area
shall comply with at least the following minimum standards:
The minimum width of buffer areas shall be as follows:
Table 5.3 Minimum Width of Buffer Areas
Special Permit Uses in or adjacent to any Residential Zone 10 ft
T3.5, T4, T5, Town Green District 10 ft
Manufacturing, Newhall Center 50 ft
a. The buffer area shall be located within the boundaries of the subject property within the Manufacturing,
Newhall Center, T3.5, T4 or T5 Zone;
b. The buffer area may be located on abutting property in a residential zone provided:
i. The owners of the abutting residential property(s) agree in writing;
ii. Said agreement is recorded on the land records and runs with the land;
iii. The Commission approves said agreement with such stipulations regarding maintenance and upkeep, as
it deems necessary.
c In cases where a less restrictive use is permitted to extend into a more restrictive zone, the Commission
shall determine the minimum width of the buffer area.
d. Where it is not feasible to comply with the minimum widths required above, due to lot size and shape or
existing structures, the Commission may modify the width requirements provided that the buffer area meets
the intent of these Regulations.
e. The buffer area shall be planted with evergreens of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as the Com
mission determines will effectively screen the activity on the lot from the neighboring residential area. At
a minimum, the plantings shall consist of a double row of trees six feet in height planted at intervals of 15’
on center. Non-evergreen planting may be included to supplement evergreen planting, but shall not take its
place
f. An earthen berm, wall, or fence of location, height, design and materials approved by the Commission may
be substituted for any portion of the required planting and/or buffer area.
g. Where the existing structure, topography and/or landscaping provide adequate screening, the Commission
may modify the planting and/or buffer area requirements.
72
550 Sign Regulations
550.1 Purpose
It is the intention of these sign regulations to promote public safety, protect property values, create an attractive
business climate and enhance the physical appearance of the community with attractive well-designed signs.
550.2.1 Figure 5.2 Examples of Signs
Figure 5.2 Examples of Signs
550.2 Signage Standards
550.2.1 General Standards
General to All Zones
a. The address number, no more than 6 inches measured vertically, shall be attached to the building in proximity
to the principal entrance or at a mailbox, or displayed on a free standing or canopy sign.
b. Buildings with a secondary facade may have an additional address number, no more than 6 inches measured
vertically, that shall be attached to the building in proximity to a secondary entrance or at a mailbox.
c. No signs shall be placed with their top edge higher than 24’-0” from grade.
d. A maximum of two signs is allowed per use.
e. The maximum area for all signage, unless explicitely stated otherwise shall be limited to one square foot per
linear foot of facade length.
100 lf of facade 175 lf of facade
equals 100 sf of equals 175 sf of
signage allowed signage allowed
100’
100’
75’
Blade
Sign
73
Figure 5.2.1 EXAMPLE of Frontage Linear Footage and
Allowable Sign Square Footage Calculation.
f. There shall be no signage permitted beyond that specified in this section. Signage may be further regulated
by village district regulations (See Article IV).
550.2.2 Illumination
Specific to all zones.
a. No sign shall be animated or flashing, except for a time, temperature, or other public service device employed
as a part of otherwise non-flashing, non-animated display.
b. Signage in all zones may be externally illuminated, except that signs within the shopfront glazing may be
neon lit. When a sign is illuminated from an external source, the light source shall be effectively shielded so
as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed onto adjoining properties or traveled roadways.
c. Self-illuminated signs shall be such that all direct light sources are completely covered.
550.2.3 Wall Mounted Sign
Specific to zones, T2, TG
One wall mounted sign, not to exceed two-feet in height or five-feet in length may be attached to the building in
proximity to the principal enterance.
550.2.4 Wall Mounted Signs
Specific to zones T3, T3.5, T4, T5, M, NC
a. A wall mounted sign may be applied to the primary facade of each building. Wall signs shall not exceed 3
feet in height and shall not exceed the total square footage allowed per section 550.2.1.e.
b. All wall mounted signs on the a single facade shall have the top edges aligned with each other.
b. No end of any wall sign shall extend beyond the outer edge of any front, side or rear wall of a building or
beyond the outer edge of any portion of a building to which a wall sign is affixed.
c. Theater marquee signs shall not project beyond the end of the marquee.
d. All signs affixed to a building shall be parallel to the wall to which they are attached and shall not project
more than 24 inches therefrom.
e. No sign shall be permitted to be painted or posted directly upon the exposed surface of any wall and no sign
shall be posted, painted or otherwise affixed to any rock, fence, tree or utility pole.
f. No sign shall extend above the lowest point of the main roofline.
550.2.5 Canopy Sign Standards
Specific to zones R4, R5, T1, T2, T3, T3.5, T4, T5, TG, NC
The address number, no more than 6 inches measured vertically, shall be shown on a canopy sign unless
displayed on a free standing sign. Signage on a canopy shall not exceed 1 foot in height and shall not exceed
the total square footage allowed per section 550.2.1.e.
550.2.6 Blade Signs / Projecting Signs
Specific to zones T2, T3, T3.5, T4, T5, M
No more than one blade sign per establishment may be permanently installed perpendicular to the façade
within the first layer. Such a sign shall not exceed a total of 4 square feet and shall clear 8 feet above the
sidewalk.
74
550.2.7 Free-Standing Sign Standards
Specific to zones T3.5, T4, T5, M, TG, NC
a. Only one freestanding business sign shall be permitted on a lot, except as provided in Section 550.2.16. A
freestanding business sign shall be limited to identifying the names and addresses of the business or businesses
occupying the lot, except as provided herein.
b. A freestanding sign shall be located entirely within the property lines of the lot and shall be screened from
the view of adjoining residential zones on the street frontage on the same side of the street.
c. No sign structure shall conflict with the corner visibility requirements in Section 530.1 and 591.2 of these
Regulations.
d. No freestanding sign shall exceed a height of 20 feet as measured from the ground to the top of the sign
sructure.
e. The bottom edge of all free-standing signs shall be at least 10 feet above ground level, except as provided in
Section 550.2.14 or in such cases where it can be established that no obstruction to street or access-egress
traffic visibility will result.
f. The smallest dimension of a freestanding sign shall be no less than 4 feet.
g. No freestanding sign shall exceed a total surface area of 32 square feet, except as provided in Section
550.2.16.
550.2.8 Temporary Signs
Specific to all zones
a. Signs temporarily attached to a window or door, announcing sales or special features are permitted, provided
that they do not exceed 50% of the area of a window or door, and provided that they are in place for
not more than 30 days. The signage should be affixed in locations that allow police to check that there are
no crimes in progress.1
b. Special advertising devices, including but not limited to plaques, banner, pennants and streamers, are permitted
for a period of not more than 30 days after the opening of a new business, provided that they do not
constitute a public nuisance.
c. Non-profit organizations and municipal agencies may employ temporary signs not exceeding 32 square feet
in total area, advertising special activities in any zone for a period not to exceed 14 days. No zoning permit
is required. The signs must be removed immediately after the event.
d. Sponsor signs and banners at public ball fields are permitted for the duration of a single sporting season.
e. A real estate sign advertising the sale or lease of the premises on which such sign is displayed shall not
exceed 6 square feet in total area and shall be set back from any street line at least 5 feet. When a property
is sold or rented, this sign may be replaced by one temporary sign not exceeding 6 square feet in total area,
noting the sale or rental. Such sign shall be removed upon occupancy of the land or structure, or within 90
days of the sale or lease, whichever is less.
f. Contractor’s signs may be displayed on a building or construction site. Such signs shall not exceed 16
square feet in total area.
g. Lawn signs shall not exceed 4 square feet.
550.2.9 A-Frame 2
a. A-Frame signs not exceeding 6 square feet on each of two sides are permitted.
b. No A-Frame signs may be located within the Town or State Right-of-Way.
c. All A-Frame signs must be located within 15’-0” of the primary intrance to the building where the advertised
activity takes place.
d. A-Frame signs shall not obstruct sidewalks.
e. A-Frame signs may not create any obstruction to street, or access, or egress visibility.
.
1 Effective November 15, 2012
2 Effective November 15, 2012
75
550.2.10 Billboard Prohibition and Roof-top Signs
Specific to all zones
Billboards and roof-top signs are prohibited.
550.2.11 Maintenance
Specific to all zones.
a. The installation, alteration, repairing, maintenance and inspection of lighted signs shall conform to requirements
of local codes and ordinances.
b. All signs, together with their supports, braces, guy wires and anchors shall be kept in good repair and in safe
condition.
c. The owner and/or lessee of the premises on which a sign is erected shall be directly responsible for keeping
such sign in good repair and safe condition.
550.2.12 Measurement of Area
Specific to all zones.
a. The area of a sign shall include all exposed faces of a sign measured from the outer dimensions of the plate
or frame by which the sign is enclosed.
b. When a sign is comprised only of letters, designs or figures attached to a wall, the area shall be computed as
the area of the smallest geometric shape that encloses all letters, symbols or designs.
c. Both sides of a double-face, A-frame or v-type sign shall be used in computing total surface area unless the
two faces of such sign are parallel to and within 24 inches of each other.
550.2.13 Sign Prohibitions
Specific to all zones.
The following signs shall be prohibited in any zone:
a. Traffic signs that are not approved by the appropriate State or Local traffic authority.
b. Any artificial light or light-reflecting device that is located where such light distracts the attention of users
of a public highway and which competes for attention with, or may be mistaken for, a traffic signal;
c. String or festoon lights;
d. Exposed neon, fluorescent, and/or incandescent tubing or lamps, raceways, ballast boxes and transformers
or other electrical apparatus;
e. Flashing, moving, flickering, blinking, illuminated animation, moving lights or floodlight illumination;
f. Signs of a temporary character or purpose, except as provided in Section 550.2.8, irrespective of the composition
of the sign or material used, therefore, including, but not limited to, paper signs and/or stickers used
as signs and/or affixed to store windows;
g. Moving signs;
h. Signs designating the name and/or the stamp of the sign contractor or sign company and attached to a business
sign advertising another use, product, service, or activity, except for an identification sign not to exceed
five square inches in size;
i. Signs attached to or painted on railroad trestles or bridges;
j. Roof signs and billboards;
k. All signs not expressly permitted by these Regulations.
550.2.14 Signage in Primarily Residential Zones
Specific to zones R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, T1, T2, T3
Signs are permitted as follows:
a. A name plate or sign for permitted uses giving only the name of the occupant or the use of the premises.
Sign shall not exceed a total surface area of 1½ square feet.
b. Bulletin boards and signs on the premises of churches, schools and similar non-profit institutions. Signs
shall not exceed 16 square feet in total area and may be part of the architecture of the building.
76
c. Signs advertising the use of a premises for Special Permit uses. Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet
in total area.
d. Freestanding signs shall be no more than 6 feet in height and shall comply with Sections 530.1 and 591.2 of
these Regulations.
550.2.15 Signage in the Town Green and Newhall Center Zones
Specific to zones TG, NC
Signs are permitted for the uses specified in Table 6.1 and subject to the following limitations:
Business signs including wall and freestanding signs advertising a business or businesses located on the premise,
are subject to the following requirements:
a. The total aggregate surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not exceed one square foot for each linear
foot along the frontage of the building containing the business’s principal entrance.
b. In mixed-use or multi-tenant buildings, the total sign area for said building shall be pro-rated on the basis of
1 square foot of sign for each linear foot of building frontage.
c. No single business use or tenant shall have more than two signs on the premises except that one additional
wall identification sign shall be permitted at a secondary business entrance facing a parking lot. This
identification sign shall not exceed two square feet in area and shall be exempt from the total allowable sign
area.
d. Directional signs for pedestrian and vehicular movement, including entrance and exit signs, shall not exceed
two square feet in area nor shall they exceed 24 inches in height. Exemption: Horizontal directional signs
applied to the surface of a parking area are exempt from this provision.
550.2.16 Shopping Center Signs
Specific to all zones.
This section shall apply only to the existing buildings in shopping centers constructed prior to the effective
date of these Regulations. Shopping centers built or substantially altered after this date shall be
subject to the sign regulations for the appropriate zone.
Shopping centers having a gross floor area of not less than 75,000 sq. ft. are permitted the following signs:
a. Those signs permitted for the uses specified and subject to the same limitations.
b. A freestanding sign for the purpose of identifying the shopping center complex, located at the main entrance
and not to exceed 100 square feet in area or a height of 20 feet. This 100 square feet is in addition to the
area of signage allowed based upon linear feet along a facade.
c. If a shopping center has more than one main entrance, a second freestanding sign of 50 square feet shall be
permitted.
d. If a free-standing building separate from the shopping center complex exists on the site, such building or
buildings shall be permitted one free-standing identification sign, each face of which shall not exceed a
maximum of 24 square feet and a maximum of 15 feet in height.
e. Each tenant or owner of a business within a shopping center is entitled to no more than two exterior storeidentification
signs, except that one additional wall identification sign shall be permitted at a secondary business
entrance facing a parking lot. Said identification sign shall not exceed two square feet in area and shall
be exempt from the total allowable sign area.
f. Department stores having a retail sales area of not less than 25,000 sq. ft. may have two identification signs
on any two of the exterior walls in addition to those permitted in ‘e’ above.
g. Department stores having exterior entrances not facing the enclosed mall may have identification signs at
each entrance to said department store.
h. All signs facing the interior of an enclosed mall shall not be subject to the provisions of these regulations.
i. The informational content of all signs shall be limited to letters designating the proper name of the center,
complex, or mall, free-standing building, or individual retail store as described below. Such description
shall be by general descriptive terms and shall not include any specifications of the merchandise offered for
77
sale or the services rendered therein. It shall contain no advertising device, slogan, symbol or mark other
than the proper name of the facility, except as the device, slogan, symbol or mark constitutes a portion of the
proper name.
550.3 Procedures
550.3.1 Permits
No sign, except as provided in Section 550.1 through 550.3.2 shall be constructed, erected, altered or otherwise
changed unless approved by variance. Political signs, traffic control signs and directional signs are exempted
from these provisions.1
550.3.2 Applications
All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by two copies of a plot plan showing the location and
size of all existing signs on the site, drawn to a scale of not less than 1” = 10’, with dimensions showing the
height, design, materials, colors and illumination of the proposed sign, and by a building elevation or sketch
showing building dimensions.
560 Sidewalk Standards
560.1 Sidewalks Along Private Streets
a. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street in T4, T5, and NC zones. The minimum width of a
sidewalk shall be 5 feet.
b. Sidewalks shall be required on at least one side of the street in T3, R4, R5 and M zones. The minimum
width of a sidewalk shall be five (5) feet .
c. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete.
d. The Commission may, at its discretion, waive these requirements, provided that the application gives due
consideration to pedestrian safety.
570 Fences and Walls
a. Fences shall be erected so that the outer, decorative surface faces away from the property on which the
fence is erected.
b. Fences of any type located within the first 25 feet of the front property line shall not exceed four feet in
height. Fences within required side and rear yards shall not exceed six feet in height.
c. No fence of any type shall be erected or maintained that unreasonably or dangerously interferes with the
visibility to or from a driveway.
d. A minimum of five feet must be left between the closest faces of terraced retaining walls.
planting area
Figure 5.3 Terraced Retaining Wall Configuration
1 Effective November 15, 2012
5 feet min.
Retaining Wall
Retaining Wall
78
580 Outdoor Lighting
Specific to all zones.
580.1 Purpose
These regulations are intended to provide specific standards regarding lighting, in order to:
a. Enhance public safety and welfare,
b. Maximize the effectiveness of site lighting,
c. Prevent unnecessary upward illumination
d. Avoid illumination of adjacent properties, and
e. Reduce glare.
580.2 Illumination Standards
All exterior lights and sign illumination shall be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to:
a. Prevent direct or objectionable glare or light trespass;
b. Be shielded to the extent possible;
c. Be contained within the target area;
d. Maximize energy conservation; and
e. Limit the illumination to the minimum amount adequate for the intended purpose of the lighting.
f. Shield direct light source(s) so that they shall not be visible at the property line at ground level or above
when adjacent to residential property and in all residential zones.
g. When more than four luminaries are proposed for a site, the Commission may require a photometric plan
from the manufacturer or a qualified engineer that demonstrates compliance with ‘a’ and ’b’ above
580.3 Fixture Standards
To reduce off-site glare, lighting fixtures for all parking and pedestrian areas shall be:
a. Full cut-off type fixtures; or
b. Fully shielded/recessed fixtures where the lens is recessed or flush with the bottom surface.
c. Lighting fixtures for building security or aesthetics and any display purposes shall, except as may otherwise
be approved, be:
i. Top downward (not upward or sideways);
ii. Full cut off; or
iii. Fully shielded/recessed.
580.4 Glare & Heat
No light shall be transmitted beyond the lot where it originates so as to endanger the public health or safety,
including the public safety on any street or highway, or to impair the value and reasonable use of any other lot.
580.5 Prohibited Lighting
a. The use of laser source light or any similar high-intensity light, when projected above the horizontal, is prohibited.
b. The operation of searchlights is prohibited.
c. Flashing and blinking lights are prohibited. Traditional seasonal and event lighting, however, is exempt
from this prohibition.
d. Floodlighting is prohibited.
580.6 Hours of Operation
Any unnecessary lighting shall be reduced after the close of business. The applicant may be required to control
the lighting through timing devices and/or motion detectors.
79
Figure 5.4 Luminare Types
580.7 Footcandle Standards for Exterior Lighting
On-site lighting is limited to between 0.5 and 1.5 footcandles, unless specifically listed below or otherwise approved
by the Commission.
Full Cut-off Luminaires Non-Full Cut-off Luminaire
REQUIRED NOT ALLOWED
80
Table 5.4 Footcandle Standards
Use Max. Avg.
Exterior fca
Use Max. Avg.
Exterior fca
Accessory Building & Use 0.2 Hospital 5.0
Adult-Oriented Establishment 2.4-0.6 Nursing Home 5.0
Agriculture Medical Office 0.8-0.2
Commercial Farm 0.2 Rehabilitation Facility - Out Patient 2.4-0.6
Community Garden 0.1 Heliport 3.6-0.9
Truck Garden 0 Home Occupation 0.2
Animals Library & Museum 0.8-0.2
Animal Day Care 0.2 Lodging
Animal Training Facility 0.2 Vehicle Storage 20.0
Grooming 0.2 Accessory Use 1.0
Keeping of Animals 0.1 Commercial 20.0
Kennel 0.2 Natural Resource Removal 2.4-0.6
Stable 0.2 Office Building 2.4-0.6
Veterinary Hospital 0.2 Open Space Development 0.2
Business & Personal Service 0.8-0.2 Place of Public Assemble 0.8-0.2
Cemetery 0.1 Place of Worship 0.8-0.2
Civic Club, Lodge or Association
(non-profit) 0.8-0.2 Public Parking Lot & Public Garage 1.5-0.5
Community Residence 2.4-0.6 Public Use & Public Utility 0.2
Day Care Residential 0.2
Adult Day Care 2.4-0.6 Multi-Family Dwellings 2.4-0.6
Child Day Care Center, Nursery
School or Group Day Care Home 0.8-0.2 Managed Residential Care Facility 2.4-0.6
Family Day Care Home 0.2 Refuse Disposal 2.4-0.6
Food Service Research, Development & Medical
Laboratory 0.8-0.2
Catering Facility 0.8-0.2 Retail
Outdoor Cafe 0.1 <20,000 sf gross leasable space 0.8-0.2
Restaurant 0.8-0.2 >20,000 sf gross leasable space 2.4-0.6
Take-out Food Service 2.4-0.6 Sale of Alcohol 0.8-0.2
Funeral Home 2.4-0.6 Sale of Fire Arms 2.4-0.6
Golf Course & Country Club 2.4-0.6 Schools 2.4-0.6
Health Care Facility Storage
Bed & Breakfast 0.2 Warehouse & Wholesale w/ indoor
storage 0.8-0.2
Hotel / Motel 2.4-0.6 Outdoor Storage 3.0
Inn 0.8-0.2 Accessory Use 8.0
Rooming & Boarding House 0.2 Primary Use 8.0
Manufacturing 0.8-0.2 Student Housing 0.2
Motor Vehicle Uses Telecommunications Facility 0.1
Gas Station, Service & Repair,
Rental 2.4-0.6 Wind Energy Conservation System 0.1
Car Sales 20.0
a Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
81
Section 590 Infrastructure
590.1 Utilities
Specific to all zones.
590.1.1 General Requirements
No development plan shall be approved unless:
a. Adequate public utilities, public sanitary sewers or Health Department-approved on-site septic systems, and
storm drainage are provided by the developer(s).
b. Clear evidence has been furnished of safe and satisfactory means of supplying potable water and fire protection.
c. The developer(s) provides fire hydrants at appropriate locations when public water is available. All Town
specifications for furnishing and installing water systems and hydrants must be met.
590.1.15 Landscaped Parking Area (See also, 540.2.4 Buffer Area)1
In addition to the front-landscaping and buffer-area requirments, parking lots shall comply with the following
minimum standards:
a. Where 30 or more parking spaces are required, there shall be at least 10 square feet,of interior landscaping
for each parking space within the paved portion of the parking area and at least one tree for every 5 spaces
or fraction thereof.
b. Each seperate landscape area shall contain a minimum of 120 square feet, shall ahve a minimum dimension
of at least 9 feet, shall be planted with grass or shrubs, and shall include at least one tree of at least 2-1/2 to
3-1/2 inches, depending on the type of tree, measured at breast height (DBH). Required landscape area may
be amassed.
c. Parking spaces within or below a structure, or otherwise covered, shall not be counmted when computing
required landscape areas or number of trees pursuant to the section.
d. A landscaped area shall be provided along the perimeter of any parking area except along that portion
of the parking area that is functionally integrated with an adjoining parking area on an abutting lot. The
landscaped area shall have a minimum dimension of 5 feet, shall be planted with grass or shrubs and shall
include at least one tree of at least 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 inches, depending on the type of tree, measured at breast
height (DBH). For every 30 feet along the perimeter of the parking area. In any case where the parking area
adjoins a public sidewalk, the required landscape area shall be extended to the edge of the sidewalk.
e. Trees used in parking lots shall be those deemed appropriate for street tree use, as listed in these Regulations.
590.1.2 Sanitary Sewers
Where public sewers are available, all sites shall be properly connected to an approved and functioning sanitary
sewer system prior to issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. All sanitary sewer extensions and connections
shall be made in accordance with the specifications in the Connecticut Public Health Code regulations
and the rules and regulations of the Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority.
590.1.3 Individual Services
Electric power, telephone, and other cable systems shall be placed underground, with the exception that existing
electric power and telephone/cable system facilities may be used where appropriate for industrial and commercial
uses. The Commission may waive this provision only if the utility company has determined that safe
underground installation is not feasible because of soil, water or other natural or man-made conditions. Existing
overhead wires on residential streets may remain; however, all extensions must be underground.
1 Adopted August 17, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
82
590.1.5 Water Supply
Sites with a property boundary within 200 feet of an existing public water supply must connect to public water
in accordance with the State Public Health Code, Sec. 19-13-B51m, unless the Commissioner of Health Services
grants an exception.
Section 591 Traffic, Parking & Loading Requirements
Specific to all zones.
591.1 Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations
591.1.1 Applicability
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided and used to serve all buildings erected, moved, altered,
or enlarged and all premises otherwise developed. Such facilities shall be provided, in accordance with
the standards specified in these Regulations, to accommodate the motor vehicles, occupants, employees, customers,
suppliers and other persons normally visiting or servicing such buildings or premises at one time.
591.1.2 Location of Parking and Loading Facilities
Parking and loading spaces required for all uses in any Residential Zone shall be located on the same lot as the
principal use.
Parking spaces required for any use in a Non-Residential zone shall consist of one or more of the following:
a. Those located on the same lot as the principal use, and/or;
b. Legal on-street parking spaces, as determined by the Hamden Traffic Authority or its agent, State Traffic
Commission or the Connecticut Department of Transportation corresponding to the lot frontage, (both frontages
in the case of corner lots). No spaces within 25 feet of a bus stop or a street corner or within 10 feet of
a fire hydrant may be counted, and/or;1
c. Parking spaces by purchase or lease for 25 years from a parking lot or garage within 300 feet, and/or;
d. Spaces available in a public parking garage located within 300 feet.
Note: “Legal” on-street parking spaces must:
1. Be at least 25 feet from any intersection of two or more streets;
2. Allow for fifty feet of space at bus stops so that buses can pull to the curb;
3. Avoid blocking the visibility of drivers exiting driveways;
4. Be at least 25 feet long.2
591.1.3 Required Parking and Loading Spaces
Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Commission, required parking facilities for passenger vehicles
shall contain not less than the minimum space set forth below. Rooftop and indoor parking may be included in
the required number of spaces. Off-street parking and loading shall be maintained as long as the building or use
remains on the property. No owner of any building or use affected by this section shall discontinue, change or
dispense with, or cause the discontinuance of, any required parking or loading space. No person, firm or corporation
shall occupy a building without providing parking and loading spaces that meet with the requirements of
and are in compliance with these Regulations. No sales or servicing or dead storage of automobiles, trucks or
automotive equipment shall occur in any parking or loading space.
A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided for every ten vehicular parking spaces.
1 Effectvie November 15, 2012
2 Adopted, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
83
Table 5.5 Required Parking Spaces for Residential Zones & Special Districtsa b c d
(Parking Requirements for T-Zones are located on Table 3.1)
Building &/or Property Uses(s) Function Parking Requirement
Accessory Building As determined by the Commission
Accessory Use As determined by the Commission
Adult-Oriented Establishment RETAIL 3 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross floor area
Agriculture
Commercial Farm OTHER As determined by the Commission
Community Garden OTHER 1 space for each 5 plots offered
Truck Farm RETAIL 3 spaces per 1,000 sf of net floor area
Animals
Animal Day Care RETAIL 1 space per every 2 employees and 1 space per 10 licensed animal
capacty
Animal Training Facility RETAIL 1 space per every 2 employees and one space per animal during
peak size class
Grooming RETAIL 3 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross leasable area
Keeping of Animals RETAIL
Kennel RETAIL 1 space per every 2 employees and 1 space per 10 licensed animal
capacty
Stable OTHER As determined by the Commission
Veterinary Hospital RETAIL 5 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross area
Business & Personal Service RETAIL 4 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross leasable area
Cemetery CIVIC As determined by the Commission
Civic Club, Lodge or Association (nonprofit)
CIVIC 1 space for each 3 legal occupants, as defined by the Fire Marshall
Commercial Recreation & Fitnessf CIVIC 1 space for every 3 legal occupants
Community Residence
Mentally Ill Adults - Group Home RESIDENTIAL 2 spaces
Mentally Retarded Persons - Group Home RESIDENTIAL 2 spaces
Sober Houses & Drug Treatment Facility RESIDENTIAL As determined by the Commission
Conference Center Development CIVIC 1 space for each 3 legal occupants, as defined by the Fire Marshall
Day Care
Adult Day Care OTHER 1 space per every employee and 1 space per 8 licensed client
capacity; sufficient drop-off and pick-up stacking space must be
provided
Child Day Care Center, Nursery School &
Group Day Care Home
OTHER 1 space per every employee and 1 space per 8 licensed client
capacity; sufficient drop-off and pick-up stacking space must be
provided
Family Day Care Home (children) OTHER 1 space per every employee and 1 space per 8 licensed client
capacity; sufficient drop-off and pick-up stacking space must be
provided
Food Service
Catering Facility RETAIL 4 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross leasable area
Outdoor Cafe RETAIL 0 additional spaces
Restaurant RETAIL 16 spaces per 1,000 sf of patron floor area
Take-out Food Service RETAIL 4 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross leasable area
Funeral Home OTHER: CIVIL
SUPPORT
1 space for every 3 legal occupants, as defined by the Fire Marshall,
plus 3 spaces for special vehicles
Golf Course & Country Club CIVIC 1 space for every 3 legal occupants, as defined by the Fire Marshall,
plus 3 spaces for special vehicles
Health Care Facility
84
Table 5.5 Required Parking Spaces for Residential Zones & Special Districtsa b c d
(Parking Requirements for T-Zones are located on Table 3.1)
Building &/or Property Uses(s) Function Parking Requirement
Hospital OTHER: CIVIL
SUPPORT
1 space for each 2 employees plus 1 space for each 4 beds
Nursing Home OTHER: CIVIL
SUPPORT
1 space for each 2 employees plus 1 space for each 4 beds
Medical Office OFFICE 5 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross floor area
Rehabilitation Facility - Out-Patient OFFICE 1 space for each 2 employees plus 1 space for each 4 beds
Heliport CIVIC As determined by Commission
Home Occupation RESIDENTIAL As determined by Commission
Library & Museum CIVIC 1 space for each 3 legal occupants, as defined by the Fire Marshall,
plus 3 spaces for special vehicles
Lodging
Bed & Breakfast LODGING 1 space for each room offered for rent plus additional spaces
required for other uses associated with a Bed & Breakfast, as
determined by the Commission, plus 2 for owner occupied unit
Hotel / Motel* LODGING 1 space for each room offered for rent plus additional spaces
required for other uses associated with a Hotel / Motel*, as determined
by the Commission, plus one per employee on maximum
size shift
Inn LODGING 1 space for each room offered for rent plus additional spaces
required for other uses associated with an Inn, as determined by
the Commission, plus 1 per employee on maximum size shift
Rooming & Boarding House LODGING 1 space for each room offered for rent plus additional spaces
required for other uses associated with a Rooming & Boarding
House, as determined by the Commission
Manufacturing
Accessory Use OTHER 1 space for each 2 employees during the largest daily work
shift or 1 space for each 500 sf of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
Primary Use OTHER 1 space for each 2 employees during the largest daily work
shift or 1 space for each 500 sf of gross floor area, whichever is
greater; Parking area for office area computed separately
Motor Vehicle Uses
Gas Station, Service & Repair, Rental RETAIL 4 spaces per 1,000 gross leasable floor square feet of area e
Car Sales (new & used) RETAIL 1 space for each 5 cars offered for sale
Vehicle Storage OTHER As determined by the Commission
Accessory Use OTHER As determined by the Commission
Natural Resource Removal** OTHER As determined by the Commission
Office Building
Office Space OFFICE 3 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross floor area
Open Space Development RESIDENTIAL Calculate based upon dwelling unit composition
Commercial Recreation & Fitness CIVIC 1 space for every 3 legal occupants
Place of Public Assemble &/or Worship CIVIC 1 space for every 3 legal occupants
Public Use & Public Utility CIVIC As determined by the Commission
Public Parking Lot & Public Garage CIVIC As determined by the Commission
Residential
Single-Family Accessory Dwelling Unit RESIDENTIAL 1 space per dwelling unit
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Other RESIDENTIAL 1.5 space per dwelling unit
Multi-Family Dwelling (adaptive re-use or
new construction
RESIDENTIAL 1-1/2 spaces per dwelling unit for efficiency and 1 BR units;
2 spaces for 2 or more BR’s
85
Table 5.5 Required Parking Spaces for Residential Zones & Special Districtsa b c d
(Parking Requirements for T-Zones are located on Table 3.1)
Building &/or Property Uses(s) Function Parking Requirement
Managed Residential Care Community RESIDENTIAL 1 space for each employee during largest daily work shift; 1
space per 2-2BR dwelling units; plus 1 space per 3-single or efficiency
dwelling units
Single-Family Dwelling RESIDENTIAL 2 spaces
Two-Family Dwelling RESIDENTIAL 4 spaces
Three-Family Dwelling RESIDENTIAL 6 spaces
Refuse Disposal
Resource Recovery, Transfer Station,
Volume Reduction Facility
OTHER As determined by the Commission
Research, Development & Medical Laboratory
OTHER 1 space per 500 sf gross leasable floor area
Retail and Financial Institutions e RETAIL 4 spaces per 1,000 sf of gross leasable floor area
Schools
Business School OTHER 1 space for each employee plus 1 space for each 2 non-residential
students plus 1 space for each 4 resident students
College & University OTHER 1 space for each employee during the largest daily work shift,
plus 1 space for each 2 non-residential students plus 1 space for
each 4 resident students
Athletic Arenas, On-campus OTHER Indoor Athletic Arenas, with a seating capacity of 3,000 to 7,000
owned and operated by a College or University and located on
a campus of said institution shall, provide 1 off-street parking
space for every 3 seats.
The Commission, may, at its discretion, allow for up to onethird
of the parking spaces required under this regulation to be
unpaved, environmentally sensitive parking spaces. Said spaces
shall be designed and constructed to specifications acceptable to
the Commission.
Dormitories LODGING As Determined by the Commission
Elementary & Secondary School OTHER As Determined by the Commission
Storage
Warehouse, wholesale w/ indoor storage OTHER As Determined by the Commission
Outdoor Storage OTHER As determined by the Commission
Accessory Use OTHER As determined by the Commission
Primary Use OTHER As determined by the Commission
Student Housing RESIDENTIAL 1 space per student
Telecommunications Facility CIVIC As determined by the Commission
Wind Energy Conservation System OTHER As determined by the Commission
a The shared parking factor from Article III my be applied to parcels with more than one use.
b Parking is not allowed within the front yard setback for student housing.
c Stacking of parking spaces for single-family homes is permitted.
d At the Commission’s discretion, stacking of parking spaces may be permitted for small non-residential uses.
e Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
f Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
The Commission may modify required parking where the applicant demonstrates that parking use is complementary
at different times of the day or week.
591.1.4 Required Truck-Loading Spaces
Truck-loading spaces shall be adequate in number to serve the proposed use and shall be located on the site so
as not to impede on-site pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
86
591.1.5 Parking and Loading Area Specifications
All off-street parking and loading areas, whether or not required by these regulations, shall comply with the following
specifications.
591.1.5.1 General Design (See also Section 540 Site Amenities)
a. Parking and loading areas shall be designed and constructed for safe circulation of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic on the lot and shall avoid interference with public use of adjacent streets and sidewalks.
b. No parking lot shall be designed or constructed that requires vehicles to back onto a street.
c. Buildings shall be arranged on the lot so as to permit vehicular access to the rear of the lot.
d. Parking lots shall be designed to minimize large, open expanses of paving.
591.1.6 Surfacing and Drainage
All parking and loading areas shall be properly surfaced, graded and drained. Stormwater drainage systems shall
be designed to minimize run-off and maximize absorption of pollutants by the soil. Required parking and loading
facilities for all uses, other than one- and two-family dwellings, shall have an all-weather, dust-free surfacing
or bituminous or concrete paving, and shall be maintained in good condition and capable of allowing free
and safe movement of all vehicles using the facilities.
Any parking spaces in excess of the minimum required shall be pervious unless expressly stated otherwise by
the Commission.
Residential driveways do not require a zoning permit. However, if they are paved with impervious material the
total percentage of impervious surface of the lot may not exceed the maximum amount allowed per Table 2.1.1
591.1.7 Curb Cuts, Ingress and Egress
a. The Police Department and the Town Engineer shall review ingress and egress locations sight lines.
b. The Town Engineering Department or the State Traffic Commission shall review curb-cut widths and curbcut
radii, where appropriate.
c. No curb-cut radii shall be designed or constructed so as to force a vehicle to cross a traffic lane or to climb a
curb.
d. Where feasible, new curb-cuts shall be aligned with existing curb-cuts on the opposite side of the street.
e. The number of curb cuts per block should be minimized.
Parking Aisles
Parking aisles or interior driveways shall be of adequate width to serve a particular design arrangement of parking
spaces, the following being the minimum width permitted:
Table 5.6 Parking Aisle Width
Design Arrangement One-Way Aisle
Width
Two-Way Aisle
Width
90° parking 24 feet 24 feet
60° parking 18 feet 24 feet
45° parking 13 feet 24 feet
30° parking 11 feet 24 feet
Parallel parking 12 feet 24 feet
1 Effective November 15, 2012
87
Ninety-degree parking shall be used unless there is positive control of the direction of all traffic. Arrows painted
on the surface of each aisle or driveway shall indicate traffic flow or direction.
Figure 5.5 Typical Arrangement for 90o Parking
591.1.8 Parking Spaces
a. All parallel parking spaces shall measure at least 9 feet by 22 feet and all other parking spaces shall measure
at least 9 feet by 18 feet, exclusive of driveways and aisles, except as provided below and shall have access
to a street or alley by way of a driveway.
b. Except for those at one- or two- or three-family dwellings, all parking spaces shall have bumper guards or
curbs to prevent damage to trees, shrubs, landscaping and lighting and to prevent interference with pedestrian
use of sidewalks.
c. All parking spaces, except for one and two- or three-family dwellings, shall be marked by painted lines,
curbs or other means.
591.1.9 Spaces for Small Cars
Where a parking lot contains more than 30 car spaces, the applicant may provide up to 40% of the total required
parking in small-car spaces, subject to approval by the Commission. A small-car space shall not be less than
8½ feet in width and 16 feet in length. The applicant is encouraged to use the difference in area between each
small-car space and standard parking space for additional landscaping on the site.
591.1.10 Parking Lot Sidewalks
a. For parking lots for more than 30 cars, every other double bay shall provide for sidewalks on a raised
curbed area consistent with sidewalk requirements below. The Commission may, at its discretion, waive
this requirement, provided that the application gives due consideration to pedestrian and vehicular safety,
pedestrian and vehicular flow, and adequacy of landscaping.
b. Where no wheel stops are provided, the sidewalk shall be 6 feet wide. Where wheel stops are provided, the
minimum width of the sidewalk shall be five (5) feet. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete.
591.1.11 Handicapped Parking
Parking shall be provided for the physically handicapped in accordance with Article 21 of the Basic Building
Code of the State of Connecticut.
88
591.1.12 Attended Parking for Events
Attended parking areas are permitted to accommodate overflow parking that occurs due to temporary events
such as banquets, conferences, fairs and similar occasions of public congregation. The Zoning Enforcement Officer
may approve an attended parking area permit in any zone. Event parking will require a parking attendant
on duty one hour before the scheduled beginning time of the event and up until one hour after the ending time
of the event. Prior to approving a plan for an event parking permit, the applicant shall obtain the approval of the
Fire Marshall and the Police Chief.
591.1.13 Drive-through Window Service and Queue Space
591.1.13.1 General Requirements
a. Drive-through window services shall be designed and located to minimize conflict between pedestrian traffic
and vehicular traffic.
b. A traffic study shall be required for all drive-through applications, unless waived by the Commission,
c. Drive-through window services shall comply with the following standards:
i. Drive-through windows shall be located in the rear of the building. The Commission may waive this
requirement when the configuration of the lot or building warrants a different location or in instances
where abutting residential property would be better served by a buffer.
ii. All drive-through lanes shall be 9 feet wide.
iii. All drive-through lanes shall be designed to allow vehicle queuing on site and shall be physically separated
from entrances and exits so as not to obstruct vehicular access/egress.
iv. If the site allows, the Commission may require that a landscaped area be placed between the drivethrough
lane(s) and the general access lane(s) and parking area.
v. The drive-through shall be clearly defined by pavement markings and directional signage.
Figure 5.5.1 Examples of Re-Design of Existing Gas Station Condition
591.1.14 Queue Space Standards
a. Minimum queue space shall be provided for uses as specified in Table 5.7. Queue space shall be provided in
such a manner that the head of the queue starts adjacent to the specified use and extends so as not to obstruct
or encroach upon any parking space or aisle. Queue space shall only be provided on the lot and for the use
to be served and shall not extend into any street or right-of-way.
b. Each queue space shall have a dimension of 9 feet in width by 18 feet in length.
a b c
Municipality
DRAFT
Author: Duany Plater-Zyberk & Co. Draft: June 8, 2009
TABLE SR6: Sprawl Building Types Repaired. This table provides descriptions of the necessary tools to repair the Sprawl Building Types into
Neighborhood Building Types.
SPRAWL BUILDING TYPES TECHNIQUES REPAIRED BUILDING TYPES
MCMANSION
• Subdivide mansion into multiple
bedrooms
• esign a common living dining enter
tainment area
• Subdivide mansion into three or more
ats
• rganie paring behind the building
SENIOR ­ STUDENT HOUSING
T­ T­
APARTMENTS
T­ T­
FRONT­LOADED HOUSE
• Subdivide the ot into a duple
• dd to the house i n the front Setbac
creating ive or garage family room
bedroom etc.
DUPLE­
T­ T­
LI­E­WOR­
T­ T­
DRI­E­THRU
• dd liners in front of building to create a
main street
• eep drivethru
• eplace buildings with perimeter bloc
LINERS ­ MAIN STREET
T­ T­
NEIGHBORHOOD STORES
T­
GAS STATION
• eep gas station and pumps and build a
corner store at the intersection
• liminate gas station eep the pumps and
increase them plus build a corner store on
both sides of intersection
CORNER STORE
T­
CORNER STORES
T­ T­
T6
Corner Stores
Corner Stores
Gas Station
a. Keep gas station and pumps
and build a corner store at the
intersection
b. Eliminate gas station; keep
the pumps and increase them,
plus build a corner stor on
both sides of intersection
89
Table 5.7 Required Queue Spaces
Use Required Queue Spaces*
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM), drive-up type 4 per machine
Bank Drive-up window 8 for each window in a separate lane
Pharmacy Drive-up window 4 for each window
Take-out food service 8 for each window
Other As determined by the Commission
*Unless modified by the State Traffic Commission
Figure 5.5.2 Examples of Re-Design of Existing Drive Through Designs
591.1.15 Landscaped Parking Area (See also, 540.3.4 Buffer Area)
In addition to the front-landscaped and buffer-area requirements, parking lots shall comply with the following
minimum standards:
a. Where 30 or more parking spaces are required, there shall be at least 10 square feet of interior landscaping
for each parking space within the paved portion of the parking area and at least one tree for every 5 parking
spaces or fraction thereof.
b. Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 120 square feet, shall have a minimum dimension
of at least 9 feet, shall be planted with grass or shrubs, and shall include at least one tree of at least
2-1/2 to 3-1/2 inches, depending on the type of tree, measured at breast height (DBH). Required landscaped
area may be amassed.
c. Parking spaces within or below a structure, or otherwise covered, shall not be counted when computing
required landscaped areas or number of trees pursuant to this section.
d. A landscaped area shall be provided along the perimeter of any parking area except along that portion
of the parking area that is functionally integrated with an adjoining parking area on an abutting lot. The
landscaped area shall have a minimum dimension of 5 feet, shall be planted with grass or shrubs and shall
include at least one tree of at least 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 inches, depending on the type of tree, measured at breast
height (DBH) for every 30 feet along the perimeter of the parking area. In cases where the parking area
adjoins a public sidewalk, the required landscaped area shall be extended to the edge of the sidewalk.
e. Trees used in parking lots shall be those deemed appropriate for street tree use, as listed in these Regulations.
DRAFT
MCMANSION
• esign a common living dining enter
tainment area
• Subdivide mansion into three or more
ats
• rganie paring behind the building
SENIOR ­ STUDENT APARTMENTS
FRONT­LOADED HOUSE
• Subdivide the ot into a duple
• dd to the house i n the front Setbac
creating ive or garage family room
bedroom etc.
DUPLE­
T­ T­
LI­E­WOR­
T­ T­
DRI­E­THRU
• dd liners in front of building to create a
main street
• eep drivethru
• eplace buildings with perimeter bloc
LINERS ­ MAIN STREET
T­ T­
NEIGHBORHOOD STORES
T­
GAS STATION
• eep gas station and pumps and build a
corner store at the intersection
• liminate gas station eep the pumps and
increase them plus build a corner store on
both sides of intersection
CORNER STORE
T­ CORNER STORES T­ T­
T6
Neighborhood Stores
Liners / Main Street
Drive - Through
a. Keep drive-through
b. Add liners in front of
building to create a main
street
c. Replace buildings with
perimeter block
90
591.2 Visibility at Intersections
591.2.1 Corner Lots and Visibility
No structure, wall, fence, shrubbery, trees or signs shall be erected, maintained, or planted on any lot that unreasonably
or dangerously obstructs or interferes with the visibility of drivers on a curve or at a street intersection.
The minimum clearance shall require a clear space between the elevations of 3 feet and 7 feet above the street
grade within 25 feet of the intersecting street lines that border corner lots. (Also See Section 530.1)
Shaded area to be kept clear of plantings, fences, walls or other visual barriers
between three and seven feet above street grade.
Figure 5.6 Visibility at Street Intersections
Area to be kept clear of plantings, fences, walls
or other barriers to vision between the elevations
91
92
This page intentionally
left blank
93
ARTICLE VI SPECIAL PROVISIONS
Section 600 Purpose
Section 610 Site Plan & Special Permit Uses
The following uses are permitted in the zone(s) as indicated in Table 6.1 Allowed Uses by Zone, subject to all provisions
of the applicable zone, and as specifically provided for in this section.
Every application for the use of property subject to conditions set forth in this section shall be filed in accordance with
the provisions of these regulations, and shall be subject to any approval stipulated in this section.
Table 6.1 Allowed Uses by Zone
Section
USES R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 T2 T3 T3.5 T4 T5 M NC TG
Accessory Building P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Accessory Use, Drive-Through Food-
Service SP SP S SP
Accessory Use, Drive-Through Service,
Other SP SP S S SP
Accessory Use S S S S S S S S S S S S S
622 Adult Oriented Establishmentc SPc
624 Agriculture
Commercial Farm S S S S SP
Community Garden S S S S S S S S S S SP S
Truck Garden P P P P P P Pg P
626 Animals
Animal Day Care S
Animal Training Facility S
Groomingg Sg S S S S SP
Keeping of Animals P P P P P S
Keeping of Hensk P P P P P P P
Keeping of Falconry Raptorsl P P P P P P P
Kennel SP SP SP SP S
Stable SP SP SP
Veterinary Hospital SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP S S SP
Business & Personal Service
<1,500 sf gross leasable space
SP SPg P P P P SP
>1,500 sf to <10,000 sf gross leasable
spaceg SP SPg SP S s S S
>10,000 sf gross leasable space
SP S SP SP
628 Cemetery SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
630 Civic Club, Lodge or Assoc. (nonprofit)
SPg SP S S S SP
632 Community Residence
Mentally Ill Adults - Group Home P P P P P P P P P
Mentally Retarded Persons - Group
Home P P P P P P P P P
Sober House & Drug Treatment
Facility P P P P P P P P P
634 Conference Center Development SP SP SP SP
636 Day Care
94
Table 6.1 Allowed Uses by Zone
Section
USES R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 T2 T3 T3.5 T4 T5 M NC TG
Adult Day Care SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP S SP SP
Child Day Care, Nursery School &
Group Day Care Home SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP S SP SP
Family Day Care Home (Children) P P P P P P P P P P
638 Food Service
Catering Facility & Food Processing
Establishment S S S S
Outdoor Cafe Pn Pn Pn Pn SPn
Restaurant S S S S S
Take-out Food Service S S S
Funeral Home SP SP SP
Golf Course & Country Club SP SP SP SP SP SP
640 Health Care Facility
Hospital SP SP
Nursing Home SP SP SP
Medical Office (See Office Building)
Rehabilitation Facility - Out-Patient SP SP SP SP SP SP S
642 Heliport SP
644 Home Occupation P/S/
SP
P/S/
SP
P/S/
SP
P/S/
SP
P/S/
SP
P/S/
SP
P/S/SP P/S/SP P/S/SP
P/S/
SP
P/S/
SP
Library & Museum SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
646 Lodging
Bed & Breakfast SP SP SP SP SP
Hotel / Motel SP SP SP c SP
Inn SP SP SP
Roomers & Boarders P P P P P P P P P
Rooming & Boarding House SP SP SP SP SP SP S
648 Manufacturing
Accessory Use S S S
Primary Use
Light Manufacturing S S S SP
Heavy Manufacturing S
677 Marijuana Dispensaries + Production Facilities n
Medical Marijuana Dispensariesp So S
Medical Marijuana Production
Facilities S
650 Motor Vehicle Uses
Gas Station, Service & Repair, Rental SPfg SP SP SP
Car Sales SP SP
Vehicle Storage SP
Accessory Use P P P P
Natural Resource Removalb SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Office Building (including Medical)
<1,500 sf gross leasable space SPg SP P P P P
>1,500 sf to <10,000 sf gross leasable
spaceg SPg SP S S S S
>10,000 sf to <20,000 sf gross leasable
space SP S S S
>20,000 sf gross leasable space SP S S SP
Open Space Development SP SP SP SP SP SP
95
Table 6.1 Allowed Uses by Zone
Section
USES R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 T2 T3 T3.5 T4 T5 M NC TG
Place of Public Assembly SP SP SP SP SP SP SP P
658 Place of Worship SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
660 Preservation of Historic Structure SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
662k Public Use & Public Utility SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
656 Parking Garage SP S SP SP SP
Public Parking Lote SPg SPeg SP S SP SP SP
Recreation & Fitness, Commercial
<10,000 sf gross leasable space SP SP S S SP
>10,000 sf gross leasable space SP S S SP
Residential
620 Single-Family Accessory Dwelling
Unit P P P P P S S S S S
Accessory Dwelling Unit, Other P P P P P P P SP P P P
652 Multi-Family Dwellings
Adaptive Re-use to Multi-Family SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Managed Residential Care Communityf
SP SP SP SP SP SPf SP SP SP
New Construction SP SP SP SP SP SP
Low Density
Single-Family P P P P P P P P P P
Two-Familyf P Pf P
Three-Familyf P Pf P
Refuse Disposal
664 Resource Recovery, Transfer Station,
Volume Reduction Facility SP
Research, Development & Medical
Lab. SP S S
666 Retail and Financial Services
<1,500 sf gross leasable space SPg P P P S SP
>1,500 sf to <5,000 sf gross leasable SPg j S/SPi S S S SP
>5,000 sf to <10,000 sf gross leasable
spaceg SPg j S/SPi S S SP SP
>10,000 sf to <20,000 sf gross leasable
space SP SP S SP SP
656 >20,000 sf to 250,000 sf gross leasable
spaced SPd h SPd SP
Farmers Market S S S S S S S S S S S S
Sale of Alcohol, Package Storegj SPgj SP SP S SP
Sale of Fire Arms SP
668 Schools
Business School <50 students at peakg SPg S S S S
Business School >50 students at
peakf g SPf g SP SP S S
College & University SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Dormitories SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Elementary & Secondary School SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
Regional Educational Service Center SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
641m Spas, Meditation and wellness
Centersm SPm SPm SPm
Storage
96
Table 6.1 Allowed Uses by Zone
Section
USES R1 R2 R3 R4 R5 T1 T2 T3 T3.5 T4 T5 M NC TG
Warehouse & Wholesale w/ indoor
storage SP S
654 Outdoor Storage
Accessory Use SP SP
Primary Use SP
670 Student Housing P P P P P P P P P P
672 Telecommunications Facility S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
676 Wind Energy Consesrvation Systemf SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SPf SP SP SP SP
P - Zoning Permit S-Site Plan Application SP-Special Permit Application Blank Space - Not Allowed
M - Manufacturing NC – Newhall Center TG – Town Green District
a Use shall not be allowed in T3 or T4 Zones along Whitney Avenue between Walden Street and Glendower Road.
b See Section 520.8
c Allowed in Manufacturing Zone on Sherman Avenue, Corporate Ridge, Crestway, Overlook Drive and Rossotto Drive only.
d Not allowed on Whitney Avenue.
e No multi-story parking structure shall be permitted in a T3.5 Zone.
f Use shall not be allowed between Walden and Glendower Streets.
g Use shall not be allowed along Whitney Avenue north of West Woods Road.
h Use shall not be allowed on Leeder Hill Drive, Hamden Hills Drive, Mix Avenue or Arch Street
i Use shall require a Special Permit north of West Woods Road in a T3.5 Zone
j Use shall not be allowed in T3 Zone between James Street and the I-40 Connector.
k Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010
l Amended, July 24, 2012. Effective, August 15, 2012
m Adopted October 27, 2015. Effective November 10, 2015
n Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
o Limiting locations to Dixwell Avenue, Whitney Avenue and State Street
p Maximum of 20,000 square feet Gross Leasable Space
Section 620 Accessory Dwelling Units in Single-Family Homes
A single-family dwelling may be converted to allow the incorporation of one Accessory Apartment in any zone
permitting a single-family residence subject to a Zoning Permit and the following conditions:
a. Public sewer and public water supply shall serve the principal dwelling. If not, the subject lot shall have a
minimum area of 6,000 square feet or as required by the applicable zone, whichever is greater.
b. An Accessory Apartment shall have a minimum floor area of 300 square feet and a maximum floor area of 600
square feet, and a maximum of two bedrooms.
c. One of the occupants of the dwelling shall be the owner of record.
d. No Accessory Apartment shall be located in a garage or basement unless one wall opens to grade.
e. An Accessory Apartment shall be self-contained, with separate entrance, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities
for the exclusive use of the occupant.
f. No exterior change shall be made to the existing front of the principal dwelling except for dormers or windows.
g. Expansion of a principal dwelling shall be permitted to accommodate an Accessory Apartment via dormer(s)
or an addition beyond the existing foundation.
h. No accessory building shall be used or created for the purpose of accommodating an Accessory Apartment.
i. The principal dwelling and Accessory Apartment shall conform to all requirements of the applicable building,
health, fire, sanitary and zoning codes.
620.1 Dwelling Units, Accessory to Non-Residential Use
A dwelling unit, when accessory to a legal non-residential use, is permitted subject the following conditions:
a. The application shall include all contiguous property under the same name or all property deemed by the
Commission to be part of the same development.
b. Up to three dwelling units that are accessory to a non-residential use located in an R-4 Zone, are permitted.
97
c. Retail, service shall only be permitted on the first floor level.
d. Separate entrances and exits shall be provided for the residential and non-residential portions of the building.
e. Accessory dwelling units shall conform to all requirements of the applicable building, health, housing, fire
and sanitary codes.
f. The building shall be served by public sewer and water supply,
g. The required floor area per accessory dwelling unit shall be as indicated in Table 6.2:
Table 6.2 Required Floor Area
for Accessory Dwelling Units
Unit Type Minimum
Floor Area
1 room 350 sf
2 room (1 BR) 425 sf
3 rooms (1 BR) 500 sf
Section 622 Adult Oriented Establishments
622.1 Purpose
The intent of this Section is to regulate adult-oriented establishments that are customarily not open to the public
generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, thereby excluding any minor by reason of age. These
establishments, as defined in Section 622.4 and further defined in Hamden Town Ordinance, affect the public
health, morals, safety, and general welfare of the community and include, but are not limited to, one or more combination
of the types of businesses that are indicated in Section 622. Considering the potentially serious objectionable
operational characteristics of adult-oriented establishments, special regulations of these uses are necessary to
ensure that no adverse effects will contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood.
622.2 The primary purposes of this Section are to:
a. Protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of such establishments;
b. Prevent a concentration of these uses in one area of a building;
c. Protect the public health, morals, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Hamden;
d. Regulate and prohibit the carrying on, within the Town of Hamden, of any trade, manufacture, business or
profession, that is, or may be, so carried on as to become prejudicial to public health, conducive to fraud and
cheating, or dangerous to or constituting an unreasonable annoyance to those living or owning property in the
Town of Hamden; and
e. Protect and preserve the quality of life for the citizens of Hamden, especially its children.
622.3 Consistency with Federal and State Law
a. The United States Constitution and the Connecticut State Statutes grant the Town powers, especially police
power, to enact reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise "Adult-Oriented Establishments",
as hereinafter defined, in order to protect the public health, morals, safety and welfare.
b. It is not the intent of the Planning and Zoning Commission, in enacting this regulation, to deny to any person
rights to speech that are protected by the United States of America and/or the State Constitution, nor is it the
intent of the Planning and Zoning Commission to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the
contents of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and/or other
materials.
c. Further, by enacting this Regulation, the Planning and Zoning Commission does not intend to deny or restrict
the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States
of America and/or the State Constitution, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected
rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute or exhibit
such materials.
98
622.4 Relevant Definitions
For the purpose of this regulation, the following will define and explain certain words used. Where a question
arises as to the precise meaning of a word, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the meaning
of the word, giving due consideration to the expressed purpose and intent of this regulation. Other words used in
these Regulations shall have the meaning commonly attributed to them.
In addition to the terms in Article VIII, the following definitions pertain specifically to Section 622:
Adult-Oriented Entertainment shall include, whether as a primary use or an accessory use, without limitation,
adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult media outlet, adult motion-picture theater, adult mini-motion-picture theater,
adult news racks, adult novelty, adult personal service, adult retail establishment, and adult video arcade, and
further means any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted, and which are so
physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls, separate from the common
areas of the premises, for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or any premises wherein
an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult
entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect, and from which minors are
excluded by virtue of age. An "Adult-Oriented Establishment" further includes, without limitation, premises that
are so physically arranged as above and are used as such whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment
studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio, juice bar or any
other term of like import.
Adult Media Outlet shall mean a business, whether as a primary use or accessory use, engaging in the barter,
rental or sale of items consisting of books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, pictures, slides, records,
audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures, films or other media, if such business is open to the public,
patrons or members, or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas,"
(See below for definitions) and which excludes minors by virtue of age.
Adult Bookstore shall mean an establishment that has as a principal activity, whether as a primary use or accessory
use, the sale or barter of books, magazines, newspapers or other printed material, videotapes, video discs and
motion-picture films or tapes, pictures, slides, audiotapes, videotapes, on compact discs that are characterized by
their emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and pubic areas or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy, and which establishment excludes minors by virtue of age.
Adult Motion-Picture Theater shall mean an enclosed building, or portion of said building, with a capacity of
50 or more persons, having as a principal activity displaying motion pictures characterized by their emphasis on
portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy for observation
by patrons therein, and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age.
Adult Mini-Motion-Picture Theater shall mean an enclosed building or portion of said building, with a capacity
of 50 or fewer persons, having as a principal activity, whether as a primary use or accessory use, the presenting
of material characterized by emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or actions of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy, for observation by patrons therein in individual viewing booths, and
from which minors are excluded by virtue of age.
Adult Cabaret shall mean an establishment licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features nude
and/or partially nude dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainers, and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age.
99
Adult Novelty Business shall mean a business, whether as a primary use or accessory use, which has as the principal
activity the sale of devices or simulated human genitals designed for sexual stimulation and from which
minors are excluded by virtue of age.
Adult Personal Service Business shall mean a business, whether as a primary use or accessory use having as a
principal activity a person, while nude, partially nude, or fully clothed, providing personal services for a person
of the same or other sex, on an individual basis, in an open or closed room, and which excludes minors by virtue
of age. It includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: massage parlors, exotic rubs, modeling studios,
body painting studios, tattoo parlors, wrestling studios and individual theatrical performances. It does not include
activities performed by persons pursuant to, and in accordance with licenses issued to such persons by the State
of Connecticut.
Adult Video shall mean any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing or relating
to “Specific Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas,” and whereby excludes minors by virtue of age.
Adult Entertainment shall mean any exhibition of an adult-oriented motion picture, live performance, display
or dance of any type, which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated
performance of “Specified Sexual Activities” or exhibition and viewing of “Specified Anatomical Areas,”
removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or other personal services offered
customers, and from which minors are excluded by virtue of age.
Partially Nude shall mean having any or all of the following bodily parts exposed: buttocks, genitals, pubic area,
or female breasts.
Primary Use shall mean a use accounting for more than 25% of a business stock-in trade, display space, or floor
space, or movie-display time per month.
Accessory Use shall mean a use accounting for less than 25% of a business stock-in trade, display space, or floor
space, or movie-display time per month.
Employee shall mean any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work in or at, or render any
services directly related to the operation of, an adult-oriented establishment.
Minor shall be deemed to refer to a person under the age of 18 years.
Operator shall mean any person, proprietor, shareholder, general partner or limited partner who holds 20% or
more of the shares or partnership interest in any business operating, conducting or maintaining an “Adult-Oriented
Establishment.”
Specified Sexual Activities shall mean:
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and
Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
Specified Anatomical Areas shall mean:
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
Human genitals, pubic region;
100
Buttocks;
Female breasts below the point immediately above the top of the areola; and
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered.
Sexual Activities as used in this Regulation is not intended to include any medical publications or films or bona
fide educational publications or films, nor does it include any art or photography publications that denote at least
25% of the lineage of each issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or photography, nor
does this definition apply to any news periodical that reports or describes current events and that, from time to
time, publishes or shows photographs or depictions of nude or semi-nude persons when describing cultures in
which nudity or semi-nudity is indigenous to the population.
Obscene Material or Performance is obscene to minors if it depicts a prohibited sexual act and, taken as a whole,
it is harmful to minors. For purpose of this subsection “harmful to minors” means:
That quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of a prohibited sexual act, when it predominantly
appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors;
It is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for minors; and
Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, educational, political or scientific value for minors.
Prohibited Sexual Act means erotic fondling, nude performance, sexual excitement, sadomasochistic abuse, masturbation
or sexual intercourse.
Child Pornography means any material involving a live performance or photographic or other visual reproduction
of a live performance that depicts a minor in a “prohibited sexual act”.
Regulated Uses
Regulated adult-oriented establishments include, but are not limited to the following:
a. Adult Bookstore
b. Adult Cabaret
c. Adult Entertainment
d. Adult Media Outlet
e. Adult Mini-Motion-Picture Theater
f. Adult Motion-Picture Theater
g. Adult News wrack
h. Adult Novelty
i. Adult Personal Service
j. Adult Retail Establishment
k. Adult Video Arcade
l. Businesses a/k/a:
i. Encounter Studio
ii. Exotic Dance Studio
iii. Juice Bar
iv. Modeling Studio
v. Rap Studio
vi. Sensitivity Studio
vii. or any other term of like impact.
Permitted
Adult-oriented establishments, whether as a primary use or an accessory use, as that term is defined in Section
622 and further defined in the Hamden Town Ordinances, which definition may be amended from time to time,
101
shall be permitted in the Manufacturing (M-) Zone, subject to Special Permit and Site Plan One-Year Approval,
to be renewed annually. Adult-oriented establishments shall be restricted to one use per building. The following
restrictions in addition to conditions set forth in Section 718 shall apply:
a. Such establishments shall be a minimum of 100 feet from public, parochial or private schools, daycare centers,
public parks, (including the Farmington Canal Greenway), playgrounds, recreational lands, or other
areas where numbers of minors regularly travel or congregate in any zone, municipal boundary lines, residentially
zoned property or libraries and 1,000 feet from other adult-oriented establishments.
b. For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building containing or proposing to contain an adultoriented
use, to the nearest boundary of the use herein specified.
c. Nor shall any such establishment be located within 100 feet of the property line of any church, convent, monastery,
synagogue, mosque or similar place of worship, or cemetery.
d. Pursuant to Section 718, such establishments shall be subject to Special Permit and Site Plan approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, for a limited period of time, not to exceed one year with annual renewal
required. The following site specific criteria shall apply:
i. All exterior signs shall comply with Section 550 and no exterior sign shall contain any photographic or
artistic representation of specified anatomical areas as defined in the Hamden Town Ordinance.
ii. All building openings, entries, windows, doors shall be located covered or screened in such a manner as
to prevent view into the interior of the building from any public right-of-way or adjacent properties.
iii. No adult-oriented use shall be established in any building of which any part is used for residential purposes.
iv. No residential use shall be established in any building of which any part is used as an adult-oriented establishment.
v. Stairways, sloping or rising paths and building entrances and exits shall be well illuminated. No spotlighttype
fixtures attached to the building are permitted.
e. Adequate site lighting shall be provided to ensure the safe movement of persons and vehicles and for security
purposes.
Exemptions
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to nor shall they prohibit the following uses and activities performed
by persons pursuant to, and in accordance with, licenses issued to such persons by the State of Connecticut.
a. Treatment by a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a Connecticut-licensed masseur or masseuse, a
licensed practical nurse or a registered professional nurse;
b. Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment;
c. Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical offices;
d. Barbershops or beauty parlors that offer massage to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders only;
e. Athletic facilities of an educational institution, including alumni club, or of a philanthropic or charitable
institution; and
f. Health establishments, including commercial and non-commercial clubs that are equipped and arranged to
provide instruction, services or activities that improve or affect a person's physical condition by physical
exercise or by massage. Physical exercise programs include aerobics, martial arts, boxing, and/or the use of
exercise equipment.
Variances
Adult-oriented establishments shall not be permitted by variance in any zone.
Required Registration
All adult-oriented establishments shall be registered with the Zoning Enforcement Officer at the time of Special
102
Permit application. Any unlawful preexisting adult-oriented establishments, whether as a primary use or an accessory
use, in operation prior to the effective date of this regulation (Section 622 inclusive) shall be registered
within 30 days of the effective date of said regulations.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent responsible for the management or control of a building thatcontains
an adult-oriented establishment to furnish and maintain the registration with the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, which shall include the following information:
a. The correct street address of the premises;
b. The name of the owner of the premises, or the names of the beneficial owners if the property is in a land trust,
or the names of the owners in interest of a corporation or limited-liability corporation;
c. The address and phone numbers of the owner or beneficial owners or owners in interest;
d. The trade name of the regulated adult-oriented establishment;
e. The names(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner(s), beneficial owner(s) or the major stockholders
or limited-liability partners, or partners of the regulated adult-oriented establishment;
f. The date of the initiation of the regulated adult-oriented establishment;
g. The issuance date of the license to operate an adult-oriented establishment issued by the Hamden Police Chief
or his/her designee; and
h. If the building is leased, a copy of the lease shall be furnished.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any property to establish or operate thereon, or to permit
any person to establish or operate, an adult-oriented establishment without first having properly registered and
received certification of approved registration and having received Planning and Zoning approval and a license to
operate from the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
The owner, operator, manager or agent of a registered adult-oriented establishment shall display a copy of the
Certification of Registration, approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and certified by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, in a conspicuous place on the premises.
Required Renewals
The Planning and Zoning Commission requires the renewal of Special Permits for adult-oriented establishments
in January of each calendar year, which shall conform to the following standards:
a. The renewal process shall consist of a Special Permit Renewal Application pursuant to Section 718 and shall
be submitted prior to the expiration date.
b. Purchasers of buildings or structures that have had Special Permit approval for adult-oriented uses who want
to continue a Special Permit that has not expired shall obtain a Zoning Permit and demonstrate that all conditions
prerequisite to obtaining the relevant permit have been met prior to the continued operation of the adultoriented
use.
c. Any such renewal shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration. The Planning
and Zoning Commission, at its sole discretion, may require a new application and a demonstration of compliance
with all conditions necessary for a Special Permit prior to the continued operation of the adult-oriented
uses.
Violations
It shall be a violation to establish or operate a regulated adult-oriented establishment, whether as a primary use or
an accessory use without:
a. Obtaining and maintaining a Special Permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission for the operation;
b. Obtaining and maintaining a license to operate such establishment from the Chief of Police or his/her designee;
and
103
c. Obtaining and maintaining proper registration of such establishment from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Any person, partnership or corporation that is found to have violated this regulation (Section 622) shall be fined
a definite sum not to exceed $100 for each violation.
Each violation of this regulation (Section 622) shall be considered a separate offense, and any violation continuing
more than one hour of time shall be considered a separate offense for each hour of violation.
Section 624 Agriculture
624.1 Commercial Farm
Commercial farms, including plant nurseries and greenhouses, are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Any structure housing animals shall be located at least 100 feet from any lot line.
b. No livestock or farm animals shall be permitted to graze or feed within any required yard.
c. Any run, paddock or barnyard shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line.
d. A fence of sufficient height to assure containment of the animals shall properly enclose any run, paddock, or
barnyard.
e. Buildings or stands for the sale of produce are permitted subject to Site Plan approval and the following conditions:
i. The building or produce stand is accessory to the primary use of the property.
ii. The produce stand does not exceed a gross floor area of 500 square feet.
iii. The building or produce stand meets the yard requirements of the applicable zone for a principal building.
624.2 Community Garden
Community Gardens are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Property shall be clear of rubble and contamination;
b. Access to water shall be provided;
c. Area for compost shall be provided;
d. Storage area for tools and secured trash receptacles shall be provided;
e. Trash removal on no less than a weekly basis shall be provided;
f. Outdoor lighting, if provided, shall not exceed 1.5 footcandles on the site and shall comply with all provisions
of Section 580.
624.3 Farmer’s Market
See Section 724 Temporary Permits
Section 626 Animals
626.1 Animal Day Care
Animal Day Care facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 80,000 square feet.
b. Outdoor exercise areas for animals shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line.
c. Open exercise areas shall be properly enclosed by a fence of sufficient height to assure containment of the
animals and such areas shall be maintained in a sanitary and odor-free condition at all times.
d. All stalls, pens and similar enclosures for animals shall have a floor made of concrete or other impervious
material, which shall contain adequate drainage facilities connected to a sanitary system for proper washing
and maintenance.
e. Overnight boarding is prohibited.
104
626.2 Animal Training Facility
Animal Training facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 80,000 square feet.
b. Outdoor exercise areas for animals shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line.
c. Open exercise areas shall be properly enclosed by a fence of sufficient height to assure containment of the
animals and such areas shall be maintained in a sanitary and odor-free condition at all times.
d. All stalls, pens and similar enclosures for animals shall have a floor made of concrete or other impervious
material, which shall contain adequate drainage facilities connected to a sanitary system for proper washing
and maintenance.
e. Overnight boarding is prohibited.
626.3 Grooming
Animal grooming facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
b. Buildings containing animals shall be a minimum of 20 feet from any lot line.
c. All stalls, pens and similar enclosures for animals shall have a floor made of concrete or other impervious
material, which shall contain adequate drainage facilities connected to a sanitary system for proper washing
and maintenance.
d. Overnight boarding is prohibited.
626.4 Keeping of Animals
The keeping and raising of domestic farm animals other than pigs, fur-bearing animals and fowl is permitted as
an accessory use subject to the following conditions except for the keeping of hens per Section 626.4.1 of these
Regulations:1
a. Each lot shall have minimum area of 120,000 square feet.
b. Not more than three domestic farm animals shall be permitted on any lot.
c. Any building used for the keeping of animals shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line.
d. No domestic farm animal shall be permitted to graze or feed within any required yard.
e. Any open area used for exercising or feeding of animals shall be properly enclosed by a fence of sufficient
height to assure containment of the animals and shall not be within any required yard or 25 feet from any lot
line, whichever is greater.
f. All areas used by such animals shall be kept in a sanitary condition that is satisfactory to the Quinnipiac Valley
Health District.
626.4.1 Keeping of Hens2
The limited keeping of female chickens (Gallus domesticus), referred to as hens, for the health, convenience
and personal enjoyment afforded by such use, in a manner which preserves the quality of life of the surrounding
neighborhood, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. No more than six (6) hens may be kept.
b. Hens may be raised only in the following zoning districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, T-3, T3.5.
c. Hens may be raised only as a non-commercial, accessory use.
d. Hens shall be confined to a fenced enclosure located in a rear or side yard only. The enclosure shall be at least
20 feet fromany property lines.
e. Within the fenced enclosure, a well-maintained structure (henceforth referred to as a coop) shall be required
for the hens. The coop must be no greater than 6 feet in height and impermeable to rodents, wild birds, and
predators, including dogs and cats. The hens must be kept inside the coop from sunset to sunrise.
1 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
2 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
105
f. The coop and enclosure must be clean and odor-free, kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times, with
adequate light and ventilation in a manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of neighboring lots due
to noise, odor or other adverse impact.
g. Any portion of the coop directly visible from a property boundary or directly visible from a street line shall
be screened by either a fence or a landscaped buffer substantial enough to conceal the structure.
h. Odors from hens, hen waste, or other hen-related substances shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries.
i. Provision must be made for the storage and removal of hen droppings. All stored droppings shall be covered
by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire structure. All other droppings not used for
composting or fertilizing shall be removed. In addition, the coop, enclosure and surrounding area must be
kept free from trash and accumulated droppings.
j. perceptible noise from hens shall not be loud enough at the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable
sensitivity.
k. No rooster shall be kept on any property.
l. The keeping of hens shall conform to standards set by the Quinnipiack Valley Health District, as amended.
m. The keeping of hens requires the issuance of a Zoning Permit.
n. The Zoning Permit application must be accompanied by a plot plan showing the allowable footprint(s) for
fenced enclosure and the permissible location(s) of the coop, as well as the footprint of the coop. Once approved,
the enclosure and coop may be moved anywhere within the allowable area(s) without the need for a
new zoning permit.
o. Compliance with CGS Section 25-43 and Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies 19-13-B32.
626.4.2 Keeping of Falconry Raptors
The limited keeping of falconry raptors, referred to as raptors, for the pursuit of falconry, in a manner which
preserves the quality of life of the surrounding neighborhood, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Compliance with Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies Section 26-67e.
b. No more than three (3) raptors may be kept.
c. Raptors may be kept only in the following zoning districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, T-3, T-3.5.
d. Raptors may be kept only as a non-commercial, accessory use. No propagation of raptors shall be permitted.
e. Raptors shall be confined in a well-maintained structure in accordance with Section 26-67e-9(b-e) of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies located in a rear or side yard only. The raptor housing shall be at
least 20 feet from any property lines.
f. The structure must be impermeable to rodents, other wild birds, and predators, including dogs and cats. When
outdoors on the property, and not accompanied by a licensed falconer, raptors must be kept inside the structure
from sunset to sunrise.
g. Odors from raptors, raptor waste, or other raptor-related substances shall not be perceptible at the property
boundaries.
h. The keeping of raptors shall conform to standards set by the Quinnipiac Valley Health District, as amended.
i. The keeping of raptors requires the issuance of a Zoning Permit.
j. The Zoning Permit application must be accompanied by a plot plan showing the allowable footprint(s) and the
permissible location(s) of the raptor housing. Once approved, the structure may be moved anywhere within
the allowable area(s) without the need for a new zoning permit.
k. Compliance with CGS Section 25-43 and regulations of Connecticut State Agencies 19-13-B32.1.3
626.5.5 Stables4
Boarding kennels, riding stables and boarding stables are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 200,000 square feet.
b. Buildings and open exercise areas containing animals shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line.
3 Amended, July 24, 2012. Effective, August 15, 2012.
4 Effective November 15, 2012
106
c. Open exercise areas shall be properly enclosed by a fence of sufficient height to assure containment of the
animals and such areas shall be maintained in a sanitary and odor-free condition at all times.
d. All stalls, pens and similar enclosures for animals shall have a floor made of concrete or other impervious
material, which shall contain adequate drainage facilities connected to a sanitary system for proper washing
and maintenance.
626.5.6 Kennels5
Boarding and breeding kennels are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 200,000 square feet.
b. Buildings and open exercise areas containing animals shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any lot line of
property located in R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, T1, T2, T3 and T3.5 zones.
c. Open exercise areas shall be properly enclosed by a fence of sufficient height to assure containment of the
animals and such areas shall be maintained in a sanitary and odor-free condition at all times.
d. All stalls, pens and similar enclosures for animals shall have a floor made of concrete or other impervious
material, which shall contain adequate drainage facilities connected to a sanitary system for proper washing
and maintenance.
626.6 Veterinary Hospitals
Veterinary Hospitals are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. In any Residential Zone, T-4 or T-5 Zone, the minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
b. Sanitary sewers shall serve the lot. Depending on the size of the facility, the Commission may require adequate
public water service.
c. A veterinary hospital shall not include a crematorium or any outside enclosure for animals.
Section 628 Cemeteries
Cemeteries are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 400,000 square feet.
b. Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards of at least 50 feet each.
c. No structures, monuments, markers, burial sites or parking shall be located in any required yard.
Section 630 Civic Clubs, Lodges or Associations (Non-Profit)
Civic Clubs, Lodges or Associations are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 80,000 square feet.
b. Outdoor recreation facilities such as, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, putting greens, and
basketball courts are permitted as accessory uses, provided the minimum lot area is 200,000 square feet.
c. Buildings, off-street parking, swimming pools, ball diamonds, picnic areas and other recreation uses, shall
occupy not more than 80% of the area of the lot.
d. No off-street parking or recreation facility shall be located in any required yard.
e. Sanitary sewers shall serve the lot.
Section 632 Community Residences
Community residences, group homes, and residential care facilities for mentally ill adults and mentally retarded
persons are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The group home shall have an approved license from the State of Connecticut prior to issuance of a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance.
5 Effective November 15, 2012
107
b. If residents are not permitted to own or operate a motor vehicle, the Commission may reduce or waive the
parking requirements.
632.1 Sober Houses & Drug Treatment Facilities
Sober houses and drug treatment facilities are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The drug treatment facility shall have an approved license from the State of Connecticut prior to issuance of
a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
b. If residents are not permitted to own or operate a motor vehicle, the Commission may reduce or waive the
parking requirements.
Section 634 Conference Center Development
Conference Center Developments are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Restaurants, dining rooms and banquet facilities are permitted as accessory uses.
b. Business or professional offices are permitted as an accessory use, provided the gross floor area utilized for
said use does not exceed 40% of the gross floor area of the structures.
c. Stores for the retail sales of goods are permitted as an accessory use provided the gross floor area utilized for
said use does not exceed 5% of the gross floor area of the structures.
Section 636 Day Care
Regularly organized day care centers are permitted subject to the following conditions:
636.1 Child Day Care Center, Nursery Schools & Group Day Care Home
a. If the use is an accessory to a dwelling, not more than 25% of the existing floor area of the dwelling unit shall
be used for day care purposes.
b. No play apparatus shall be located in any required front or side yard. Either a fence or foliage screen shall
screen any play apparatus. This screening shall be of such type and location as to provide privacy to adjoining
properties, but shall not be so constructed or located as to constitute an unsafe situation for the users of the
outdoor apparatus.
c. The day care center shall have an approved license from the State of Connecticut prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
d. Public water service and sanitary sewers are required. The Commission may waive either or both of these
utility requirements, subject to a technical report from a qualified authority that on-site systems for sewage
disposal and/or potable water supply are adequate.
e. The day care center shall not create any excessive noise, dust, smoke, odor or unsightly condition that would
constitute a public nuisance to adjoining properties.
f. No overnight stays are allowed.
636.2 Family Day Care Home
Family Day Care Homes are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. No play apparatus shall be located in any required front or side yard. Either a fence or foliage screen shall
screen any play apparatus. The screening shall be of such type and location to provide privacy to adjoining
residential properties, but shall not be so located or constructed as to constitute an unsafe situation for the users
of the play apparatus.
b. The family day care home shall have an approved license from the State of Connecticut prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
c. The family day care home shall not create any excessive noise, dust, smoke, odor or unsightly condition that
would constitute a public nuisance to adjoining properties or the neighborhood.
108
636.3 Adult Day Care
Adult day care centers are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. If the use is an accessory to a dwelling, not more than 25% of the existing floor area of the dwelling unit shall
be used for day care purposes.
b. No outdoor apparatus shall be located in any required front or side yard. Either a fence or foliage screen shall
screen outdoor apparatus. This screening shall be of such type and location as to provide privacy to adjoining
properties, but shall not be so constructed or located as to constitute an unsafe situation for the users of the
outdoor apparatus.
c. Public water service and sanitary sewers are required. The Commission may waive either or both of these
utility requirements, subject to a technical report from a qualified staff authority that on-site systems for sewage
disposal and/or potable water supply are adequate.
d. The day care center shall not create any excessive noise, dust, smoke, odor or unsightly condition that would
constitute a public nuisance to adjoining properties.
e. No overnight stays are allowed.
Section 638 Food Service
638.1 Outdoor Café
Outdoor cafes and eating areas, when accessory to a restaurant, are permitted subject to a Zoning Permit and the
following conditions:
a. 6
b. The outdoor eating area shall not exceed 50% of the indoor eating area;7
c. The outdoor eating area shall be largely open to the elements and shall not be permanently enclosed with a
roof or walls;
d. All food and beverages shall be served at the table;
e. Outdoor eating areas shall be operated on a seasonal basis not to exceed six months in a calendar year and
shall be exempt from providing parking spaces other than those required for the restaurant;
f. The outdoor eating area shall be landscaped with planters, window boxes, planted pots and/or planted beds
containing appropriate trees, shrubs and/or flowers to provide privacy and ambiance for diners;
g. There shall be no live or recorded music played or projected outside the restaurant building without the prior
issuance of a Zoning Permit.
Section 640 Health Care Facilities
Public and private hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes, and residential rehabilitation facilities are permitted
subject to the following conditions:
a. There shall be a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet, or 1,500 square feet for each patient bed, or as required
by the applicable zone, whichever is greater.
b. Each lot shall have front, side, and rear yards with depths of at least 50 feet each.
c. Any emergency entrance shall have direct access to a public street with a minimum pavement width of 50
feet.
d. Sanitary sewers shall serve the lot. Depending on the size of the facility, the Commission may require public
water services.
Section 641 Spas, Meditation and Wellness Centers:
Centers shall comply with the Bulk standard requirements in the zone in which they are located.
6 638.1.a Deleted. Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010
7 Effective November 15, 2012
109
Section 642 Heliports
Heliports are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Heliports are accessory to the primary land use; they are not commercial in nature, not held out or open to the
general public, nor allowed to charge a fee at any time.
b. There will be no overnight storage of helicopters as a normal operation, no fueling or storage of maintenance
materials.
c. The facility will have a favorable FAA airspace determination that is current and complies fully with all
recommendations and/or conditions made by the FAA. A copy of the full FAA Form 7480 Application and
response from the FAA will be part of the application package. The facility will be limited to the size of the
helicopters that it was designed for and that will be specifically stated in the application and zoning permit.
d. The facility will comply with all the applicable licensing guidelines and regulations for such facilities as defined
by the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation (DOT). The written acknowledgement from
that department that it meets such requirements is needed as part of the application package.
e. The facility will be listed with the FAA when activated and this listing will be kept current as required.
f. The facility will be approved by the Hamden Fire Department with all of their recommendations and conditions
being complied with.
g. The heliport flight paths, while legally under the sole jurisdiction of the FAA, should be designed to use natural
sound corridors and roads to enhance the compatibility with the surrounding community.
h. Permission is granted as a part of the approval for the Hamden Public Safety Departments, i.e. Fire and Police,
to use and access the heliport in the event of a local emergency and to allow appropriate emergency helicopters
to serve the public need. The facility will also allow for any needed emergency service (MedEvac, State
Police, etc.) helicopter to use the heliport within its weight and size notations.
i. The facility will be used only by the owner and his/her guests.
j. If the primary land use ceases at the location, the facility will no longer be approved as an accessory use.
k. A trip shall be defined as one landing and one take-off.
l. There will be no helicopter operations, except for emergencies, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Section 644 Home Occupation
Customary home occupations are permitted accessory uses, subject to the following conditions:
644.1 The home occupation or office shall:
a. Not occupy more than 25% of the existing floor area of the dwelling or 600 square feet, whichever is less;
b. Not change the exterior residential character or appearance of the dwelling in any visible manner;
c. Be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling. The home occupation or office may involve only
members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit. Subject to Special Permit and Site Plan approvals,
the home occupation or office may also involve one non-resident employee;
d. Not involve the sale of any commodity or article;
e. Not include any manufacturing, processing or assembling (other than artists, craftsmen or bakers);
f. Not have materials or products related to the home occupation stored outside of any building;
g. Not have parking in any required front or side yard;
h. Not create any excessive noise, traffic, odor, dust, vibration, smoke, gas fumes, radiation, electromagnetic
interference, or unsightly condition that would constitute a public nuisance to adjoining properties or the
neighborhood;
i.. Require sanitary sewers should the Commission decide that such service is necessary.
644.2 A home occupation, such as an office, may be approved by Zoning Permit only if:
a. No changes to the exterior of the house and site are made;
b. No signage is located on site;
c. No non-family members are employees;
110
d. There are only infrequent visits to the home by clients;
e. The activity does not exceed the approved capacity of private wells or private subsurface sewage disposal
systems;
f. There is no discharge toxic or hazardous waste material into a private, subsurface sewage disposal system,
g. No toxic materials are used; and
h. No additional parking is required;
Home occupations may be permitted in a dwelling unit that is part of a two-family, three-family or multi-family
development subject to the above criteria.
Section 646 Lodging
646.1 Bed & Breakfast
Bed & Breakfasts are allowed subject to the following conditions:
a. The establishment shall be owner-occupied;
b. Up to five bedrooms may be offered for lodging;
c. No parking shall be allowed in the required front or side yards.
646.2 Hotel/Motel/Inn
General Requirements for Hotels, Inns & Motels
a. The lot shall be serviced by a public water supply.
b. The size and appearance of any proposed hotel, inn or motel shall be compatible and harmonious with the
character and appearance of buildings in the immediate vicinity and shall not be detrimental to the appropriate
and orderly development of any adjacent lot or building.
c. No more than 10% of rental units shall have kitchen or cooking facilities.
d. Proposed sewage disposal systems shall meet all State and Local requirements, shall be approved by the local
health department and shall have no adverse effects on adjacent sewage disposal systems.
Hotels, inns and motels on parcels abutting residential and T3 zones are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The maximum amount of patron space for limited conference and dining use shall not exceed 20 square feet
per lodging room. Dining facilities shall be designed to focus on servicing patrons and their guests.
b. Side and/or rear yard setbacks abutting residentially zoned property shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
Hotels, motels and inns on parcels that do not abut residential an/or T3 zones are permitted subject to the conditions
of the underlying zone.
646.3 Roomers & Boarders8
The keeping of no more than two roomers and boarders who do not meet the definition of “student” is permitted
as an accessory use in a one-, two- or three-family dwelling subject to the following conditions:
a. The roomers or boarders shall reside within the principal dwelling unit.
b. The sleeping space shall be no less than 80 square feet for the first person and 70 square feet for the second
person.
c. No cooking or cooking appliances shall be permitted in rented rooms,
d. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each roomer or boarder.
e. No roomer or boarder shall be permitted where the family occupying the dwelling unit is composed of a group
of four unrelated persons.
8 Effective November 15, 2012
111
Section 648 Manufacturing
648.1 Accessory Use
The manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing, cleaning or other similar processing of products,
when accessory to a retail, business/personal service use, is permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. The goods produced or processed shall be sold exclusively on the premises.
b. The area used for such purposes shall be entirely within the building occupied by the principal use.
c. The area used for such purposes shall not exceed 50% of the area devoted to retail sales or 20% of the gross
floor area of the building, whichever is less. This provision shall not be applicable to businesses primarily
involved in food processing such as bakeries.
d. Sanitary sewers and a public water supply shall serve the lot.
648.2 Primary Use
The manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing, cleaning or other similar processing of products is
permitted provided that the lot is served by sanitary sewers and has public water supply.
Section 650 Motor Vehicles
650.1 Sales, Rental, Service & Repair of Vehicles and Gas Station
Motor vehicle (including automobile, truck, recreation vehicle, trailer, boat and mobile home) sales, rental, service
(including gas stations and car wash facilities) and repair are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet and shall have at least 150 feet of frontage on one
street.
b. All fuel pumps and service equipment shall be setback from any lot line by at least 15 feet9
c. Curb cuts shall be at least 25 feet from any other curb cut or street intersection.
d. Trash, garbage and unusable vehicle parts shall be temporarily stored within the principal building or within
a covered container or receptacle that is suitably screened from adjoining properties.
e. The outdoor display, exhibition, and storage of motor vehicles is permitted as an accessory use subject to the
provisions in Section 654 Outdoor Storage.
f. Freestanding signs for gas stations shall comply with Section 550.2.10. However, the total surface area of 32
square feet may be increased by one square foot for posting each fuel price provided that the total surface area
of the sign does not exceed 36 square feet and the posted prices are an integral part of the face of the sign.
g. Sanitary sewers and a public water supply shall serve the lot.
h. All hazardous materials and waste chemicals shall be stored inside on an impervious floor with some form of
secondary containment.
i. Scrap metal or other parts in contact with lubricant shall be stored in a watertight container to prevent the accumulation
and contamination of stormwater.
j. Solid waste material shall be stored in an appropriately sized, covered, solid waste dumpster or other watertight
container that is plugged to prevent the release of any liquids.
k. Waste material shall be disposed of by a licensed waste hauler in accordance with all applicable federal, state
and local regulations.
l. All servicing of vehicles shall be conducted indoors on an impervious surface.
m. All vehicle washing shall be conducted indoors.
n. There shall be absolutely no discharges of motor vehicle fluids or detergent chemicals to the environment.
o. Any vehicles that are leaking automotive fluids shall be stored in a garage or at minimum on an impervious
surface where the leaks can be contained and cleaned up.
p. RWA inspectors shall be granted access to any property located within the Mill River Watershed or an Aquifer
Protection Area during the Authority’s annual inspection program.
9 Adopted February 14, 2017. Effective March 10, 2017
112
650.2 Commercial Vehicle Storage, Accessory Use in Residential, T2 and T3 Zones
650.2.1 The parking of commercial vehicles may be permitted in any residential district as an accessory use only
and subject to the following conditions:
a. Only one commercial vehicle not exceeding 11,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) may be parked or
stored on a lot provided it also does not exceed 10 (ten) feet in height from the base of the wheel to the top
(including any cargo) or 10 (ten) feet in cargo (box) length, subject to the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
b. By Special Permit, one commercial vehicle exceeding the requirements referred to above may be parked or
stored on a lot, subject to Special Permit approval and the following :
i. The Commission shall consider such factors as proposed screening; proximity to adjacent lots and buildings;
the size, intended use, and hours of operation of the vehicle in question; other vehicles on the property;
character of the neighborhood.
ii. No commercial vehicle shall exceed thirteen feet, six inches (13’6”) in height from the base of the wheel
to the top (including any cargo).
iii. No commercial vehicle shall exceed 26,000 pounds GVW.
650.2.2 All commercial vehicles, regardless of GVW, shall meet the following standards:
a. No vehicle shall have more than 2 (two) axles.
b. No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct the view of traffic from adjacent driveways or streets.
c. No vehicle containing hazardous materials or waste may be parked on a residential lot.
d. Construction vehicles, including but not limited to, backhoes, bobcats, bucket loaders, track vehicles, shall
not be allowed.
e. No tanker trucks or similar type vehicles used for hauling liquids including but not limited to, oil trucks, septic
cleanout trucks, etc, shall be allowed.
f. All commercial vehicles shall be parked on the driveway of the occupied residential lot or a parking area
leased to the residential occupant, provided no commercial vehicle may be parked closer than ten (10’) from
any adjacent property line.
g. The commercial vehicle shall be owned or operated by the permanent resident of the property on which it is
to be parked.
h. No maintenance or repair of a commercial vehicle shall be allowed on the residential property.
i. There shall be no loading or unloading of commercial vehicles between the hours of 9 p.m. and 7 a.m.
j. No garbage hauling, dump trucks or any other trucks that haul cargo that emits objectionable odors shall be
permitted.
k. No tractor-trailer, nor the tractor or the trailer, shall be parked in a residential district at any time except in
connection with a moving operation.
650.2.3 All applications for Special Permits shall include a detailed description of the vehicle to be used including
gross vehicle weight, height, total length, box length (if applicable), wheelbase, model and make. Any
permits granted shall be for the specific vehicle described in the application. Any changes to the vehicle
specifications as approved shall require a new approval by the Commission.
650.2.4 Commercial vehicles subject to Special Permit approval shall be screened along the closest residential
property line by appropriate evergreen trees, shrubs, fence, or a combination thereof. Exceptions and
modifications may be considered by the Commission taking into consideration topography and proximity of
adjacent residential structures.
650.2.5 Nothing herein shall be construed to permit a home occupation that is not otherwise permitted under the
regulations. Any home occupation in conjunction with the parking of a commercial vehicle must meet the
applicable requirements and receive a permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
113
650.2.6 Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prohibit commercial vehicles parked temporarily while engaged
in providing products or services to the owner of the property.
650.2.7 Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit commercial vehicles that are used as part of the following:
a. A permitted agriculture, farming, forestry, or nursery gardening use.
b. A permitted earth excavation, removal or deposit activity authorized by these Regulations.
c. A use of a facility operated by the Town of Hamden, the State of Connecticut, or the Federal Government;
d. A maintenance facility in support of a multiple dwelling project on the lot, or in support of a Special Permit
use, if specifically authorized by the Commission.
650.3 Recreational and Other Vehicle Storage, Accessory Use in Residential, T2 and T3 Zones
650.3.1 The storage of travel trailers, campers, boats, recreation vehicles, vans and pick-up trucks on residential
properties is permitted as an accessory use subject to the following conditions:
a. Not more than two such vehicles shall be stored or parked on a lot used for residential purposes for a period
exceeding 24 hours per month.
b. No pick-up truck or van having a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of more than 11,000 pounds shall
be allowed to park for a period exceeding 24 hours per month on any residential lot unless it is in an enclosed
structure.
c. There shall be no outside storage of construction equipment and/or vehicles except when essential to on-site
construction activities.
d. The resident or owner of the premises shall own all vehicles and equipment.
e. If not in a completely enclosed structure, travel trailers, campers, boats and recreation vehicles may not exceed
18 feet in length. Such vehicles shall be parked or stored in the rear yard, and not closer than ten feet to
any lot line.
f. All vehicles and equipment shall be screened from view.
g. Travel trailers, campers, boats and recreation vehicles may be parked anywhere on a residential premises for
a period not exceeding 24 hours during unloading or loading.
h. No travel trailer, camper, boat, recreation vehicle, pick-up truck or van parked or stored in any zone shall be
used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
i. No vehicle shall have more than 2 (two) axles.
j. No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct the view of traffic from adjacent driveways or streets.
k. No vehicle containing hazardous materials or waste may be parked on a residential lot.
l. The vehicle shall be owned or operated by the permanent resident of the property on which it is to be parked.
m. No maintenance or repair of a commercial vehicle shall be allowed on the residential property.
n. No trucks that haul cargo that emits objectionable odors shall be permitted.
Section 652 Multi-Family Dwellings
Multi-family dwellings are permitted in the R-4, R-5, T3.5, T4 and T5 Zones. All multi-family developments,
as provided for in this Section of the Hamden Zoning Regulations, shall conform to the following requirements.
652.1 General Requirements
a. All multi-family developments shall be designed and developed to integrate into and enhance the surrounding
neighborhoods, provide a residential environment that creates a sense of community, and provide affordable
housing.
114
Table 6.3 Allowed Locations for Multi-Family Housing*
T3.5, T-4, T-5 R-4, T-4 & T-5 R-5, T-4 & T-5 NCb
Whitney Avenue Dixwell Avenue Whitney Avenue Newhall Streetb
Washington Avenue Old Dixwell Avenue Dixwell Avenue
Arch Street Old Dixwell Avenue
Arch Street
Evergreen Avenue
State Street
School Street
Mix Avenue
South side of Mather
Street extending from
Dixwell Avenue to Waite
Streeta
*Multi-family dwellings shall be located on and have vehicular access only to these streets.
aAmended November 18, 2014. Effective December 9, 2014
b Amended November 24, 2015. Effective December 4, 2015
b. The minimum lot requirements for size, frontage, depth, area per dwelling unit, and useable open space shall
be as follows:
Table 6.4 Minimum Lot Requirements for Multi-Family Dwellings*
Lot Requirements
Zone
R-3 R-4 R-5 T3.5 T-4 T-5
Lot Size 80,000 sf 40,000 sf 20,000 sf
Continuous Frontage on streets listed in Table 6.3 200 ft 160 ft 120 ft per Table 3.4
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 8,500 sf 6,500 sf 6,500 sf
Useable Open Space per Dwelling Unit 1,000 sf 1,000 sf 750 sf 25% 10% 10%
* Effective November 15, 2012
c. Held for future use
d. There shall be no parking in any required yard.
e. Sanitary sewers and a public water supply shall serve the lot.
f. The size and appearance of any proposed multi-family building or development shall be compatible and harmonious
with the residential character and appearance of buildings in the immediate vicinity of the proposal
and shall not be detrimental to the appropriate and orderly development of any adjacent lot or building.
g. Unused10
h. Where townhouses are used, they shall be placed along the frontage of all public streets, to enhance the
streetscape. Common access drives may be used where necessary for safety due to traffic conditions on the
public street. Each unit shall have use of and direct access to private opoen space in the form of a patio, balcony
or yard with a minimum area of 100 square feet.11
i. In the case of multifamily buildings that are not townhouses, private open space of at least 45 square feet shall
be provided as follows:
10 Effective November 15, 2012
11 Effective November 15, 2012
115
T3.5 Zone: A patio or yard, for the ground floor;
R-4, R-5 and T-4 Zone: A patio or yard, for the ground floor and palconies for the second floor.
T-5 Zone: A patio or yard, for the ground floor and balconies for the second and third floor.12
j. Open space shall be of such size, shape, topography, general character, and location as to be useful. The community
open space shall be accessible to all residents of the multi-family development and be in location(s)
central and convenient to the development, in the opinion of the Commission. The community open space
shall contain active and passive recreational facilities suitable and appropriate for the residents of the development.
The community open space shall be the focus or central point of the multi-family development.
Common mailboxes shall be located within the useable community open space. Community swimming pools
shall not be included to meet the minimum usable community open space. In instances where the topography,
shape of the parcel or similar factor makes provision of the usable open space infeasible or impractical, the
Commission may accept other amenties as substitutes.13
k. All multi-family developments shall be designed to be oriented towards and enhance the streetscape. The priority
shall be the enhancement of the streetscape of existing public streets within the Town but, where applicable,
the development shall also include a design that creates a well-designed pedestrian-oriented streetscape
for internal private streets. Such orientation shall include the following elements:
i. Unused14
ii. Parking lots shall not have prominent frontage along the public street, except for entrances and driveways
to such parking lots.
iii. The character of the architecture along the street shall be consistent with that of the nearby neighborhood,
in terms of size, scale, and design features.
iv. Garage door entrances shall not face the public street unless otherwise approved by the commission.
v. Where internal or private streets, driveways, accessways or other methods of internal access are utilized,
the garages shall be placed and oriented such that they do not visually dominate the private streets, driveways,
or accessways that are designed to be the primary pedestrian entrance to dwelling units.
l. All multi-family developments shall contain a comprehensive walkway system to provide safe pedestrian
circulation separate from the vehicular travel ways. In areas where the Commission determines that the street
system does not conform to a convenient pattern of pedestrian circulation, particularly in the vicinity of parks,
playgrounds, schools, trails or other public or semi-public places, the Commission may require off-site pedestrian
connections.
m. No wall of any building shall exceed 100 feet in length in an unbroken plane, without an offset of at least
five feet. All walls 30’ or more in length shall have varied surface material that will avoid the creation of a
monotonous appearance.
n. All multi-family developments of 25 units or greater shall have a common room for use by the residents for
recreational and social activities. Such room shall be centrally located and shall have a minimum area of 500
square feet, or 5 square feet per unit, whichever is greater.
o. All efficiency and one-bedroom units shall have a minimum floor area of 600 square feet.
p. All two-bedroom units shall contain a minimum floor area of 900 square feet and three-bedroom units shall
have a minimum floor area of 1,200 square feet.
q. Common areas, including usable open space, club houses, common rooms and pools must be constructed during
the initial phase of any multi-phase project, and must be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate
of Zoning Compliance.15
652.2 Adaptive Re-Use to Multi-Family Dwellings
Any existing building in any zone may be converted to a multi-family dwelling subject to the following conditions:
a. A determination by the Commission that the existing building its environs will be suitable for multi-family
12 Effective November 15, 2012
13 Effective November 15, 2012
14 Effective November 15, 2012
15 Effective November 15, 2012
116
conversion and that conversion will not adversely impact the existing neighborhood character;
b. The maximum permitted number and type of dwelling units on the lot shall be determined by dividing the
GFA of the existing building by one or more of the following factors:
Table 6.5 Density Computation
Type of Dwelling
Unit
Computation
Factor
1 BR 600
2 BR 900
3 BR 1,200
c. If the maximum permitted number of dwelling units is not achieved within the existing building, an addition
may be permitted provided that:
i. The maximum permitted number and type of dwelling units does not exceed ‘b’ above.
ii. The addition does not exceed 50% of the GFA of the existing building.
iii. The addition conforms to all other regulations for the zone in which it is located.
iv. The addition conforms architecturally and in scale to the existing building.
e. The existing building and addition, if any, shall be served by public sewer and public water supply;
f. There shall be a minimum of 100 square feet of useable community open space per dwelling unit. The Commission
may permit the provision of less than 100 square feet of useable community open space per dwelling
unit if it determines that the configuration of the site makes the provision of the full amount of community
open space not feasible, and if the nature of the units proposed is conducive to the provision of a smaller
amount of community open space;
g. All adaptive re-use to multi-family structures that contain five units or more shall include affordable housing
units, as provided by Section 652.3.
h. Where feasible, there should be no parking in any required yard;
i. Where feasible, adaptive re-use to multi-family developments shall be oriented towards and enhance the
streetscape. The priority shall be the enhancement of the streetscape of existing public streets within the
Town, but the development should also include an orientation toward the internal streets within the development,
if internal streets are created. Such orientation shall include the following elements:
i. Parking lots shall not be placed along the public street, except for entrances and driveways to such parking
lots.
ii. The character of the architecture along the street shall be consistent with that of the nearby neighborhood,
in terms of size, scale, and design features.
iii. Garage door entrances shall not face the public street unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
652.3 Affordable Housing in Multi-Family Dwellings
652.3.1 Purpose
All multi-family housing developments containing 5 or more dwelling units shall set aside a minimum of 20%
of the dwelling units as Affordable Housing Units as provided for in Section 8-30g of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended. The Affordable Housing Units shall be conveyed by deeds containing covenants or restrictions
requiring that Affordable Housing Units be sold or rented at, or below, prices that will preserve these units as
housing for occupants whose annual income is less than or equal to 80% of the median income for the New Haven
area. The cost of such housing shall not exceed 30% of the annual income of the occupant(s). These restrictions
shall be in place for a period of at least forty years after the initial occupation of the unit. Median income shall be
defined as provided for in Section 8-30g (a) (7) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
117
652.3.2 Maximum Sale Price of Affordable Housing Units
The maximum price for all affordable units that are sold or resold, for the period of affordability restrictions, to a
household earning 80% of the median income or less, shall be determined as follows:
Step 1 Determine area median income and the statewide median as published by the U. S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development for the Town of Hamden, and use the lower of these figures.
Step 2 Adjust median income identified in Step 1 by family size by assuming that 1.5 persons will occupy
each bedroom of an affordable unit, except in the case of a studio or zero-bedroom unit, in which
case 1.0 person shall be assumed. Family size adjustment shall be made based upon the following
percentages:
Table 6.6 Adjustment to Affordable Housing Units Based on Family Size
Number of
Persons in
Family
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Percentage
Adjustment 70% 80% 90% 100%
(BASE) 108% 116% 124% 132%
The family size adjustment that involves a half person (such as 4.5 persons) shall be calculated by taking the
midpoint between the relevant figures above and below the half. For example, the adjustment for a 4.5 person
household is 104%.
Step 3 Calculate 80% of Step 2.
Step 4 Calculate 30% of Step 3. This number represents the portion of household income to be used
for housing costs.
Step 5 Divide step 4 by 12 months to determine the maximum monthly housing payment.
Step 6 Determine, by reasonable estimate, monthly housing expenses, including real property taxes
for the Town of Hamden; real property insurance; any common-interest ownership or similar
fee required of all unit purchasers or owners; and heat and utility costs, excluding television,
telecommunications, and information technology services.
Step 7 Subtract Step 6 from Step 5 to determine the amount available for mortgage principal and interest.
Step 8 Using the amount resulting from Step 7, apply a 30-year mortgage term and interest rate that is
commercially reasonable and available to households likely to apply to purchase such units, in
order to determine the financeable amount.
Step 9 Calculate down payment. The maximum allowable down payment used in calculating the maximum
sale or resale price of an affordable unit shall be the lesser of 20% of the total sale price
or 20% of the Connecticut Housing Finance Authority (CHFA) maximum sales price limit for
a comparably sized unit in the area, as published by the CHFA.
Step 10 Add Steps 8 and 9 to determine the maximum sale or resale price.
118
652.3.3 Maximum Cost of Affordable Rental Units
The maximum monthly rent for all affordable units, during the period of affordability restrictions to a household
earning 80% of the median income or less, shall be determined as follows:
Step 1 Determine area median income and the statewide median as published by the U. S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development for the Town of Hamden, and use the lower of these figures.
Step 2 Adjust median income identified in Step 1 by family size by assuming that 1.5 persons will occupy
each bedroom of an affordable unit, except in the case of a studio or zero-bedroom unit, in which
case 1.0 person shall be assumed. Family size adjustment shall be based on Table 6.7.
The family size adjustment that involves a half person (such as 4.5 persons) shall be calculated by taking the
midpoint between the relevant figures above and below the half. For example, the adjustment for a 4.5 person
household is 104%.
Step 3 Calculate eighty 80% of Step 2.
Step 4 Calculate 30% of Step 3. This number represents that portion of household income to be used for
housing costs.
Step 5 Divide Step 4 by 12 months to determine the maximum monthly housing payment.
Step 6 Determine the fair market rent for a unit with the same number of bedrooms in Hamden as published
by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Step 7 Multiply the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development fair market rent as determined
in Step 6 by 120%.
Step 8 The maximum monthly housing payment for occupants of the subject rental unit shall be the lower
of the results of calculations in Steps 5 and 7.
Step 9 Determine, by reasonable estimate, monthly expenses for heat and utility costs for which the tenant
is directly responsible, excluding television, telecommunications, and information technology
services, but including any other periodic fees for which the tenant is directly responsible, such as
common charges in the case of a common-interest ownership community.
Step 10 Deduct the estimate of tenant-paid utilities and fees determined in Step 9 from the maximum
monthly housing payment in Step 8. The result is the maximum amount that the developer/owner
may charge for this rental unit as the monthly contract rent.
652.3.4 Requirements for Affordable Units
a. Affordable units shall be comparable to market-rate units in size, quality, finishes and amenities.
b. Affordable units shall be evenly distributed throughout the development in such a manner that at least 20% of
the dwelling units within each multi-family building or cluster of units shall be affordable units.
c. The project shall be phased such that a minimum of 20% of the units for which building permits and certificates
of zoning compliance have been cumulatively issued shall be affordable units.
119
652.3.5 Affordability Plan
All applications for multi-family developments that contain 5 or more units shall submit an Affordability Plan that
includes the following:
a. All elements set forth in section 8-30g (b) (1) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
b. The designation of the person or entity who will be qualified and responsible for administration of the affordability
plan including the following:
i. Ensuring that households applying for affordable units qualify within applicable maximum income limits;
ii. Assuring the accuracy of sale or resale prices or rents, and providing documentation where necessary to
buyers, sellers, lessors, lessees, and financing institutions;
iii. Maintaining minimum percentages in a set-aside development;
iv. Reporting compliance to the Town Planner and the Town Attorney; and
v. Executing the affirmative fair-housing marketing plan.
c. An affirmative fair-housing marketing plan that conforms to the requirements of Sections 8-30g-7(a)(2) and
8-37ee-1 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
d. The maximum sale price, resale price or rent for the affordable units, as determined in accordance with the
requirements of 652.1 and 652.3 above.
e. A description of the projected sequence in which affordable units shall be built and offered for occupancy.
Such description shall consist of a narrative and schematic plan describing the construction sequence of the
proposed site development and the location of the affordable and market-rate units with each phase of the
sequence.
652.4 Managed Residential Community
Managed Residential Communities which provide Assisted Living Services or other services for persons aged 55
or older are permitted subject to the following conditions:
a. Managed Residential Communities shall be located in an area within 1,500 feet of public transportation, to be
measured along a public pathway.
b. Managed Residential Communities shall not be permitted on parcels which are within a Flood Plain Zone or
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as either a special flood-hazard area or located
within a flood way.
c. At least one entrance shall have direct access to a public street having a minimum pavement width of 30 feet.
d. The minimum lot requirements, including, lot size, yards, area per dwelling unit, useable open space, and
maximum lot coverage shall be as follows, or as required by the applicable Zone, whichever is greater:
Table 6.7 Minimum Lot Requirements for Managed Residential Community
Minimum Lot Requirements Residential Zones T-4 &T-5 Zones
Lot Size 40,000 sf See T-4 & T-5 requirements
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 2,000 sf See T-4 & T-5 requirements
Useable Open Space per Dwelling Unit 750 sf See T-4 & T-5 requirements
e. Sanitary sewers and a public water supply shall serve the lot.
f. The size and appearance of any proposed Managed Residential Community shall be compatible and harmonious
with the character and appearance of buildings in the immediate vicinity of the proposal and shall not be
detrimental to the appropriate and orderly development of adjacent lots or buildings.
g. Each dwelling unit shall have no more than two permanent occupants.
h. No parking shall be allowed in the setbacks adjoining residential zones.
i. Accessory buildings shall not be located in required setbacks that adjoin residential zones.
j. The site area accessible to residents shall have no slope greater than 5%, which is within the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements, i.e., everything accessible to the residents should meet ADA requirements.
120
k. A van drop-off area and parking spaces shall be located at the main entry for the convenience of residents.
l. Loading spaces should be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 591; access to loading
spaces should be designed so as not to interfere with normal traffic, and shall be screened.
m. No less than 25% of the total area of usable open space shall be contiguous. Natural geological features and
specimen trees should be preserved in these areas.
n. Outdoor space designed for use by the residents should be 50 sq. ft. per unit, with a minimum of 2,000 sq. ft.,
landscaped, and provide benches, paved walkways, site lighting and beneficial views, and be shielded from
heavy traffic. With Commission approval only, an indoor atrium may substitute for up to 33% of the required
outdoor space.
o. All Managed Care facilities containing more than 5 dwelling units shall set aside a minimum of 20% of the
dwelling units as Affordable Housing Units as provided for in Section 8-30g of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended and shall comply with the Affordable Housing in Multi-Family Dwellings section of these
Regulations.
Section 654 Outdoor Storage in Non-Residential Zones
Outdoor storage of vehicles, materials and equipment is permitted as an accessory use, subject to the following
conditions:
a. The outdoor storage of vehicles, materials and equipment shall be located on the same premises as the principal
use or building.
b. All outdoor storage areas shall be located in the side or rear yards except as provided herein.
c. All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view by suitable landscaping and fencing except as provided
herein.
d. The outdoor display of vehicles when accessory to a use permitted in accordance with Section 650 shall be
exempt from provisions B and C above.
e. In no case shall stored materials exceed the height of the screening or fencing,
f. No outdoor storage area shall be located within 10 feet of any lot line.
g. All equipment and vehicles in a storage area shall be in operable condition.
h. No tractor-trailer or truck loaded with merchandise shall be parked in a lot for a period exceeding seven consecutive
days in one calendar month.
Section 656 Parking Garages and Big Box Retail
Liner Buildings: All parking structures and big box stores along public rights-of-way and at key intersections
(as determined by the Commission) shall be screened from public view by one or more liner buildings that
include ground floor commercial uses that will activate the street frontage. Liner buildings may be attached to a
parking structure or big box store or separated by a service alley of no more than 15’-0” in width.
Facades of parking structures shall be designed such that parked vehicles are reasonably obscured from view.
Facades should camouflage the incline of the interior levels from public view.
Section 658 Places of Worship
Churches, synagogues, mosques, parish houses, rectories, parsonages, convents and similar uses are permitted
subject to the following conditions:
a. 16
b. No off-street parking shall be located in any required front or side yard.
c. The front door shall be oriented toward the street where possible.
16 Language removed. Amended March 13, 2012. Effective Date March 31, 2012.
121
Section 660 Preservation of Historic Structures
Any addition to or modification of a building that has been designated on a local, state or national historic register
shall be subject to Special Permit approval.
Section 662 Public Uses & Public Utilities
Public uses such as Town, State or Federal buildings, facilities (other than public housing and solid waste facilities)
as well as public utilities are permitted in any zone subject to the following conditions:
a. The use shall promote the general welfare of the Town of Hamden and, if a neighborhood use, be essential to
the health, safety and welfare of the general area of the Town in which the use is proposed.
b. No materials or equipment shall be stored in any required yard.
c. Depending on the nature of the public use, the Commission may require service by sanitary sewer and/or
public water supply.
Section 664 Resource Recovery, Volume Reduction Facility and/or Transfer Station
664.1 Preamble
It is the intent of this Section to provide that resource recovery, volume reduction facilities and/or transfer stations
be sited so as not to be detrimental to the use and development of the land in the vicinity and operated so as not to
constitute a nuisance to such land in the vicinity of the disposal area, having regard for the statutes and regulations
that are enforced by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection where appropriate.
Resource Recovery, Volume Reduction Facilities and/or Transfer Stations are permitted in Manufacturing Zones
subject to the following conditions:
664 .2 General Standards
a. Prior to submission of an application to the State Department of Environmental Protection, the applicant shall
have received approval for a Resource Recovery and/or Volume Reduction Facility or Transfer Station from
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. Said application shall contain all information required by Section 718 and Section 720 and shall be accompanied
by an operational plan, and a landscaping plan with a planting schedule. Said landscaping plan shall
provide for adequate planting of any buffer area and appropriate screening to protect adjacent property.
c. No material shall be received at the site that is not permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection;
nor shall any material prohibited under these regulations.
d. The site proposed for a resource recovery, volume reduction facility and/or a transfer station shall meet the
Standards as provided herein.
e. The Commission may refer any application to the Quinnipiac Valley Health District, the Department of Environmental
Protection or any other department or agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request
any such department or agency to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to it in
connection with its own responsibility.
f. The Commission may, after a public hearing, grant a permit.
g. The owner of the property shall at all times assume full responsibility for the use of his/her property and keep
on file, with the Zoning Enforcement Officer, at all times the names and addresses of the agent(s) for service
of notice required by law.
h. In evaluating a Special Permit application under this section, the Commission shall take into consideration
the health, safety and welfare of the public, in general, and the neighborhood, in particular. The Commission
may deny a Special Permit where the proposed use is of such location, size and character that it will not be in
harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the zone in which it is proposed to be situated and
will be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification
of such properties. If the Commission concludes that the proposed use meets the threshold requirements
122
of compatibility, the Commission may grant a Special Permit with conditions attached thereto, the purpose of
said conditions being to assure compatibility with the neighborhood and protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the public in general.
664 .3 Specific Standards
664 .3.1 Lot Area
Each Resource Recovery Facility, Volume Reduction Facility and/or Transfer Station shall have a minimum lot
size of 80,000 square feet and a width of 200 feet measured at the required front yard setback.
664.3.2 Setbacks
a. Each lot shall have a front yard of 50 feet.
b. Each lot shall have two side yards of at least 30 feet each.
c. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 50 feet.
664.3.3 Lot Coverage
All buildings shall occupy not more than 35% of the area of the lot.
664.3.4 Maximum Height
No building or structure shall exceed 40 feet in height.
664.3.5 Landscaping and Buffer Area
A 15-foot-wide buffer area shall be provided along all abutting lot lines to minimize the visual intrusion of a resource
recovery and/or volume reduction facility or transfer station on adjoining uses. The buffer area shall be
installed in accordance with a time schedule approved by the Commission, shall be seeded and fertilized so as to
establish suitable grass cover, shall be planted with trees as approved by the Commission, and shall be properly
maintained and kept free of debris, litter, machinery and vehicles.
664.3.6 Access to Site Area
Resource recovery, volume reduction facilities and/or transfer stations shall be restricted to areas that have public
access roads of sufficient width and capacity to carry maximum projected volumes and loads. Truck traffic shall
avoid routes that require passage through residential areas.
On-site roads shall be constructed to handle maximum projected loads, shall have an all-weather surface and shall
be maintained so as to be passable by all vehicles that utilize the area.
Access to the site shall be controlled to prevent unauthorized use. Control may be accomplished through use of
appropriate fences, gates and signs.
664.4 Operating Conditions and Procedures
a. An operator certified by the Commissioner of Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) must be present
at the resource recovery and/or volume reduction facility or transfer station at all times during operating
hours.
b. A sign shall be posted at the entrance to the site which states, at a minimum, the name of the permittee and
hours of use of the facility, the authorized users and required safety precautions.
c. No solid waste shall be stored within the property boundary for a period greater than 48 hours unless authorized
by the DEP and the Planning & Zoning Commission. All solid waste shall be stored indoors, except that
bulky waste or recyclable materials may be otherwise stored on-site in appropriate areas or containers. A
building roofed, and enclosed on all sides or otherwise enclosed to satisfactorily control dust and litter, shall
be provided for all solid waste other than bulky waste or recyclable materials.
123
d. Unloading of solid waste, except for bulky waste and recycled materials, shall take place only within an
enclosed structure and/or only in designated areas approved in writing by the DEP. Scavenging shall be prohibited
at the unloading area.
e. Solid waste shall be confined to the unloading, loading and handling area. The facility and adjacent areas
shall be kept clean and reasonably free of litter.
f. Hazardous wastes and special waste shall be excluded.
g. Dust and odors resulting from the unloading of solid waste and the operation of the resource recovery facility
and/or volume reduction plant, or transfer station shall be controlled at all times to assure compliance with the
applicable regulations of the DEP.
h. Equipment shall be provided to control fires and arrangements made with the Hamden Fire Department to
immediately acquire services when needed.
i. The resource recovery facility and/or volume reduction plant or transfer station design and/or equipment shall
provide for explosion protection.
j. If, for any reason, the resource recovery facility, volume reduction plant and/or transfer station is rendered
inoperable, an alternative method approved by the Commissioner of DEP shall be available for processing or
transfer and disposal of solid waste.
664.5 Closure
If an owner or permittee intends to close a resource recovery and/or volume reduction facility or a transfer station,
the owner or permittee shall submit a site plan showing the proper closing in order to preserve and protect the
natural resources and environment of the Town of Hamden. Said plan shall show the use of the site after closure.
664.6 Conditions
The Commission may attach such conditions to the operation as it shall deem necessary to protect the public
health and welfare of the residents of the Town of Hamden and the neighborhood, in particular, and may, if it
deems necessary, require a performance bond in a form and amount acceptable to the Commission or its designated
agents, to guarantee performance of the site work as shown on the approved site plan. The Commission
may also, if it deems necessary, require a performance bond of sufficient magnitude to assure compliance with the
closure plans.
Section 666 Retail
Retail stores are permitted subject Table 6.1 to the following conditions:
a. All public utilities shall be placed underground. However, the Commission may waive the requirement provided
engineering data substantiate that such placement is impractical.
b. The gross floor area of any individual retail store shall be limited to a maximum of 250,000 square feet.
c. Stores selling firearms shall have a security system installed and be approved by the Town Building Official,
the Police Chief and the Fire Marshall.
666.1 Design Standards for Stores over 20,000 square feet
The following are required in addition to the standards set forth in Article III of these regulations:
a. The Commission may require design features on any façade.
b. All stores must be accessible to pedestrians and bicyclists. Where practicable, stores that border two or more
public streets shall have a minimum of one entry from each street.
c. Landscaped sidewalks that link store(s), parking, transit stops and crosswalks must be included on site plan.
d. Exposed concrete masonry units (CMU) may not constitute more than 33% of finish material on front or side
façades.
124
Section 668 Schools
6.26.1 Business Schools
Business schools are allowed subject to Table 6.1.
668.2 Colleges & Universities
Colleges and Universities are permitted subject to the following standards:
a. The combination of abutting and nearby lots functioning as a campus shall have a minimum area of 120,000
square feet or 1,000 square feet for each student based on enrollment capacity, whichever is greater.
b. Each lot shall have two side yards of at least 50 feet each.
c. Each lot shall have a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
d. For commonly owned adjoining properties, required side and rear yards are applicable only to the perimeters
of such properties.
e. Sanitary sewers and a public water supply shall serve the lot.
f. The maximum building height shall be consistant with that of the underlying zone.
g. Exceptions in the case of parcels with steep slopes:
The maximum building height shall be 60 feet subject to the following conditions:
i. The building shall be located on a lot having a minimum lot size of 200 acres; and
ii. The building is located on a lot with at least 40% of the property has at least a 20% grade; and
iii. No building on the lot shall be in excess of 35 feet in height above the highest elevation on the lot.
iv. The property on which the building is located must be at least 500 feet from any neighboring municipality
h. Any college or university submitting a Special Permit application or a Major Amendment to an existing Special
Permit shall provide a five-year Institutional Master Plan (IMP) as supporting documentation with its
application.
i. Exceptions and Clarifications
a. Updates of the IMP are required with each Special Permit Application or Major Amendment of an existing
Special Permit, irrespective of how many have been submitted within a five year period. If the IMP or
prior IMP update includes the proposed project, only updated information regarding enrollment and housing
need be provided.
b. If an IMP has been submitted within five years of the current application but does not include the proposed
project, an amended IMP describing all significant plan changes as well as updated information regarding
enrollment and housing, must be provided.
c. If the five years covered by the complete IMP have passed, a new five year IMP is required irrespective
of any interim updates previously submitted.
ii. The IMP shall include such items as:
a. A Statement of Institutional Aims and Objectives and an explanation of how the IMP advances the aims
and objectives of the educational institution.
b. Map(s) and descriptions of land, buildings and other structures or facilities owned or occupied by the
Institution, including footprints, gross floor areas, heights, utilities, walks, open space, parking areas and
number of parking spaces.
c. Current and projected institutional needs for academic programs, research activities, offices and housing,
explaining how they are related to the Institutional Aims and Objectives. In its discussion of housing
needs the IMP shall include a detailed Student Housing Plan containing:
i. The number of full-time and part-time undergraduate (broken down by year) and graduate
students attending the institution the Fall term, as submitted to the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System (IPEDS) by November 1st, and projected to attend each year covered by the IMP.
ii. The number of full-time and part-time undergraduate and graduate students living as of
November 1st in housing facilities owned or operated by the Institution, broken down by year (freshman,
sophomore, junior, senior and graduate) type of housing (dormitory-apartment- other type of arrangement)
and location.
125
iii. The number of full-time and part-time undergraduate (broken down by year) and graduate students living as
of November 1st off-campus in non-university owned housing.
iv. The number and percentage of beds that are currently unoccupied, broken down by location
and year of student the beds are designated for.
v. Any housing requirements or restrictions the Institution places on its students, such as eligibility
for on-campus housing and requirements to live on-campus.
vi. The process by which the Institution directs its students to housing facilities.
vii. Short and longer-term plans for housing its students on and off-campus, broken down by
year (freshman, sophomore, junior, senior and graduate) and type of housing (dormitory-apartment- other
type of arrangement).
viii. Impacts of the Institution’s housing demand on property values, housing supply and rental
market rates in the neighborhoods adjacent to the campus and where its students are concentrated. The analysis
must be prepared by a firm, organization or individual with the appropriate professional expertise.
ix. A plan for mitigating the impacts of student housing demand on surrounding neighborhoods.
x. A policy to address off-campus student behavioral issues that are incompatible with the
surrounding neighborhoods and an action plan to respond to inappropriate behavior.
xi. Any other information deemed necessary by the Commission.
d. Description of proposed future projects, including:
i. Site locations and approximate building/facility footprints.
ii. Uses of each land area, building or structure (classroom, laboratory, office, and parking).
iii. Gross floor area to be added.
iv. Gross floor area to be eliminated through demolition.
v. Parking to be added, moved or removed.
vi. Any other information deemed necessary by the Commission.
e. Transportation and Parking Management Mitigation Plan describing:
i. Parking to be provided during the years covered by the plan, broken down by groups eligible
to use each lot or facility.
ii. Policies regarding on-campus parking.
iii. Transportation services provided by the Institution.
iv. Likely traffic impacts of the proposed projects.
v. Transportation objectives and mitigation measures intended to address these impacts
f. A statement of guidelines and objectives for a pedestrian circulation system, including
access to active and passive open space.
g. A statement of guidelines and objectives for new and renovated buildings to assure
their compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods, minimize potential adverse impacts on historic structures
and protect ridge lines and steep slopes.
h. The Commission may waive any of these items it feels they are not necessary.17
668.3 Elementary & Secondary Schools
Regularly organized public or private elementary schools, secondary schools (including vocational schools), accredited
by the State of Connecticut or other applicable crediting authority, are permitted uses subject to the following
conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 120,000 square feet or 1,000 square feet for each student based on
enrollment capacity, whichever is greater.
b. Each lot shall have two side yards of at least 50 feet each.
c. Each lot shall have a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
17 Adopted April 14, 2015. Effective May 15, 2015
126
d. Off-street parking, active sports facilities, such as tennis or basketball courts or ball diamonds, shall not occupy
space in any required rear or side yards. Play apparatus such as a swing set, a jungle gym, a see-saw and
similar equipment may be located no closer than 20' from any lot line subject to the following:
e. Prior to installation of such equipment, a Zoning Permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
f. Fencing or screening shall be required for any equipment installed, if deemed necessary by the Town Planner.
g. Sanitary sewers and a public water supply shall serve the lot.
670 Student Housing
The following section is adopted to provide for the needs of students for off-campus housing while at the same
time providing for the health, welfare, and safety of students and residents and the livability of residential
neighborhoods. Student housing unit is defined as a dwelling unit occupied primarily by unrelated individuals
enrolled in a program of study at an educational institution, college or university, trade school, training facility or
similar entity. Student housing units are allowed subject to the following conditions and standards:
670.1 Owner-Occupied Buildings 18
a. Owner-occupied student housing dwelling units are allowed provided that no more than two students occupy
any single dwelling unit as renters or boarders. Owner-occupied dwelling units are subject to the following
requirements:
i. No structural exterior changes are permitted to existing buildings unless required for compliance with
building, housing or fire code;
ii. No parking is allowed in any required front yard;
iii. Initial and thereafter renewal registration and certification of owner occupancy; renewal registration and
certification must be received by August 1st of each year;
iv. A Zoning Permit must be obtained;
v. The Zoning Permit will automatically renew each year upon submission of registration and certification
provided that the ZEO has not made a finding of non-compliance with the provisions of this section.
b. Three or 4 students per dwelling unit as renters in an existing 2- or 3-dwelling-unit building that is occupied
by the building owner and will continue to be occupied by the building owner are allowed subject to the following
requirements:19
i. Deleted
ii. Health Official approval for current housing-code compliance;
iii. Fire Marshall approval for fire safety-code compliance
iv. No structural exterior changes to existing buildings unless required for compliance with building, housing
or fire code;
v. Demonstrated provision for parking at one space per student, with at least two spaces per dwelling unit
having unimpeded access;
vi. No parking in any required front yard;
vii. A maximum of 4 students per dwelling unit are allowed, provided compliance with housing code for minimum
square footage;
viii. Submission of floor plans and, thereafter, any proposed modifications thereto;
ix. Initial and thereafter renewal registration and certification of owner occupancy. Renewal registration must
be received by August 1st of each year;
x. A Zoning Permit must be obtained;
xi. The Zoning Permit will automatically renew each year upon submission of the registration form and fee,
provided that the ZEO has not made a finding of non-compliance with the provisions of this section.
18 Adopted December 8, 2015. Effective December 15, 2015 Adopted November 15, 2016. Effective
November 30, 2016
19 Adopted November 15, 2016. Effective November 30, 2016
127
670.2 Non-Owner-Occupied One-, Two- and Three-Dwelling-Unit Buildings20
All student housing located in a one-, two-, or three-dwelling-unit building that is not occupied by the building
owner shall meet the following requirements:
a. Deleted21
b. Health Official approval for current housing-code compliance;
c. Fire Marshall approval for fire safety-code compliance
d. No exterior changes to existing buildings unless required for compliance with building, housing or fire code;
e. The demonstrated provision for off-street parking at one space per student, with at least two spaces per dwelling
unit having unimpeded access;
f. No parking in any required front yard, or side yard that is unpaved as of November 14, 2006;
g. Parking is prohibited within 10 feet of the rear yard line;
h. The landlord shall be responsible for providing trash receptacles and recyclable bins and posting instructions
regarding Town of Hamden pick-up schedules;
i. Submission of floor plans and, thereafter, any proposed modifications thereto;
j. Initial and renewal registration of student rental housing providing 24-hour contact person in Connecticut to
resolve complaints;
k. Compliance with following density: A maximum of 4 students per dwelling unit, provided compliance with
housing code for minimum square footage;
l. A Zoning Permit must be obtained;
m. The Zoning Permit will automatically renew each year upon submission of registration, provided that the
ZEO has not made a finding of non-compliance with the provisions of this section. A renewal registration
form and fee must be received by August 1st of each year.
670.3 Student Housing in Multiple-Dwelling-Unit Buildings
Existing multiple-dwelling-unit buildings as of the effective date of this section shall be regulated as follows:
a. Student housing units located within existing multiple-unit buildings as of the effective date of this section are
not subject to the provisions of Section 670 unless they are converted to either a multiple-unit student housing
building in which more than 50% of the units are occupied by students or are converted to a dormitory.
b. Multiple-dwelling-unit buildings existing as of the effective date of this section and converted to multiple-unit
student-housing building in which more than 50% of the units are occupied by students shall comply with the
following conditions:
i. Current building, housing, and fire code compliance as of the date of the conversion;
ii. Initial and thereafter renewal registration of student rental housing providing 24-hour contact person in
Connecticut to resolve complaints;
iii. Side and rear yards shall be adequately screened from adjoining properties by a suitable landscape buffer
of at least 10 feet;
iv. Off street parking must be provided in amounts sufficient to meet student demand, i.e., one space per student;
v. Submission of floor plans and thereafter any proposed modifications thereto;
vi. Special Permit, Site Plan and Zoning Permit;
vii. The Zoning Permit will automatically renew each year upon submission of registration, provided that the
ZEO has not made a finding of non-compliance with provisions of this section. A renewal registration form
and fee must be received by August 1st of each year;
670.4 New Construction Multiple-Unit Student-Housing Buildings
Student-Housing Multiple-Unit Buildings (occupied more than 50% by students) constructed after the effective
date of these regulations shall meet the following requirements:
20 Adopted December 8, 2015. Effective December 16, 2015
21 Adopted November 15, 2016. Effective November 30, 2016
128
a. Multi-dwelling-unit student-housing buildings are permitted only where multiple-dwelling-unit buildings are
permitted and must meet the requirements for multiple-dwelling-unit structures in the applicable zone, and
the provisions of Article III and Section 652 in addition to the provisions of Section 670. In the case of
conflicts, the more restrictive provision shall apply;
b. All buildings shall be served by fire sprinklers;
c. Submission of floor plans and, thereafter, any proposed modifications thereto;
d. Initial and thereafter renewal registration of student rental housing, providing 24-hour contact person in Connecticut
to resolve complaints;
e. Special Permit and Site Plan approval for building; Zoning Permit for building;
f. The Zoning Permit will automatically renew each year upon submission of registration, provided that the
ZEO has not made a finding of non-compliance with the provisions of this section. A renewal registration
form and fee must be received by August 1st of each year;
Section 670.5 Temporary Moratorium on the Issuance of Zoning Permits for Student Housing
1. In order to provide the Planning and Zoning Commission with adequate time to assess the impact of offcampus
student housing on the health, safety and welfare of Hamden residents, and to adopt more appropriate
regulations, the Commission hereby extends the temporary moratorium on the issuance of Zoning Permits for
Student Housing for an additional six months from the effective date of this amendment.
The moratorium applies to applications for new zoning permits submitted under the provisions of Sections
670 through 670.4, with the exception of ones for students living with one or more parents or legal guardians.
2. Dormitories administered by educational institutions, as described in Article VIII. Definitions and Abbreviations,
are not subject to the Moratorium.
3. Applications for annual renewals of existing Zoning Permits for Student Housing are not subject to the Moratorium
provided the renewal registration forms and fees are received by August 1, 2014.
4. The moratorium may be removed prior to the end of the one year period by an amendment to the Zoning
Regulations.
5. Applications in 2015 for annual renewals of existing Zoning Permits for Student Housing are not subject to
the Moratorium provided the properties were properly renewed in 2014 and the 2015 renewal registration
forms and fees are received by August 1, 2015.22
6. The moratorium is further extended by an additional two months to allow additional time for the Commission
to hold Public Hearings and make decisions regarding proposed amendments to the Zoning Regulations
concerning student housing23
672 Telecommunications Facility
672.1 Purpose
These regulations are intended to establish guidelines and standards for the siting of antenna and related facilities
in Hamden in order to protect the public safety and general welfare and, through design, siting, and screening, to
minimize any adverse visual and operational effects.
672.2 No Permit Required
a. Residential Household Antenna - An antenna used solely for residential household television and radio reception,
provided any such antenna meets required setbacks and does not exceed by more than 6 feet the maximum
total building height for the zone in which it is located.
b. Residential Satellite Dish Antenna - A satellite dish antenna is allowed in a residential zone, provided:
i. The dish antenna measures 1 meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter; and
ii. A building-mounted installation complies with yard setback and total building height standards for a principal
structure.
22 Adopted April 14, 2104. Effective May 15, 2105
23 Adopted November 10, 2015. Effective November 15, 2015
129
c. Commercial Satellite Dish Antenna - A ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite dish antenna in a Non-
Residential Zone is allowed, provided the dish antenna measures 2 meters (6.56 feet) or less in diameter.
672.3 Zoning Permit Required
a. Amateur Radio Antenna - An amateur radio antenna owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed
by the FCC provided:
i. A ground-mounted installation is located in the rear yard;
ii. A building-mounted installation is affixed to the rear of the residential structure;
iii. Any tower and antenna combination is less than 40 feet in total height and is erected no nearer to any
property line than a distance equal to the vertical height of the tower and antenna; and
iv. A suitable safety fence may be required to preclude unauthorized access.
b. New Public Safety Tower or Antenna - A new antenna tower intended and used primarily for the purpose of
police, fire, ambulance, and/or other emergency services or similar emergency communications.
c. Existing Tower Repair - Repair of existing towers and antennas, provided there are no changes in design,
height or appearance.
672.4 Permitted by Site Plan Approval
a. Commercial Satellite Dish Antenna - A ground-mounted or roof-mounted satellite dish antenna in a Manufacturing,
T3.5, T4, or T5 zone that does not comply with Section 672.2.
b. Other Antennas on Existing Structures - Any other antenna which is not attached to a tower, provided:
i. The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations;
ii. The antenna complies with all applicable building codes;
iii. The antenna does not extend more than 10 feet above the highest point of the structure; and
iv. The antenna is screened or designed and installed to be architecturally compatible with the structure in
question.
672.5 Permitted by Special Permit
a. New Tower or Antenna on Town-Owned Property - A new antenna located on property owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the Town.
b. New Tower or Antenna - Any new tower or antenna not regulated by the Connecticut Siting Council.
672.6 Requirements for Special Permit Applications
a. Each application shall include:
i. Documentation that a licensed carrier or an authorized emergency-services organization is either an applicant
or a co-applicant on the application;
ii. Documentation that the proposed facility will not cause any interference with any emergency or publicsafety
radio system;
iii. Documentation showing how the proposed facility will accommodate emergency service communications
for police, fire and ambulance services or a statement from each organization that such accommodation is
not desired;
b. Documents indicating that:
i. All towers, antennas, and/or equipment to be installed meet or exceed current standards and regulations of
the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the State or Federal Government with the authority to regulate
towers and antennas, and;
ii. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this
regulation shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance;
iii. Documentation regarding noise emission from equipment and identification of appropriate steps to provide
soundproofing so that any noise above ambient levels is inaudible at the property line; and
130
iv. A written maintenance plan for the site, including, but not limited to, all facilities and landscaping at the
site.
c. Visual Standards
i. Towers and antenna and appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color or given other such finish, as determined
by the Commission, to minimize visual obtrusiveness.
ii. The design of the equipment, buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
iii. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting equipment must be of
a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure to make
the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
iv. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority and specifically
authorized by the Commission.
d. Equipment/Tower Standards
i. Any equipment cabinets or other appurtenances used in association with the tower or antenna shall be
clearly shown as part of the application, including how such equipment is designed to blend with the surrounding
landscape or be obscured from adjacent properties and streets.
ii. Security fencing, no more than six feet in height, may be required by the Commission around the antenna,
tower, and equipment, depending on the nature of the installation.
iii. Landscaping, including buffering, may be required by the Commission around the antenna, tower, and
equipment, depending on the nature of the installation.
iv. Towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to their height. This requirement may be
waived when there is adequate documentation that the tower structure has been designed to collapse in a
manner which will not impact adjacent properties.
v. Tower heights shall not exceed 200 feet.
672.7 Bonding
Upon approval of any new tower and/or attendant facilities, excluding Town-owned towers, the applicant is
required to provide a separate Demolition Performance Bond in an amount approved by the Town Planner. The
bond must be in the form of a bank or certified check or an insurance bond, the premium of which has been paid
in advance for five years and which is renewed in the same manner.
674 Transfer Station
(See Section 664, Resource Recovery, Volume Reduction Facility; and Solid Waste and Bulky Waste Disposal
Area)
676 Wind Energy Conservation Systems
Wind energy conservation systems, such as windmills, are permitted as accessory uses, subject to the following
conditions:
a. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 40,000 square feet or as required by the applicable zone, whichever
is greater;
b. No windmill or similar structure shall exceed 80 feet in height;
c. No windmill or similar structure shall be located in any required yard;
d. The windmill or similar structure shall be set back from all lot lines a distance at least equal to the height
of the windmill or similar structure.
131
677 Medical Marijuana Production Facilities and Dispensaries24
Medical Marijuana Production Facilities and Dispensaries are permitted, subject to Site Plan Approval and the
following requirements:
1. Production Facilities:
a. They must be licensed by the State of Connecticut.
b. They must be located at least 1,000 feet from all elementary and secondary schools and places of
worship, measured by drawing the nearest straight line between their respective boundaries.
c. They must be located in an M Zone.
2. Dispensaries:
a. They must be licensed by the State of Connecticut
b. The Gross Leasable Space may not exceed 20,000 square feet.
c. They must be located at least 1,000 feet from all elementary and secondary schools and places of
worship, measured by drawing the nearest straight line between their respective boundaries.
d. They must be located in either a T-4 or T-5 Zone on Dixwell Avenue, Whitney Avenue or State Street.
3. Production facilities and dispensaries that meet the requirements of Section 510.2 Change of Use require
only a Zoning Permit.
24 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017.
132
ARTICLE VII APPLICATION STANDARDS, PROCEDURES AND
ZONING ENFORCEMENT
700 General Application Standards and Procedures
Applications shall be made by the property owner of record, by an individual having substantial interest in the
property, or by a duly authorized agent.
Applications may be referred to the Quinnipiac Valley District, the Department of Environmental Protection
or any other department or agency the Commission deems appropriate and may request any such department
or agency to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to it in connection with its own
responsibility.
A public hearing is required for amendments to the Zoning Map and Regulations, Special Permits and any applications
submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Whenever the Commission schedules a public hearing, the applicant shall place a sign or signs on the affected
property, clearly visible to passers by, giving notice of the proposed public hearing. Where the property is a
corner lot, a sign shall be placed on both frontages of the property. The sign is to be placed at or near the street
line or traveled way and shall be clearly visible to the general public. Such sign, to be provided by the Planning
Department, shall be installed by the applicant no less than 10 days before the hearing. Sign(s) are subject to a
security deposit in an amount set by the Legislative Council.
An affidavit shall be presented at the public hearing by the applicant or his/her agent certifying that this sign
was installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section.
In addition to the sign notice required above, for any application requiring a public hearing, the Commission
shall give notice by mail of any such hearing 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to the applicant filing the
application and to every property owner (of record on the date of filing the application) whose property, according
to Town Land Records, is located within, abutting, or directly across the street from all boundaries of the
proposed change in the zoning map change.
All applications to a Commission shall include the following:
a. The required number of copies of the complete application form signed by the applicant(s) and the owner(s)
of the property;
b. A fee in the amount prescribed by ordinance; and
c. A list of all property owners required to be notified, together with stamped envelopes appropriately addressed.
Exemptions: The provisions of Sections 700, 702.4 and 702.61 shall not apply to applications initiated by the
Commission.
702 Zoning Amendments & Standards
The following requirements shall pertain to applications for Zoning Map and Zoning Regulation amendments.
702.1 Authority
The Commission, on its motion or on petition, may amend these Regulations and/or the Zoning Map, after public
notice and hearing, in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
1 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
133
702.2 Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to protect the health, safety and welfare of Hamden’s population, environment,
infrastructure and economic viability by enabling, encouraging and qualifying the implementation of
these regulations.
702.3 Application
Applicants requesting an amendment to the Zoning Regulations and/or Zoning Map may submit an application
proposing such an amendment to the Commission.
Before the Commission shall consider any such petition, the following requirements shall be met and information
submitted by the applicant:
702.4 Zoning Map Amendments
For all applications to amend the boundaries or classification of a zone, an applicant shall submit fifteen copies
of an application, in writing, on forms provided by the Commission. Applications shall:
a. Signed by the party proposing the amendment or by the agent for such party;
b. Include a metes-and-bounds2 description of the land to be included in the amendment;
c. Provide fifteen copies of a narrative stating the reason(s) for the proposed amendment;
d. Contain fifteen copies of a map showing north arrow, name of the petitioner(s) and all existing lots, dimensions,
property lines, streets, and existing and proposed zoning for the area included in and within 500 feet
of the subject property.
e. Include a map accurately drawn to a maximum scale of 50 feet and a minimum of 200 feet to the inch. The
map may show other information considered pertinent by the applicant.
f. Supply a list of all property owners required to be notified in Section 702.63, and corresponding stamped
envelopes appropriately addressed.
g. Sign posting per Section700.
702.5 Review Criteria for Change to Zoning Map
In acting upon a zone change, the Commission shall consider, as appropriate, the various factors favorable and
unfavorable to such a change, including but not limited to:
a. The goals, objectives, and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development;
b. The intent of zoning and of these regulations;
c. Changes that have taken place in the rate and pattern of development and land use within the Town and
adjoining communities;
d. The supply of land available in the present and proposed zone;
e. The physical suitability of the land for the proposed zone;
f. The impact on the capacity of the present and proposed utilities, streets, drainage systems, and other improvements;
g. The general character and zoning of the neighborhood
h. Impacts on the surrounding area;
i. Traffic congestion impacts;
j. The environmental impacts; and
k. The health and general welfare of the community.
702.6 Additional Notice
In addition, for proposed Zoning Map amendments submitted by an applicant, the Commission shall give notice
of any such hearing at least (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to the applicant filing the application and
2 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
3 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
134
to the property owners of record on the date of filing the application whose property, according to Town Land
Records, is located within, abutting, or directly across the street from all boundaries of the proposed zoning map
change.
702.7 Amendments to Regulations
For all applications to amend the text or diagrams of these Regulations, including any change in punctuation or
wording, a written application is necessary. The applicant shall:
a. Provide 15 copies of the application to the Commission, setting forth the specific provision(s) to be amended
and the proposed language thereof;
b. Be signed by the party proposing the amendment or by the agent for such party.
c. Include a narrative stating the reason(s) for the proposed amendment.
702.8 Review Criteria for Change to Zoning Text
In acting upon a change to the Regulation text, the Commission shall consider, as appropriate, the various factors
favorable and unfavorable to such a change, including but not limited to:
a. The goals, objectives, and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development;
b. The intent of zoning and of these regulations;
c. Changes that have taken place in the rate and pattern of development and land use within the Town and
adjoining communities;
d. The impact on the capacity of the present and proposed utilities, streets, drainage systems, and other improvements;
e. Traffic congestion impacts;
f. The environmental impacts; and
g. The health and general welfare of the community.
702.9 Referrals
The Commission may refer any application to amend these Zoning Regulations and/or the Zoning Map to any
Town department or other agency the Commission deems appropriate. The Commission may request any such
department or agency to submit a report to the Commission on matters that are of concern to it in connection
with its own responsibility.
702.10 Public Hearing and Notice
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all proposed amendments to the Zoning Regulations and/or
Zoning Map and shall publish a notice of said hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with
the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
702.11 Adoption of Amendment
In the case of a zoning map amendment when a protest is filed with the Commission at a public hearing and is
signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed amendment,
or of the lots within 500 feet in all directions from the lots included in the proposed amendment. In the
case of either an amendment to the Zoning Map or the Zoning Regulations if the Planning Section of the Commission
recommends denial, such amendment shall not be adopted except by a vote of two-thirds of the entire
membership of the Commission.
702.12 Effective Date of Amendments
Zoning Regulations and boundaries of zones, shall become effective at a time fixed by the Commission, provided
notice has been published prior to the set effective date in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
the Town.
135
718 Special Permit Standards and Procedures
718.1 Authority and Purpose
All non-residential uses established by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall require Special Permit review and approval
by the Commission.
718.2 Applications
Applications for a Special Permit shall include the following:
a. Site Plan application as required in Section 720;
b. A narrative statement describing the proposed use;
c. Data must include:
i. Building Location
ii. Building Use
iii. Parking Location
iv. Landscaping
v. Signage
vi. Special Requirements
vii. Hazard Mitigation
viii. Natural Drainage and Sedimentation and Erosion Controls
ix. Architectural Plans and Elevations
x. Lighting Plans
xi. General Performance Standards
xii. Any other information, such as traffic or hydrology study deemed necessary by the Commission or staff
to be necessary to determine conformity with the intent of these regulations.
d. Any revisions to maps and any additional information, such as a traffic report, that is not submitted at the
time of the initial application must be submitted to the Planning Office at least 10 calendar days prior to the
public hearing on the proposed application.
e. Proposed increases to existing building coverage per Section 310.2 that do not comply with Section 530.3
must have an approved Special Permit for full build-out that meets these Regulations. Plans for this Special
Permit shall be to A2-T2 standards and shall be drawn to 1:100 scale. Subdivision applications and/or
requests for acceptance of roadways by the Town shall not be granted prior to the approval of said Special
Permit.
f. Additional Mapping Requirements for Parcels in T-Zones
i. A Comprehensive Master Plan shall be required for any proposed substantial changes to building coverage
in a T-zone. Comprehensive Master Plans shall be drawn to A2-T2 standards, shall meet all requirements
for a Special Permit and Site Plan applications and shall show a Comprehensive Master Plan for
full build-out of the entire parcel. The Commission will approve, approve with conditions or deny the
Comprehensive Master Plan, in its entirety, as a Special Permit and Site Plan.
ii. A Conceptual Master Plan shall be required for any minor changes to building coverage in a T-Zone.
Conceptual Master Plans shall contain a detailed Site Plan for the area proposed for immediate development.
Conceptual Master Plans shall also include a Conceptual Master Plan with enough detail to
demonstrate the intent for future development. The Commission will approve, approve with conditions
or deny the proposed immediate development as a Special Permit and/or Site Plan. The context of such
approval will be based upon the Conceptual Master Plan.
g. A copy of all documentation, including surveys and plans should be provided in pdf format.4
h. If circumstances warrant, the Town Planner may waive any of the about requirements in consultation with
the Chairperson of the Planning & Zoning Commission. 5
4 Effective November 15, 2012
5 Effective November 15, 2012 136
i. Review by Independent Consultants
On any application the Commission, may retain outside consultants to be paid by the applicant, for specialized
technical reviews when it finds the size, complexity or potential impact of the proposed use or activity
requires specialized assistance and expertise, in accordance with the following procedure:
1. This payment shall be made to the Town prior to the review commencing and the decision being rendered
on the application.
2. The consultant(s) will work under the supervision of the Town Planner.
3. Copies of the consultant’s findings and reports shall be made available to the applicant not less than seven
(7) days prior to any meeting of the Commission to consider the consultant’s report(s), and the applicant as
well as the public in general shall be given the opportunity to respond to said report in writing and at the
next hearing, when the consultant’s report will be considered.
4. Failure to pay the reviewer’s charges shall be grounds for denial of the application.
5. Payment of any outstanding balance in the consultant fees shall be a condition of approval of any application
and no final approval shall be recorded on the Town of Hamden Town Clerk’s Land Records until such
amount is paid in full.6
718.3 Conformance to Requirements
Unless otherwise specified, a Special Permit use shall conform to all requirements of the zone in which it is
located as well as with other applicable provisions of these Regulations.
Where two or more Special Permit uses apply to the same premises, the minimum requirements shall be the
minimum requirements for each use as specified in these regulations, or in cases of two or more Special Permit
uses in the same building, whichever requirements are more restrictive.
718.4 Theshold for Granting a Special Permit
In deciding whether or not to grant a Special Permit, the Commission shall give consideration to, but not be
limited by, the following:
a. The health, safety and welfare of the public in general, and the immediate neighborhood, in particular,
compliance with the Plan of Conservation and Development;
b. The location and size of the proposed use;
c. The nature and intensity of the proposed use and any operations involved in the use;
d. The safety and intensity of traffic circulation on the site and in adjacent streets;
e. The scale of the proposed site and structure(s);
f. The harmony and appropriateness of the use and site design in relation to the general area and to adjacent
properties;
g. Compliance with the Zoning Regulations and the site plan objectives set forth in Section 720. Any permit
granted under this Section shall be subject to any and all conditions and safeguards imposed pursuant to
Section 718.6.
718.5 Conditions and Safeguards
The Commission may, if it finds that a Special Permit is appropriate, include reasonable conditions and safeguards
related to the factors set forth in Section 718.4. Any such conditions or safeguards attached to the granting
of a Special Permit shall remain with the property as long as the Special Permit use is still in operation, and
shall continue in force regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
718.6 Conformance to Approved Plans
Site development shall proceed in accordance with plans approved by the Commission. Any changes proposed
by an applicant to an approved Special Permit shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office for review
and approval by the staff or by the Commission, as required. Any changes made prior to such review and ap-
6 Amended June 11, 2013. Effective, July 8, 2013 137
proval shall constitute a violation of these regulations. All site work shall be completed no later than five years
from the date of approval of the original plan, unless the Commission grants an extension in accordance with
State Statutes.
718.7 Suspension
Any authorized Special Permit shall be subject to suspension through a Cease and Desist Order if any condition
or safeguard imposed by the Commission upon buildings, structures, land or uses for said permit is not strictly
adhered to by the applicant, user and/or owner.
718.8 Amendments or Modifications to Approved Special Permits
Applications for amendment(s) or modification(s) to an approved Special Permit that are necessitated by site
conditions or by a change in circumstances, or that are deemed to be in the public interest, shall be made in the
same manner as the original application; except that amendments which are found to be of a minor nature or
that do not materially alter the Special Permit may be authorized by the Town Planner or the Commission without
another public hearing.
The Planning staff shall determine whether a proposed deviation from approved Site Plans and/or Special Permits
requires a Minor or a Major Amendment.
a. Major amendments to approved Site Plans attendant to Special Permits may be approved with a public
hearing before the Commission. Major amendments are those that may result in additional impact to the
appearance and/or intensity of use of a site.
The request for a Major Amendment to a Special Permit shall not subject the entire application to review by
the Commission, only that portion necessary to allow the Commission to rule on the specific issue requiring
relief.
b. Minor amendments to approved Site Plans attendant to Special Permits may be approved without a
public hearing by the Town Planner or the Commission, if such changes are the result of site conditions
or a change in circumstances, and provided such change shall have no additional impact and complies with
all appropriate zoning standards.
The request for a Minor Amendment shall not subject the application to a public hearing. The Town Planner
or the Commission shall have the authority to approve or disapprove, administratively, a request for a Minor
Amendment pursuant to regulations established by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Town Planner
shall report all administratively approved Minor Amendments to the Commission at its next regularly
scheduled meeting.
718.9 Time Period and Expiration
In approving a Special Permit, the Commission may set time limits on the permit and/or require periodic renewal
of the permit without a public hearing. If a legal ruling is made to reverse the Commission’s denial of
a Special Permit, the time period shall commence on the date of final disposition of such an appeal. Expired
Special Permits shall be considered invalid.
718.10 Continuance
Notwithstanding any other provision of these regulations, when an amendment is adopted to these Zoning Regulations
or boundaries of zones, a Special Permit that has been approved according to the regulation in effect at
the time of filing shall not be required to conform to such amendment provided:
138
a. Construction of any of the proposed improvements, including but not limited to roads, sewer lines, landscaping,
recreational facilities, etc. shall have commenced within 12 months from the effective date of the
Special Permit and Site Plan approvals; and
b. Construction of the improvements is diligently pursued and brought to substantial completion within the
original time constraints set forth at the time of approval or within 3 years following the effective date of
such amendment to the zoning regulations or boundaries of zones.
720 Site Plan Standards and Procedures
720.1 Authority and Purpose
No Zoning Permit shall be issued for any activity requiring Site Plan approval until the Commission has reviewed
and approved the application.
720.2 Site Plan Procedure
720.2.1 Application
Each application for Site Plan approval shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the Commission, accompanied
by ten sets of a Site Plan, as well as the applicable fee.
The Commission, on its motion or on petition, may amend these Regulations or the Zoning Map, after public
notice and hearing, in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
720.3 Referrals
The Commission may refer any Site Plan application to any Town department or other agency that the Commission
deems appropriate and may request any such department or agency to submit a report to the Commission
on matters that are of concern to the Commission in connection with its own responsibilities.
720.4 Site Plan Information
720.4.1 Any other information, such as a traffic or hydrology study deemed necessary by the Commission or
staff to be necessary to determine conformity with the intent of these regulations.
720.4.27 All maps shall include an accurate class A-2/T-2 survey of the property and improvements, prepared by
a land surveyor registered in the State of Connecticut unless waived by the Commission.
All plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a Connecticut-registered engineer, architect, or landscape
architect, whichever is appropriate.
All plans shall be prepared at a scale of one-inch equals not less than 20 feet, and not more than 50 feet.Site
Plans shall include the following:
a. Title Block with date, name of developer(s), property owner(s), north arrow, revision date(s), numeric
and graphic scale of plans, seals and signatures of all appropriate design professionals;
b. A key map at the scale of 1-inch equals 1000 feet showing the subject property and adjacent properties
within 500 feet;
c. Boundary survey of the site, including distances with angles or bearings;
d. Zoning classification of property;
e. Area of lot;
f. Name of adjacent owners and zoning classification of each property;
g. Existing and proposed contours or spot grades at no more than 2-foot intervals;
h. Locations of existing and proposed buildings, signs, fences, and walls with dimensions, area, elevations and
number of stories, and distances between all buildings and property lines;
7 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010. 139
i. Location of all existing and proposed uses and facilities not requiring a building, such as swimming pools,
tennis courts, tanks, and transformers;
j. Sizes, arrangement, uses, and dimensions of all open spaces on the site;
k. Location and design of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm drainage, water-supply facilities,
electical / mechanical pad(s) and other underground and above-ground utilities;
l. Existing and proposed sidewalks, curbs and curb cuts, and adjacent streets;
m. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by Section 520.9 Sediment and Erosion and
Control Regulations;
n. Drainage design for roof area(s), parking lot(s) and driveway(s);
o. Stormwater Detention Plans;
p. Locations and descriptions of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way;
q. Location of all existing wooded areas, watercourses, wetlands, rock outcrops, and other significant physical
features, and, where appropriate, the mean high-water line, the wetlands boundary, the flood hazard area, the
coastal area boundary, the aquifer boundary and the West Rock Ridge Conservation area;
r. Location of existing stone walls;
s. Proposed landscaping to include the following:
i. Location, general layout, type and size of buffer(s) or landscape area(s), plant material(s), fencing,
screening devices, decorative paving, or other materials proposed;
ii. Location of existing trees with a trunk caliper of more than 6 inches except in intensely wooded areas
where the foliage line shall be indicated;
iii. A statement to the effect that such landscaping does not include any species listed on the Connecticut
Invasive Plant List.
t. Layout of all off-street parking areas showing details of aisles, driveways, each parking space, all loading
and unloading areas, pavement markings, location of directional signs;
u. Existing and proposed locations, heights and sizes of all outdoor lighting and sign locations. Lighting plan
shall include the following:
i. Location and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices;
any decorative lighting should be indicated;
ii. Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices and the
description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cut sheets by manufacturers and drawings (including
sections where required);
iii. Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut-off or
light emissions;
iv. Wattage or power of the lights, and method of shielding from any adjoining residential area.
v. Fire lanes and traffic control signs as required by the Hamden Traffic Authority or Police and Fire authorities;
w. Outside storage areas with proposed screening;
x. Location of outside recycling and refuse storage area and proposed screening;
y. Provisions for water supply;
z. Proposed open space areas and any proposed site improvements to such areas;
aa. Information on endangered species or species of special concern, as listed on the Natural Diversity Data
Base maintained by the Connecticut DEP; and
bb. A table or chart indicating the proposed number or amount and types of uses, lot area, lot width, yards,
building height, coverage, floor area, parking spaces, landscaping, open spaces and other elements as they
relate to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
cc. A copy of all documentation, including surveys and plans should be provided in pdf format.8
dd. If circumstances warrant, the Town Planner may waive any of the above requirements in consultation with
the Chairperson of the Planning & Zoning Commission.9
8 Effective November 15, 2012
9 Effective November 15, 2012 140
720.5 Site Plan Objectives
In reviewing a Site Plan Application, the Commission shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare
of the public in general and the immediate neighborhood, in particular, and may prescribe reasonable conditions
and safeguards to insure the accomplishment of the following general objectives.
720.5.1 Town Plan: That the proposed site plan shall be in general conformance with the intent of the
Town Plan. However, the Town Plan shall not take precedence over specific provisions of the Zoning Regulations.
720.5.2 Public Safety: All buildings, structures, uses, equipment, or material are readily accessible for
fire and police protection.
720.5.3 Traffic and Pedestrian Access: All proposed traffic and pedestrian access ways do not create
traffic hazards and are: adequate, but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment, and visibility;
adequate in distance from street corners, places of public assembly and other access ways; and adequate in
design for other similar safety considerations.
720.5.4 Circulation and Parking: Adequate parking and loading spaces are provided to prevent congestion;
that all parking spaces and maneuvering areas are suitably identified; that entrances and exits are suitably
identified and designed to specific use radii; that the interior circulation system is adequately designed to provide
safe and convenient access to all structures, uses, and/or parking spaces; that parking areas are provided
with suitable bumper guards, guard rails, islands, crosswalks, speed bumps and similar safety devices when
deemed necessary by the Commission to adequately protect life and property; and that provision is made for
safe pedestrian movement within and adjacent to the property by the installation of sidewalks.
720.5.5 Landscaping and Screening: The general landscaping of the site complies with the purpose and
intent of Section 540.2 of these regulations; that existing trees are preserved to the maximum extent possible;
and that parking, storage, refuse and service areas are suitably screened during all seasons from the view of
adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way.
720.5.6 Lighting: Lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level for the protection and safety of
the public in regard to pedestrian and vehicular circulation and that glare from the installation of outdoor lights
and illuminated signs is properly shielded from the view of adjacent property and public rights-of-way.
720.5.7 Public Health: That all utility systems are suitably located, adequately designed, and properly
installed to serve the proposed uses, and to protect the environment from adverse air, water, and land pollution.
720.5.8 Environmental Features: That the development of the site will preserve sensitive environmental
land features, such as steep slopes, wetlands, and large rock outcroppings and will attempt to preserve public
scenic views or historically significant features.
720.5.9 Neighborhood Character: The location and size of any proposed use, building or structure, as
well as the nature and intensity of operations involved or conducted in connection therewith, will be in general
harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and will not be hazardous or otherwise detrimental
to the appropriate and orderly development or use of any adjacent land, building, or structure as expressed in
Article V Performance Standards.
141
720.5.10 Drainage: The design of stormwater drainage systems shall be such as to minimize soil erosion
and maximize absorption of pollutants by the soil. Runoff from impervious areas shall be attenuated to reduce
peak flow volume and sediment loads to pre-development levels. Practices as outlined in the 2004 Stormwater
Quality Manual of the Connecticut DEP (as updated), shall be followed.
720.5.11 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control: The design of soil erosion and sediment control plans shall
be such as to reduce the danger from storm water run-off, minimize non-point sediment pollution from land being
developed and conserve and protect the land, water, air and other environmental resources of the Town.
720.6 Conformance to Requirements
Unless otherwise specified, a Site Plan use shall conform to all requirements of the zone in which it is located as
well as to other applicable provisions of these regulations.
Where two or more Site Plan uses apply to the same premises, the minimum requirements shall be the minimum
requirements for each use as specified in these regulations or, in cases of two or more Site Plan uses in the same
building, whichever requirements are more restrictive.
720.7 Conditions and Safeguards
The Commission may, if it finds that a Site Plan is appropriate, include reasonable conditions and safeguards
related to the factors set forth in Section 720.6. Any conditions of approval shall be so noted by stamping on
the Site Plan accordingly and noting specific conditions on the plan.Any such conditions or safeguards attached
to the granting of a Site Plan shall remain with the property as long as the Site Plan use is still in operation, and
shall continue in force regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
720.7.1 Performance Bond
The Commission, may, if it deems necessary, require a bond consisting of a corporate surety or other financial
guarantee, in a form and amount acceptable to the Commission or its designated agents, to guarantee performance
of the site work as shown on the approved site plan. Said bond shall be submitted at a time to be determined
by the Commission.
720.8 Conformance to Approved Plans
Site development shall proceed in accordance with plans approved by the Commission. Any changes proposed
by an applicant to an approved Site Plan shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Office for review and
approval by the staff or by the Commission, as required. Any changes made prior to such review and approval
shall constitute a violation of these regulations. All site work shall be completed no later than five years from
the date of approval of the original plan.
720.9 Suspension
Any authorized Site Plan shall be subject to suspension through a Cease and Desist Order if any condition or
safeguard imposed by the Commission upon buildings, structures, land or uses for said permit is not strictly
adhered to by the applicant(s), user(s) and/or owner(s).
720.10 Amendments
The Planning staff shall determine whether a proposed deviation from approved Site Plans requires a Minor or a
Major Amendment.
a. Major amendments to approved Site Plans attendant to Special Permits may be approved with a public
hearing before the Commission. Major amendments are those that may result in additional impact to the
appearance and/or intensity of use of a site.
142
The request for a Major Amendment to a Site Plan shall not subject the entire application to review by the
Commission, only that portion necessary to allow the Commission to rule on the specific issue requiring
relief.
b. Minor amendments to approved Site Plans attendant to Special Permits may be approved without a
public hearing by the Town Planner or the Commission, if such changes are the result of site conditions
or a change in circumstances, and provided such change shall have no additional impact and complies with
all appropriate zoning standards.
The Town Planner or the Commission shall have the authority to approve or disapprove, administratively, a
request for a Minor Amendment pursuant to regulations established by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Town Planner shall report all administratively approved Minor Amendments to the Commission at
its next regularly scheduled meeting.
720.11 Time Period and Expiration
In approving a Site Plan, the Commission may set time limits on the permit and/or require periodic renewal
of the permit. In the event a legal ruling is made to reverse the Commission’s approval of a Site Plan, the time
period shall commence on the date of final disposition of such litigation. Expired Site Plans shall be considered
invalid.
720.12 Continuance
All conditions and improvements shown on an approved Site Plan shall remain with the property, as long as the
use indicated on the approved Site Plan is still in operation. The conditions and improvements shall continue in
force, regardless of any change in ownership of the property.
Notwithstanding any other provision of these regulations, when an amendment to these Zoning Regulations is
adopted or boundaries of zones are modified, a Site Plan that has been approved according to the regulations in
effect at the time of filing shall not be required to conform to such amendment provided:
a. Construction of any of the proposed improvements, including but not limited to roads, sewer lines, landscaping,
and recreational facilities, shall have commenced within 12 months from the effective date of the
Site Plan approvals; and
b. Construction of the improvements are diligently pursued and brought to substantial completion within the
original time constraints set forth at the time of approval or within 3 years after the effective date of such
amendment to the zoning regulations or modification of boundaries of zones.
722 Applications for Approval of Location of Use: Limitted Repairer’s License and Car Sales
Applications for automobile repairer’s and dealers and related licenses shall be approved by the Commission in
accordance with Connecticut State Statutes.
724 Temporary Permits
Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent a church, school, civic association, social club, volunteer fire department,
municipal agency, or other non-profit organization from holding a fair, carnival, circus, horse show,
athletic meet or similar event on its own premises for a period not exceeding seven days in any calendar year,
the profits of which are for the sole benefit of such organization or for civic, religious or philanthropic purposes.
Seasonal operations, such as a farmer’s market, shall not be limited to 7 days. A commercial business may conduct
a farmer’s market, limited to 12 days in any calendar year.10 A Zoning Permit may be issued to any member
of the above group of organizations located within the Town of Hamden, for an event, as described and limited
above, at permissible premises other than those of such organizations.
10 Amended March 9, 2010. Effective April 15, 2010
143
726 Zoning Board of Appeals
726.1 Powers and Duties
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
726.1.1 Decide Appeals
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made
by the official charged with Zoning Enforcement. A person, firm, corporation or entity to whom said decision
has been directed shall make such appeals within fifteen days of the decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
726.1.2 Vary the Application of the Regulations
To determine and vary the application of the Zoning Regulations in harmony with the general purpose and
intent and with due consideration for the Plan of Conservation and Development and for conserving the public
health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing to
conditions especially affecting such parcel, but not affecting generally the zone in which it is situated, a literal
enforcement of the regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice
will be done and the public safety and welfare secured. Financial hardship alone shall not be considered an
exceptional difficulty or unnecessary hardship.
726.1.3 Use Variances
726.1.3.1 Purpose:
Pursuant to Section 8-6, Connecticut General State Statutes, and to be consistent with the purpose and intent of
the Hamden Zoning Regulations, and to avoid spot zoning in contravention to the Hamden Plan of Conservation
and Development, and to avoid actions that in essence establish new or amend existing Zoning Regulations, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the statutory substantive requirements for variances.
726.1.3.2 Criteria for Use Variances
Use variances shall be granted only upon finding all of the following:
a. A literal enforcement of the Zoning Regulations would result in exceptional or unusual hardship; Financial
hardship alone shall not be considered an exceptional difficulty or unnecessary hardship.
b. The hardship is not a self-inflicted hardship, resulting from a previous action by the applicant;
c. The applicant has demonstrated that no reasonable use of the property can be made for any use permitted in
the applicable zone;
d. The applicant has demonstrated that (s)he has pursued all other alternatives available to him/her under the
regulations;
e. The variance requested is the minimum variance necessary to allow a reasonable use of the land;
f. The applicant has demonstrated that the granting of the requested variance will have no adverse effect on
surrounding properties with regard to health, safety, welfare or property values;
g. The applicant’s request for a variance is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of Conservation an Development,
2004, as it may have been amended from time to time.
726.1.3.3 All uses prohibited in the Zoning Regulations shall not be permitted by variance.
726.1.3.4 All applications where a use variance has been granted shall be subject to Special Permit approv
al by the Commission.
144
726.4 Flood Damage Prevention Variances
To hear and decide variance in accordance with Section 430 (Flood Plain Zones and Special Flood Hazard Areas)
of the Hamden Zoning Regulations, adopted on December 7, 2009, effective January 1, 2010, as amended.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result. For variances which are granted allowing the construction of fully enclosed areas
below base flood elevation (BFE), the resulting structure must conform to minimum federal standards of the National
Flood Insurance Program cited in 44 CFR 60.3 (c) (5) for such areas below BFE. Any applicant to whom
a variance is granted, except a variance allowing a fully enclosed area below base flood elevation, shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood
elevation (BFE), and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting
from the lowest floor elevation.11
726.5 Procedures
726.5.1 Application
All applications and appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals(ZBA) shall be filed in a form prescribed by the
ZBA. and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the Board. The applicant shall submit a list of all
property owners required to be notified in Section 726.6.3, together with stamped envelopes appropriately addressed.
726.5.2 Public Hearing
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on all applications and appeals after due notice and
within the time prescribed by the Connecticut General Statutes.
726.5.3 Written Notification
In addition to the hearing notice required by the Connecticut General Statutes, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall send written notification of a request for a variance to owners of all lots located within 100 feet of any lot
or lots on which any variance is being requested. Said notice shall be sent at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing and shall include the location and general description of the type of variance being requested.
Whenever the Commission schedules a public hearing, the applicant shall place a sign or signs on the affected
property clearly visible to passers by giving notice of the proposed public hearing. Where the property is a
corner lot, a sign shall be placed on both frontages of the property. The sign is to be placed at or near the street
line or traveled way and shall be clearly visible to the general public. Such sign, to be provided by the Planning
Department, shall be installed by the applicant no less than 10 days before the hearing. Sign(s) are subject to a
security deposit in an amount set by the Legislative Council.
An affidavit shall be presented at the public hearing by the applicant or his/her agent certifying that this sign
was installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section.
726.5.4 Board Action and Referral
The Zoning Board of Appeals in compliance with the time limits set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes
shall take action on all requests, applications or appeals. The Board may attach reasonable conditions to the
granting of variances to ensure compliance with the intent of the Zoning Regulations.
11 Amended September 28, 2010. Effective October 15, 2010. Amended July 2, 2013. Effective July 8, 2013 145
728 Staff Procedures
728.1 Enforcement
728.1.1 Authority and Purpose
The Zoning Enforcement Officer or other authorized official subject to appropriate supervision shall enforce
these regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to cause any building, structure, place, premise,
or use to be inspected or examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any condition found to exist
therein or thereon in violation of any provisions of these regulations.
728.1.2 Enforcement and Penalties
Any official having jurisdiction may institute, in addition to other remedies, an action or proceeding to prevent
the unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use of a building, or to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupation of buildings, structures, or land, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct of business, or use in or about such premises.
The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any provision of such regulations has been
committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of any entire building or entire premises where such violation
shall have been committed or shall exist, or the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or
premises in which such violation has been committed or exists, shall be subject to the fines, injunctive procedures,
and any other penalties prescribed by Connecticut General Statutes Chapter 124, as amended, including,
when warranted, a separate violation for each day that a violation exists.
730 Administrative Permits
730.1 Zoning Permit
No building or structure shall be erected, added to, or structurally altered and no use, or reuse, shall be established
until approved by the Commission or the Town Planner, as required, and until a Zoning Permit has been
issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) or other authorized official. All applications for such permits
shall be in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations.
730.1.1 Application: Every application for a Zoning Permit shall be accompanied by such information
and exhibits as are required herein or may be reasonably required by the ZEO in order that the proposal of the
applicant may be adequately interpreted and judged as to its conformity with the provisions set forth in these
regulations.
730.1.2 Plot Plan: The application shall be accompanied by three copies of a plot plan based on a survey
prepared by a land surveyor and/or engineer registered in the State of Connecticut (whichever is applicable),
drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size of the building to be erected,
the location of the building upon the lot, the dimensions of all open spaces, the setback lines observed by buildings,
the location of driveways and curb cuts, and such other information as may be necessary. The Town Planner
may authorize the ZEO to waive any of the plot plan requirements in cases where it is not needed to determine
conformity with these regulations.
730.1.3 Expiration: A Zoning Permit application that is not approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
within 180 days of receipt due to lack of completeness or lack of compliance with one or more Zoning Regulations
is automatically deemed denied.12
12 Effective November 15, 2012 146
730.2 Certificate of Zoning Compliance
No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied in whole or in
part for any purpose until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have been issued by the ZEO, or other authorized
official, stating that the premises or building comply with all the provisions of these regulations. Such
a certificate is also required for any change, extension, or alteration in use that must be approved by the Town
Planner or Commission, as required, prior to issuance of such certificate by the ZEO.
No Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued until the applicant submits an Improvement Location Survey
(As-Built) that meets the following requirements:
a. One Mylar and three paper copies of drawing to A-2/T-2 standards13
b. One digital copy of drawings to A-2/T-2 standards
c. Mylars and drawings shall be signed by the Engineer or Architect who signed the approved drawings. The
Engineer or Architect shall certify that the project was built in accordance with the approved plans14
d. A narrative of use(s)
e. If circumstances warrent, the Town Planner may waive any of the above requirements in consultation with
the Chairperson of the Planning & Zoning Commission.15 When the site work cannot be completed because
of weather or other pertinent reason, a Conditional Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued for a
period not to exceed 180 days, provided satisfactory surety has been posted with the Town of Hamden in an
amount sufficient to complete the site work. Upon written request of the applicant and satisfactory completion
of the site work, the Commission shall order the release of the surety.
The ZEO may waive the requirement for a certified plot plan in cases where it is not needed to determine
conformity with these regulations. No such Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued by the ZEO
until all zoning requirements and conditions have been met.
732 Digital Mapping Data Submission Requirements
In addition to the hard copies signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor , all applications for a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall accompanied by a digital file or set of files, meeting the following requirements:
The digital mapping data shall be delivered in one of the following formats:
a. AutoCAD dwg or dxf
b. ESRI shape file or geodatabase
If delivered as a series of tiled files, the features that cross sheet boundaries shall meet precisely at the match
line.
Line work in files shall employ types for graphically differentiating features, such as dashed lines for unpaved
roads. Continuous lines that have been broken to appear like a dashed line are not acceptable.
Map features and text shall be located on separate layers. Where text labeling covers an underlying map feature
the text shall be moved to another location where possible. A portion of the line work may be removed, providing
it does not compromise the in tent of the feature. For example, a portion of a contour line may be erased,
but not the embedded elevation unless it can be relocated in close proximity to its original position.
13 Effective November 15, 2012
14 Effective November 15, 2012
15 Effective November 15, 2012 147
Features shall be thematically organized in the CADD or GIS data structure. For example there shall be separate
layers for buildings, roads, road centerlines, surface water, wetlands, etc. Having all these features in a
single CADD layer or GIS file shall not be accepted.
Metadata which includes the method used to capture and map features, shall be submitted, together with the
horizontal and vertical accuracy of the same.
148
This page intentionally
left blank
149
150
151
ARTICLE VIII DEFINITIONS and ABREVIATIONS
Section 800 Use of Terms
For the purposes of these Regulations, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall
have the meaning defined in this Section of these Regulations, unless otherwise clearly qualified by the
context. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
The language used in these Regulations is integral to their meaning and interpretation. Those terms not
defined in Article VIII or Section 622.4 shall be accorded their common accepted meanings (See Section
2.2). In the event of conflicts between these definitions and those of the Existing Local Codes, these
Regulations shall take precedence.
Where in conflict, numerical metrics shall take precedence over graphic metrics.
Section 810 Specific Terms
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, certain words contained herein shall be interpreted
as follows:
a. The word “shall” is always mandatory.
b. The word “should” is recommended.
c. The word “may” is optional.
d. The words “occupied” or “used” include the words “designed, arranged or intended to be occupied
or used”.
e. The words “zone”, “zoning district”, and “district” have the same meaning.
f. The word “person” also includes a partnership, association, trust, corporation or other legal entity.
g. The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel”.
Section 820 Undefined Terms
In the interpretation and enforcement of these Regulations, the Commission after consulting one or more
of the following shall interpret words not defined in this Article:
a. The State Building Code, as amended;
b. The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended;
c. The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers University, Center for Urban Policy
Research (Piscataway, NJ), as amended;
d. Black’s Law Dictionary;
e. A comprehensive general dictionary; and
f. Hamden Town Ordinances
Definitions
Specific Terms
Undefined Terms
152
Section 830 Defined Terms
A
A-2 Survey: Depicts the position of existing conditions or proposed improvements and is
prepared in accordance with the regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, Sections 20-300b-
1 through 20-300b-20 and meet “the minimum standards for surveys and maps in the State of
Connecticut”.
A-Frame Sign: A portable, self-supporting, double-faced sign on any upright, rigid supporting
frame in the form of a triangle or an inverted V.
Abut: To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line;
Accessory Structure: A structure detached from a principal building located on the same lot and
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. (See also Accessory
Building)
Accessory Dwelling Unit or Apartment: An apartment sharing ownership and utility connections
with a single family home or an apartment in a mixed-use principal building. As with all
dwelling units, an accessory dwelling unit or apartment must have its own cooking, eating and
sanitary facilities. Accessory dwelling units in single-family homes are clearly subordinate to
the primary dwellilng unit -- the home.1
Acre, (Zoning): 40,000 square feet.
Advertising Sign: A sign for the display of advertisements of a business, product, service or
activity not conducted, sold, or offered on the premises where such advertising sign is located.
Adult Day Care: An establishment having facilities and all necessary personnel for the care,
guidance and/or supervision of adults on a regular basis for a part of the 24 hours in one or
more days of the week. Animals shall not be boarded overnight.
Adult-Oriented Establishment: See Section 622.4 Definitions.
Agriculture: The business, science and art of cultivating and managing the soil, growing,
harvesting and selling sod, crops and livestock and the products of forestry, horticulture and
hydroponics; breeding or raising livestock, poultry, fish, game and fur-bearing animals, dairying,
beekeeping and similar activities.
Allee: A regularly spaced and aligned row of trees usually planted along a thoroughfare or path.
Alley: A service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and
not intended for general traffic circulation.
Animal Day Care: A commercial service for the care of dogs or other household pets for periods
of less than 24 consecutive hours.
1 Effective November 15, 2012
Definitions
A
153
Animal Grooming Establishment: An establishment in which dogs and cats are bathed and
groomed. The animals are not boarded overnight.
Animated, Flashing or Moving Sign: Any sign or source of light or part thereof that flashes, rotates,
moves, or in any way simulates motion, exclusive of any portion used for relating time and
temperature information.
Apartment: A residential unit sharing a building and a lot with other units and/or uses; it may be
for rent or for sale as a condominium.
Apartment, Accessory: (See Accessory Unit)
Applicant: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation or the official
agent thereof having recorded title to the land or building, or sufficient proprietary interest to
seek development or use of the premises.
Aquifer Protection Regulations: See separate Aquifer Protection Regulations
Arcade: A private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the façade is a colonnade supporting
habitable space that overlaps the sidewalk, while the façade at sidewalk level remains at the
frontage line.
Arcade Frontage: A building that overlaps the sidewalk such that the first floor facade is a colonnade.
The arcade frontage designation may be combined with a shopfront designation.
As Built: See Improvement Location Survey
Assisted Living Services: Nursing services and assistance with daily living activities provided to
clients living within a managed residential community having supportive services that encourage
clients primarily age 55 or older to maintain a maximum level of independence. Assisted Living
Services are provided by Assisted Living Services Agencies, licensed by the State of Connecticut.
Attic: The interior part of a building contained within its roof structure.
B
Back-building: A single-story structure connecting a principle building to an outbuilding.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The
height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent
points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.2
2 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
AB
154
Basement: Basement: A story of a building wholly or partially below grade and having a clear
floor-to-ceil ing height of not less than 6½ feet. For Floodplain management purposes, any area
of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.3
Bed & Breakfast: An owner-occupied type of lodging offering up to 5 bedrooms, and permitted
to serve breakfast to guests.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The
height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reashed by the waters of the base flood at pertinent
points in floodplains of coastal and riverine areas.4
Bedroom: Any room within a dwelling unit, other than a living room or kitchen, enclosed by
four walls and having a livable floor area of at least 60 square feet.
Belt Course: A continuous row or layer of stones, tile, brick, shingles, etc. in a wall.
Big Box Store: Retail establishments in freestanding industrial-style one-story buildings, with
floor areas of approximately 100,000 to 250,000 square feet.
Billboard Sign: A large, commercial sign, typically overhead, that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered, at a location other than the
premises on which the sign is located.
Block: The aggregate of private lots, passages, rear alleys and rear lanes, circumscribed by public
or private vehicular roadways.
Block Face: The aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a block.
Boarder: See Roomer.
Brownfield: An area previously used primarily as an industrial site.
Buffer or Buffer Area: A strip of land along a property line which shall be free of any building or
use other than landscape materials and/or fencing and which may be a part of the minimum yard
requirements.
Build-To Line: The line with which the exterior wall of a building is required to coincide. Front
porches and handicapped ramps shall be exempt from build-to-line requirements.
Buildable Area: That part of a lot on which a principal building or use may be located, as defined
by the minimum yard required.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of any person, animal or material of any kind or nature. Where two
or more buildings are connected by covered walkways or by structural features which are not
roofed or provide shelter, housing, or enclosures of persons, animals, or material they shall be
considered separate buildings.
3 Adopted July 2, 2013. Effective July 8, 2013
4 Adopted December 14, 2010. Effective December 17, 2010.
Definitions
B
155
Building, Accessory: Any building which is subordinate, incidental or supplementary to the use
of the principal building on the same lot or on a contiguous lot where both lots are under the
same ownership in all respects as to title and fractional interest. A detached accessory building
is one that is not attached to the principal building by any covered porch, breezeway or other
roofed structure. (See also Accessory Structure)
Building Area: The ground area enclosed by the exterior walls of a building together with the
ground area of all covered porches and other roofed portions.
Building Coverage: The ratio of the horizontal area measured from the outer most exterior walls
of all principal and accessory buildings, including swimming pools, sheds, deccks garages and
tennis courts, to the total lot area.
Building Height: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the
finished grade adjacent to the exterior walls of the building to:
a. The highest point of the roof, including any parapet, for a FLAT ROOF
b. The top of the lower slope for a MANSARD ROOF
c. The average height between the eaves and the ridge for a GABLE, HIP, GAMBREL or
OTHER ROOF TYPE
Definitions
B
156
When the finished ground level slopes away from an exterior wall, the vertical distance will be
calculated based on the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or,
when the lot line is more than ten feet from the building, between the building and a point ten
feet from the building.
Building Location:
Building, Principal: A building in which the primary use of the lot is conducted.
Building, Setback Line: The line within a lot defining the minimum required horizontal distance
between the principal building or use and an adjacent street or lot line.
Bulk Standards: Standards applying to individual lots that control such items as the placement,
intensity and character of development and include the amount of open space on the lot, the
height of structures, setbacks from property lines and public rights-of-way, impervious coverage
and density.
Bulky Waste: Oversized non-putrescible items including, but not limited to: tires, mattresses, bicycles,
large kitchen and laundry appliances and land clearing and demolition debris that require
separate handling by virtue of their bulk and weight and tendency to foul compacting and other
processing equipment.
Business Sign: A sign advertising a business, profession, use, product, service or activity conducted,
sold or offered on the premises where such sign is located.
C
Camper: A structure that can be mounted on a vehicle, and with sufficient equipment to render it
suitable for use as a temporary living accommodation for travel, recreational or vacation use.
Canopy Sign: Any sign attached to the underside of, or constructed upon a canopy.
Cell Construction Method: The spreading, compacting and covering daily of solid wastes in
areas that are enclosed by at least three walls or berms of soil.
1- Principal Building
2- Backbuilding
3- Outbuilding
1 1
2
3 3
Definitions
BC
157
Cemetery: Property used for the interring of the dead.
Change of Use: Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land.
Child Day Care Center: See Nursery School.
Civic: The term defining government and not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture,
education, recreation, transit, and municipal parking, or for use(s) approved by the legislative
body.
Civic Building: A building operated by government and/or not-for-profit organizations dedicated
to arts, culture, education, recreation, transit, and municipal parking, or for use approved by the
legislative body.
Civic Club: An association of persons which owns, leases or occupies an establishment operated
solely for a recreational, social, fraternal, religious, political or athletic purpose, whose activities
are confined to its members and guests, are not extended to the general public, excluding clubs
where the chief activity is a service customarily carried on primarily for business or gain.
Civic Space: Designation for sites dedicated for civic buildings and/or open space. Civic spaces
shall be generally designed as described in Article III, their type determined by the underlying
Transect Zone. Civic space may be privately or pubicly owned.
Clear Cutting: The large-scale, indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs, and undergrowth, typically.
Clinic, Outpatient: An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment
by one or more physicians, dentists or psychologists and where patients are not lodged overnight.
Coastal Area Management: The area of Hamden that lies within the Coastal Area boundaries
described in Section 22a-94 (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Connecticut General Statutes and as shown
on a map titled “Coastal Boundary” 1980, as it may be amended from time to time, prepared by
Coastal Area Management Program, Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection which
is on file in the Planning and Zoning Office and in the office of the Hamden Town Clerk.
College: An educational institution of higher learning certified or accredited by the State of Connecticut
to award degrees or certificates.
Colonnade: A series of columns supporting one side of a roof, creating an arcade.
Column: A vertical architectural element that is usually structural. It typically has a capital and
a base.
Commercial: The term collectively defining workplace, office, retail, and lodging functions.
Commercial Farm: See Farm, Commercial
Definitions
C
158
Commission: The Town of Hamden Planning and Zoning Commission, the Planning Section of
the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Section of the Planning and Zoning Commission,
or the Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), whichever has jurisdiction over the subject matter
in question.
Common Yard: A planted private frontage wherein the façade is set back from the frontage line.
It is visually continuous with adjacent yards.
Community Garden: Owned and/or managed by a municipality or a non-profit organization containing
plots leased for growing of fruits, vegetables and or flowers for personal use.
Community Residence – Mentally Ill Adults: A facility which is defined in Connecticut General
Statutes Sec. 19a-507a, as amended from time to time, which is generally defined as “a community
based residential facility housing the staff of such a facility and 8 or fewer mentally ill adults
which is licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide services needed for daily living and
other support services.”
Community Residence – Mentally Retarded Persons: A facility which is defined in Connecticut
General Statutes in Sec. 17a-220(e), as amended from time to time, which is generally defined
as “a community based residential facility housing up to 6 mentally retarded or autistic persons
which provides services needed for daily living and other support services.”
Configuration: The form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage, and height.
Construction Sign: A temporary sign erected where construction or remodeling is taking place,
during construction, with the names of the architect(s), engineer(s), landscape architect(s),
contractor(s) or similar artisan(s), and the owner(s), financial supporter(s), sponsor(s), and similar
individuals or firms having a role or interest in the structure or project.
Contiguous: See Abut.
Convalescent Home: See Nursing Home.
Cornice: Any horizontal structural or non-structural member, projecting outward from the exterior
wall at the roofline, including eaves and other roof overhangs.
Corridor: A lineal geographic system incorporating transportation and/or greenway trajectories. A
transportation corridor may be a lineal Transect Zone.
Cottage: An edgeyard building type. A single-family dwelling, on a regular lot, often shared with
an accessory building in the back yard.
County Soil and Water Conservation District: The New Haven County Soil and Water Conservation
District established under subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes.
Courtyard Building: A building that occupies the boundaries of its lot while surrounding one or
more private patios. (See Article III.)
Cover Material: Solid or other suitable material used to cover compacted solid waste in a solid
waste disposal area. This material shall be classified as GM, silt gravels, poorly graded gravelsand-
silt mixtures; GC, clayey gravels, poorly graded gravel-sand-clay mixtures; ML, inorganic
silts and very fine sands, rock flour, silty or clayey fine sands with slight plasticity in accordance
with the unified soil classification system.
Definitions
C
159
Cross Block Passages: A minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian access reserved between buildings.
Curb: The edge of the vehicular pavement that may be raised or flush to a swale. It usually incorporates
the drainage system.
Curb Cut: The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
D
Day Care Center: See Nursery School or Adult Day Care Center.
Density: The number of office, retail, lodging and dwelling units within a standard measure of
land area.
Design Speed: The velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of
signage or enforcement. There are four ranges of speed: Very Low: (below 20 MPH); Low: (20-
25 MPH); Moderate: (25-35MPH); High (above 35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired
design speed. See Table 3A.
Developed: A lot that has a building on the site. The maximum frontage build-out need not be
complete to count as a lot that is 100% developed.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to the construction of buildings or structures; the construction of additions, alterations
or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures;
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment;
the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; the installation, repair or removal of
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities;.or any use or extension of
the use of land.5
Direct Light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or
through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
Directional Sign: A sign limited to directional messages that direct the way to a place or activity
or to point towards a place of activity.
Dog Day Care: See Animal Day Care
Dooryard: A private frontage type with a shallow setback and front garden or patio, usually with
a low wall at the frontage line. See Article III. (Variant: lightwell, light court.)
Dormitory: (1) A building used for accommodating students with sleeping quarters with or without
communal kitchen facilities and administered by an educational institution, college or university,
trade school, training facility or similar entity. Dormitory includes fraternity and sorority
houses. (2) Any building occupied by 15 or more individuals meeting the definition of student
5 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
C
D
160
who were assigned to live in that building by an educational institution, college or university,
trade school, training facility or similar entity shall be considered a dormitory under these regulations.
Drainage: The controlled removal of surface water or ground water from land by drains, grading
or other means including runoff controls to minimize erosion, reduce suspended solids and maximize
groundwater recharge during and after construction or development.
Drive: A thoroughfare along the boundary between an urbanized and a natural condition, usually
along a waterfront, park, or promontory. One side has the urban character of a thoroughfare, with
sidewalk and building, while the other has the qualities of a road or parkway, with naturalistic
planting and rural details.
Drive-Through: Relating to or conducting exchanges with clients who drive up to a window and
remain in their automobiles.
Driveway: A vehicular lane within a lot, often leading to a garage or parking area. See Section
591
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation. The term
shall not be deemed to include a motel, hotel, camper, trailer, recreation vehicle, or tent.
Dwelling, Attached: A residence having any portion of one or more walls in common with another
dwelling.
Dwelling, Detached: A residence that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: Any building designed, constructed, and used as a residence for four or
more dwelling units; the term applies to town house and apartment complexes of four or more
dwelling units.
Dwelling, One-Family: A building containing only one residence.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A building containing only two residence.
Dwelling, Three-Family: A building containing only three residence.
Dwelling Unit: One or more connected rooms, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping
establishment containing independent cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the exclusive
use of an individual or single-family maintaining a household, and physically separated from
other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure.
Dwelling Unit, Efficiency: A dwelling unit having only one habitable room, not inclusive of
bathroom, water closet compartment, kitchen, laundry, pantry, foyer, communicating corridor, or
closets.
Definitions
D
161
E
Edgeyard Building: A building that occupies the center of its lot with setbacks on all sides.
Effective Parking: The amount of parking required for mixed-use after adjusted by the shared
parking factor.
Effective Turning Radius: The measurement of the inside turning radius taking parked cars into
account.
Egress: An exit.
Elevation: A vertical distance above or below a fixed referenced level; or a flat scale drawing of
the front, rear, or side of a building; an exterior wall of a building not along a frontage line.
Emission: A discharge of substances into the air.
Encroach: To break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element,
so that it extends into a setback, into public frontage, or above a height limit.
Encroachment: Any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory
limit, extending into a setback, into the public frontage, or above a height limit.
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice and gravity.
Excavation: Removal or recovery of soil, rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances
other than vegetation by any means from water or land on or beneath the surface. Activity or
use of the land that results in a change in the natural or man-made cover or topography, and that
may cause or contribute to erosion and sedimentation.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Expansion: The preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).6
Expression Line: A line prescribed at a certain level of a building for the major part of the width
of façade, created by variation in material or by limited projection such as molding or balcony.
F
Façade: The exterior wall of a building facing a public or private right-of-way.
Facade, Primary: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view and is adjacent to or
fronting a public street, park or plaza.
6 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
E
F
162
Façade Width: The width of the exterior wall(s) of a building exposed to public view that is adjacent
to or fronts a public street, park or plaza.
Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union, or adoption; or a group of
not more than four persons who need not be so related and who are living together in a dwelling
unit and maintaining a common household. Foster children or wards of the state are included as
members of a family. Exception: A group of unrelated individuals occupying a dwelling unit and
meeting the definition of students will be classified as a student-housing unit.
Family Day Care Home: An establishment licensed by the State of Connecticut, caring for not
more than 6 children including the provider’s own children not in school full time, where the
children are cared for not less than 3 nor more than 12 hours during a 24- hour period and where
care is given on a regularly recurring basis.
Farm: A lot or contiguous lots containing at least 2 acres where the land and buildings are devoted
to farming and other accessory uses.
Farm, Commercial: A farm containing at least 5 acres and producing vegetables, grains, grasses,
trees, herbs, flowering plants, shrubs or fruit for the market, or the raising of livestock, farm
animals, fish, birds or bees and the production of milk for the market. Exception: No commercial
farm may raise pigs or fur-bearing animals.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency that administers the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
Fence: A barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, separate or
screen areas of land.7
Fixture: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include some of the following
parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, ballast, a reflector or mirror,
and/or a refractor or lens.
Flood or Flooding: A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation by water of normally
dry land areas.
Flood, Base: The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-
year storm).
Flood Hazard Area: See Special Flood Hazard Area
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map in which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to Hamden.8
Flood Insurance Study: The official report from the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) that contains examinations, evaluations, and determinations of flood hazards and if appropriate,
corresponding water, and surface elevations.
Flood Plain: The relatively flat area or low lands adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse
or any body of standing water which has been or may be covered by flood water.
7 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
8 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
F
163
Floodplain Cross Section
Flood, Search, or Spot Light: Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor
to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction.
Floodway, Regulatory: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including the basement) upon which one
walks, i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in a wood frame
construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking of vehicles.
Floor, Lowest: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
Floor Area, Gross (GFA): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all enclosed floors of a building,
including cellars, basements mezzanines,penthouses, corridors, and lobbies from the exterior
face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a common wall separating two buildings, but
excluding any space with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than six feet six inches.9
Floor Area, Gross Leasable (Floor Area, Net): The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and
all floors below the first or ground floor, except when these are used or intended to be used for
human habitation or service to the public. The Gross Leasable Floor Area is assumed to be 85
percent of the Gross Floor Area unless calculations that show otherwise are presented.10
Floor Area, Livable: The floor area of a dwelling unit finished for occupancy and capable of
maintaining an interior room temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit with adequate ventilation
when outside temperature is zero degrees Fahrenheit and having ceiling heights in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the Building Code. Excluding: Porches, utility rooms, garages,
bay windows or public hallways.
Forecourt: A private frontage where a portion of the façade is close to the frontage line and the
central portion is set back. See Article III.
9 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
10 Amended, July 27, 2010. Effective, August 15, 2010.
Definitions
F
164
Freestanding Sign: Any non-movable sign erected on or affixed to the land or any exterior sign
not attached to a building.
Frontage: See Lot Line, Front.
Frontage Build-out: The ratio of the horizontal length, measured from the exterior surface of the
exterior walls of the ground floor, of all principal and accessory buildings closest to the front lot
line to the total lot width measured at the front lot line.
Frontage Line: A lot line bordering a public or private vehicular roadway other than an alley.
Facades facing frontage lines define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the
elevations facing other lot lines.
Full Cutoff Light: A luminaire or light fixture that by design of the housing, does not allow any
light dispersing or direct glare to shine above a 75 degree horizontal plane from the base of the
fixture.
Functionally Dependent Use or Facility: A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing
facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities.11
Fully Shielded Light: Any light fixture that allows control of light beams in any direction.
Fur-Bearing Animal: An animal that is customarily bred and raised for the use of its pelt for
clothing or decoration of clothing such as mink, fox or rabbit.
G
Gallery: A private frontage conventional for retail use where the façade is aligned close to the
frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk.
See Article III
Gallery Frontage: A building that provides a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered
or supported by columns. The gallery frontage designation may be combined with a shopfront
designation.
Garage: A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking
or storage of vehicles.
Gas Station: Any lot, building or part thereof, used for the sale of vehicular fuels and accessories
and which may include facilities for lubrication, washing and the servicing of vehicles as permitted
by a limited repairers license as defined in Chapter 246 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Geographic Information System (GIS): A computerized program in widespread municipal use
that organizes data on maps.
11 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
F
G
165
Definitions
GH
Glare: Light emitting from a luminaire with intensity great enough to reduce a viewer’s ability to
see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness.
Grade: The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
Grade, Finished: The final elevation of a particular point above or below a given reference datum.
Grading: Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials
or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Green: A civic space type for unstructured recreation, spatially defined by landscaping rather
than building frontages. See Article III.
Greenfield: An area that consists of open or wooded land or farmland that has not been previously
developed.
Greenway: An open space corridor in largely natural conditions that may include trails for bicycles
and pedestrians.
Greyfield: An area previously used primarily as a parking lot. Shopping centers and shopping
malls are typical greyfield sites.
Gross Leasable Space: See Floor Area, Gross (GFA)
Group Day Care Home: See Nursery School.
Group Home: See Community Residence – Mentally Ill Adults or Mentally Retarded Persons
Ground Floor: The first floor of a building other than a basement.
Guy Wire: A tensioned cable designed to add stability to a structure.
H
Hazardous Material: Any material included in EPA’s list of priority pollutants, or Section 3001
of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, or Connecticut’s Hazardous Waste Regulations,
whichever is in effect.
Hazardous Wastes: Waste that is dangerous or potentially harmful to human health or the environment.
Hazardous waste can be liquids, solids, gases or sludges. They can be discarded commercial
products like cleaning fluids or pesticides or the by-product of manufacturing processes.
Solid or liquid wastes in the following classifications may be considered hazardous: explosives,
pathogenic wastes, radioactive wastes, hospital operating room wastes, and chemical wastes
which either create an immediate safety hazard to persons disposing of the waste or which by
virtue of their chemistry and/or the method of disposal present a threat to the quality of ground
or surface waters or any other natural resources. (Also See CT General Statutues Sec. 22a-115.)
166
Height: See Building Height
Height of Luminaire: The vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the
luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
Highway: A rural and suburban thoroughfare of high vehicular speed and capacity. This type is
allocated to the more rural Transect Zones.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on the State
Register of historic places; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved
state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary
of the Interior in states without approved programs.12
Home Occupation: Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and carried on by the
residents of the premises and employing not more than one person on the premises who is not a
resident thereof.
Hospital: A facility licensed by the State Department of Health providing health services and
medical or surgical care to persons, primarily as in-patients.
Hospital, Veterinary: A facility for the diagnosis, treatment and/or care of animals by a veterinarian
licensed by the State of Connecticut.
Hotel: A hotel offers lodging accommodations to the general public and may include additional
facilities and servies such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services and
recreational facilities. Maximum room capacity shall be determined by coverage, required parking
and other ameneties. A commercial establishment offering in excess of 12 bedrooms for rent
by the day or week, and often having public restaurant(s) and meeting room(s).
Housing Unit for the Elderly: A dwelling unit specifically designed for the needs of an elderly
person or persons, and conforming to the eligibility requirements of State and/or Federal programs
providing for housing for the elderly.
I
Impervious Surface: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
Improvement Location Survey: A type of survey which depicts or notes the position, horizon-
12 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
1
Definitions
HI
167
Definitions
IJ
K
tally and, where required, vertically, between particular existing or proposed improvements with
respect to the applicable municipal or statutory requirements. The purpose of this type of survey
is to enable determination of compliance with said requirements.
In-Patient Facility: One licensed by the State Department of Health providing overnight accommodations,
health services and medical or surgical care to persons in need of such care.
Indirect Lighting: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces.
Industrial Processing Waste (Non-Hazardous): Commercial solid waste which is no threat to
water resources or any other natural resources but requires special consideration for haul and
disposal by virtue of the volume or properties of the material when dumped at a disposal site.
Infill: New development on land that had been previously developed, including most greyfield
and brownfield sites and cleared land within urbanized areas.
Ingress: An entrance.
Inn: A hotel with a maximum of 90 lodging rooms that provides traditional hospitality in a
building that is residential in character and architecturally compatible with the surrounding area.
Unlike motels, inns shall provide for a common public lobby or entry rather than direct entry to
individual lodging rooms. Inns shall have building detail and finishes typically found in residential
buildings within the Town.
Inspection: The periodic review by appropriate personnel, of actual site and/or building conditions,
including sediment and erosion control measures as they compare to the approved plan and
for impacts upon public health, safety and welfare.
J
Junkyard: Any land or building where the principal use, in whole or in part, is for the collecting,
storage, processing, purchase, sale or abandonment of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or similar
material; including an automobile junkyard as defined by State law.
K
Kennel: An establishment in which more than 5 dogs or other domesticated animals more than
a year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, all for a fee or other compensation.
13
13 Effective November 15, 2012
168
Layer: A range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted.
Lightwell: A private frontage type that is a below-grade entrance or recess designed to allow light
into basements. See Article III. (Syn: light court.)
Linear Building: A building specifically designed to mask a parking lot, parking structure or a big
box store from a frontage.
Loading Space: An off-street space available for the standing, loading and unloading of one
truck, excluding adequate maneuvering area.
Lodging: A premises available for the renting of bedrooms with housekeeping services and other
accessory uses such as the service of at least one meal.
Lot: A plot or parcel of land under the same ownership and permitted by law to be occupied by
one building or a group of buildings and accessory buildings including such yards and area as are
required by these Regulations.
Lot Area: The gross horizontal area contained within the property lines of a lot excluding slopes
in excess of 20% and all wetland areas.
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting on the intersection of two or more streets or on two parts of the same
street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot Coverage: The ratio of the footprint of the building plus all other impervious surfaces (including
paved driveways, sidewalks) to the total lot area; the total area of impervious surface on
a lot.
Lot Depth: The mean distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line measured in the general
direction of the sidelines of the lot.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner, rear or a through lot.
Lot Line: A property line of record bounding a lot.
Definitions
L
1st layer
2nd layer
3rd layer
20 feet
1st layer
2nd & 3rd
layer
Principal Frontage
Secondary Frontage
169
1-Frontage Line
2-Lot Line
3-Facades
4-Elevations
2
4
3
3
4 4
1
3
1
4 4
2 2
2
Lot Line, Front: The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. In the case of a rear lot,
the front lot line shall be considered the line most nearly parallel to and closest to a street providing
lot frontage. Syn. Frontage.
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line between the side lot lines and generally opposite to and most distant
from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: The lot line generally extending from the street or front lot line and connecting
the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, Rear: A lot having access to the street via an accessway that is part of the rear lot and where
the buildable area is located generally to the rear of other lots having frontage on the same street.
Lot, Through: A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two streets or two frontages on the
same street.
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the street line and
along the minimum required front setback line.
Luminaire: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
Definitions
L
170
M
Main Civic Space: The primary outdoor gathering place for a community. The main civic space
is often, but not always, associated with an important civic building.
Managed Residential Community: A facility, consisting of private residential units, that provides
a managed group living environment, including housing and other services, primarily for persons
age 55 or older.
Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. The term “Manufactured Home” does not include a “Recreational
Vehicle.”
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into
two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.14
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Existing: A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are
to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 15, 1079, the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.15
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Expansion of existing: The preparation of additional
sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading of the pouring of concrete pads).16
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, New: A manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed by June 15, 1979, the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.17
Manufacturing: Any process where the nature, size or shape of articles or raw materials is
changed or where articles are assembled. The term “manufacturing” includes fabricating, compounding,
assembling, packing, food processing and treatment activities.
Manufacturing, Accessory Use: Any manufacturing process that is subordinate, incidental or
supplementary to a non-manufactuing primary use.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into
two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.18
14 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
15 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective December 17, 2010.
16 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
17 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
18 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
M
171
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, Existing: A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are
to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 15, 1979, the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.19
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, New: A manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 15, 1979,
the effective date of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community.20
Manufacturing, Light: The assembly or finishing of articles predominately from previously
processed materials or finished products or parts. There is no outdoor storage of raw or semifinished
materials. All manufacturing takes place within the primary structure.21
Marijuana Production Facility: Means a secure, indoor facility where production of marijuana
occurs and that is opperated by a person to whom the Connecticut Department of Consumer
Protection has issued a producer license under the Act and Sections 21a-408-1 to 21a-408-70,
inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 22
Market Value: The market value of the structure shall be determined by an independent appraisal
by a professional appraiser prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of
damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.23
Maximum Building Coverage: The total area of impervious surface due to buildings, accessory
buildings, tennis courts, pools, etc., allowed on a lot. Excluded: Sidewalks, paths or driveways.
Mean Sea Level: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, mean sea level means
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps are referenced.
Mean Sea Level (MSL): For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, mean sea level
means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which the base
flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced.24
Medical Facility: A facility where diagnostic, therapeutic and rehabilitative programs are conducted,
and which does not include in-patient services.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility: means a place of business where marijuana may be
dispensed or sold to qualifying patients and primary caregivers and for which the Connecticut
Department of Consumer Protection has issued a dispensary facility permit to an applicant under
the Act and Sections 21a-408-1 to 21a-408-70, inclusive, of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies.25
19 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
20 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
21 Amended October 8, 2014. Effective October 29, 2013
22 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
23 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
24 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
25 Adopted July 25, 2017. Effective August 17, 2017
Definitions
M
172
Mixed-Use: multiple functions within the same building or on the same paracel.
Motel: A motel offers lodging accommodations to the general public and is typically one- or
two-stories with a majority of the rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity
of passing through a main lobby. Additional facilities and services such as restaurants, meeting
rooms, personal services and recreational facilities may be included. Maximum room capacity
shall be determined by coverage, required parking and other ameneties. See also Hotel/Motel
Motor Vehicle Service: Any lot, building or part thereof used for the servicing of vehicles as
permitted by a limited repairer’s license as defined in Chapter 246 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
Motor Vehicle Repair: Any lot, building or part thereof for the repair of vehicles as permitted by a
repairer’s license as defined in Chapter 246 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
N
Neighborhood Plan: A map, or set of maps, showing the desired intent of an area, typically
including Transect Zone, Civic Zone and Special District designations. Text may accompany a
Neighborhood Plan stating any desired special requirements.
Non-conforming Building or Structure: A building or structure legally existing on the effective
date of these Regulations or any applicable amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present zoning regulations for any prescribed
structure or building requirement (i.e. front, side or rear yards, building height, building area or
lot coverage, lot area per dwelling unit, dwelling units per building, number of parking and loading
spaces).
Non-conforming Lot: A lot legally existing on the effective date of these Regulations or any applicable
amendment thereto but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to
conform to the present zoning regulations for any prescribed lot requirement.
Non-conforming Use: A use, whether of a building, structure or lot, or combination thereof,
legally existing on the effective date of these Regulations or any applicable amendments thereto
but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present use
regulations of the zone where it is located.
Nursery School: An establishment licensed by the State of Connecticut having facilities and all
necessary personnel for the care, guidance and/or supervision of 7 or more children not of common
parentage on a regular basis for a part of 24 continuous hours in one or more days of the
week.
Nursing Home: An in-patient chronic and convalescent facility or a rest home with nursing supervision,
as defined and licensed by the State of Connecticut.
172
Definitions
MN
173
O
Occupant: The individual or individuals in possession of a premises.
Office: A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service
or government.
Office Building: A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession,
service or government, or like activity, that may include ancillary services for office workers
such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand.
Open Space: Space on a lot or parcel that is (a) unoccupied by principal or accessory buildings
above the finished grade; (b) unobstructed to the sky; (c) not devoted to service driveways, service
areas, off-street parking at finished grade or loading areas; (d) devoted to landscaping, active
or passive recreation and other like uses; (e) made available in the same proportion to all occupants
of the building or buildings on a lot or parcel. Additionally, all roofed areas landscaped or
developed for recreation; all landscaped areas above underground garages, exterior balconies and
decks shall qualify as open space.
Passive Open Space: Forested land, stream corridor buffers, scenic overlooks and the like.
Recreational Open Space: Ball fields, playgrounds and the like.
Farmland: Fields, pastures and forested areas used to grow harvestable crops or trees and not
containing buildings, equipment, paddocks or concentrated animal holding areas.
Outbuilding: An accessory building, usually located toward the rear of the same lot as a principal
building, and sometimes connected to the principal building by a back building.
Outdoor Wood-Burning Furnace (Also called Outdoor Wood Boiler): An accessory structure
or appliance designed to be located outside living space ordinarily used for human habitation
and designed to transfer or provide heat, via liquid or other means, through the burning of wood
or solid waste, for heating spaces other than where such structure or appliance is located, any
other structure or appliance on the premises, or for heating domestic, swimming pool, hot tub or
jacuzzi water. The term “Outdoor wood-burning furnace” does not include a fire pit, wood-fired
barbecue or chiminea.26
Owner: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation having recorded
title to a parcel of land and/or a building.
P
Park: An open space that is a natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. See Article
III.
Parking Area: Any land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles, including garages,
carports, and other enclosed, semi-closed and open spaces.
Parking Lot: An off-street ground level area used for the temporary parking of registered motor
vehicles. A parking lot is not the same as a driveway.
26 Amended, September 28, 2010. Effective, October 15, 2010.
Definitions
O
P
174
Definitions
P
Parking Lot Aisle: An area in a parking lot intended or designed to allow for self-parking of
motor vehicles and access to such parking spaces. Excluding: Lanes of ingress or egress from a
street.
Parking Space: The area required for parking one automobile excluding passageways and driveways
appurtenant to and giving access thereto.
Parking Structure: A building containing one or more stories of parking above grade.
Permanent Resident: The primary domicile occupied by the owner for at least ten months out of
a twelve month period.27
Personal Wireless Service, Facilities and Towers: Other Antennae and Satellite Dishes: See Section
9.30 definitions.
Pervious Surface: Any material that is designed to permit full or partial absorption of stormwater
into land, including green roofs.
Pilaster: A column partially embedded in a wall and usually non-structural.
Placement: The location of a building on its lot. See Article III
Places of Worship: A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which, by design
and construction, are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and
accessory uses associated therewith.
Planter: The element of the public frontage that accommodates street trees, whether continuous
or individual.
Plat: A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties
and streets; A map of a subdivision or site plan.
Plaza: A civic space designed for civic purposes and commercial activities in the more urban
transect zones, generally paved and spatially defined by building frontages.
Plot: A single parcel of land; A parcel of land that can be identified and refereneced to a recorded
plat or map.
Pollution: The presence of matter or energy whose nature, location or quantity produces undesired
environmental and/or health effects.
Premises: All land comprising a lot, together with all buildings and uses thereon.
Principal Entrance: The main point of access for pedestrians into a building.
27 Adopted December 8, 2015. Effective December 16, 2015
175
Principal Frontage: On corner lots with two frontages, the private frontage designated to bear the
address and principal entrance to the building, and the measure of minimum lot width. Prescriptions
for parking layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer
pertain to both frontages of a corner lot.
Private Frontage: The privately held layer between the frontage line and the principal building
façade. See Article III.
Projecting Sign: A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part
more than 14 inches beyond the building.
Public Frontage: The area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the frontage line. See
Article III.
R
Radius: See Turning Radius
Rational Method: A method of determining peak discharges from small drainage areas. This
method is typically used to size storm sewers, channels and other drainage structures which
handle runoff from drainage areas of less than 200 acres.
Rear Alley (RA): A vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas,
parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear alleys should be paved from
building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll curbs at
the edges.
Rear Lane (RL): A vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas,
parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear lanes may be paved lightly to
driveway standards. The streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges, has no raised curb,
and is drained by percolation.
Rear Yard Building: A building that occupies the full frontage line, leaving the rear of the lots as
the sole yard. See Artile III.
Recreation, Commercial: A commercial establishment which provides indoor recreation facilities
such as tennis clubs, skating rinks, bowling alleys, health clubs, racquet ball clubs, billiard or
pool parlors, dance halls and other similar uses.
Regional Center: A downtown area that includes significant office and retail uses as well as government
and other civic institutions of regional importance.
Regional Educational Service Center: A corporate body established under the laws of the State of
Connecticut for the purpose of providing regional educational programs, services, and activities.
Residential Zone: An area restricted by zoning regulations to primarily one, two and three-family
homes. R-Zones.
Definitions
P
R
176
Resource Recovery Facility: A facility that reclaims material or energy values from solid wastes.
Retaining Wall: A structure that is constructed between lands of different elevations to stabilize
the surfaces, prevent erosion, and/or protect structures.
Right-of-way (ROW): A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or
condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission
lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or their similar uses. Generally, the
right of one to pass over the property of another.
Roomer or Boarder: An individual other than a member of the family occupying a dwelling unit
or a part thereof who, for a consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and may be furnished
meals or other services as part of the consideration. Exception: The student housing provisions
of these regulations will govern unrelated individuals meeting the definition of student.
Rooming House or Boarding House: Any dwelling in which at least 3 persons but less than 15
persons are housed or boarded for consideration or otherwise without separate kitchen facilities,
with or without meals. If 15 or more persons are housed or boarded, such building shall be
considered a hotel or motel.28 Exception: The student housing provisions of these regulations will
govern dewllings housing unrelated individuals meeting the definition of student.29
S
School: Any building or group of buildings the use of which meets State of Connecticut requirements
for primary or secondary education.
28 Effective November 15, 2012
29 Adopted December 8, 2015. Effective December 16, 2015
Definitions
RS
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Private Building
Frontage
Public
Front-
Vehicular
Lanes
Public
Front-
Private
Frontage
Building
Private Lot Private Lot
177
School, Business: Private establishments engaged in providing educational services for training
in business or the arts such as: data processing, computer programming, typing, stenography,
cosmetology, modeling, dancing, music, fashion design, drafting, yoga, drivers education or
painting.
Service Establishment, Personal and Business: Establishments providing services for home or
business, as well as services of a personal nature such as accounting, house cleaning, nail and
hair salons.
Setback: The minimum required horizontal distance from any lot line to any building, structure
or use, measured in a straight line from and perpendicular to such lot line.
Shopping Center: A group of commercial establishments that may be interconnected by walls,
roofs, and enclosed malls or walkways, planned and developed to make a common facility.
Shopfront: A private frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the
building entrance at sidewalk grade. See Figure 3.3 “PRIVATE FRONTAGES,” in Article III.30
Shopping Center: A group of commercial establishments under the same roof or which are
interconnected by walls, roofs, and enclosed malls or walkways, planned and developed in such
a manner so as to make a common facility. This definition does not apply to mixed-use or nonconnected
buildings.
Sign: Any object, device, display or structure that is used for attracting attention to any use,
product, service, or activity. Exception: A flag or insignia of any government or governmental
agency, or of any fraternal, civic, charitable, or religious organization. Window displays lasting
no more than 30 days are treated as temporary signage.31
30 Effective November 15, 2012
31 Effective November 15, 2012
Definitions
S
1-Front Setback
2-Side Setback
3-Rear Setback 1
2
178
Sign Area: The number of square feet contained within a single continuous perimeter of the simplest
regular geometric shape enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface including
any framing, trim or molding. Exception: Structural members and supports required by Building
Codes and not bearing advertising matter and not forming an integral part of the display.
Sill: A horizontal member forming the bottom of a window or door.
Solid Waste: Unwanted or discarded material including municipal solid wastes, bulky wastes and
non-hazardous industrial processing wastes. Exception: Solid waste does not include septage and
sludges, agricultural and mining wastes, or hazardous wastes.
Solid Waste Disposal Area: The location for disposal of solid waste that is approved by the State
Department of Environmental Protection and the Hamden Planning and Zoning Commission.
Solid Waste Facility: Any solid waste disposal area, volume reduction plant, resource recovery
facility or transfer station if such facility handles more than five tons of solid waste per year.
Solid Waste, Municipal: Non-bulky, non-hazardous garbage that is normally collected by conventional
refuse collection vehicles and hauled to a point for processing or disposal. This is the
classification of refuse acceptable for a conventional packer truck, transfer station compactor,
shredder, or refuse combustion unit.
Spas, Meditation and Wellness Centers: Centers designed to promote health and well-being
through physical, psychological and/or emotional activities and education. Programs may include
day programs and short term residence programs.32
Special Flood Hazard Area: The land in the flood hazard areas within Hamden subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
dated July 8, 2013, as revised. 33
Special Flood Hazard Areas, New Construction in: Any construction for those structures in the
area of flood hazard for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective
date of the FIRM, June 15, 1979, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of
construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
32 Adopted October 27, 2015. Effective November 10, 2015
33 Amended July 2, 2013. Effective July 8, 2013
Definitions
S
179
Story: That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the roof above
it and including those basements used for the principal use.
Street: A vehicular way opened to or intended for public use, but excluding an alley for service
access only. “Street” shall be deemed to include the entire width of the right-of-way.
Street, Abandoned: One that the Town had accepted at one time and had maintained; and one that
the Town has since relinquished any ownership rights to including the duty to maintain, through
a formal abandonment process or through a long period of non-use.
Street, Accepted: One that has been formally accepted by resolution by the Legislative Council
or one that has been implicitly accepted by the Town due to public maintenance or use over an
extended period.
Street, Unaccepted/Unacknowledged Road: One that has not been accepted by the Legislative
Council or by implication; one that the Town has not acknowledged the existence of; and one
that the Town has no duty to maintain.
Street Centerline: Describes the midpoint along the length of the street where the edges have
been previously delineated.
Street Line: The line distinguishing the street from an adjacent lot.
Streetscreen: A freestanding wall built along the frontage line, or coplaner with the facade. It
may mask a parking lot from the street, provide privacy to a sideyard, and/or strengthen the spacial
definition of the public realm.
Structure: Anything constructed, formed or erected. A walled and roofed building that is principally
above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, portable or mobile
storage containers, canvas or plastic, Quonset hut type, “roll-off” construction dumpsters or other
man-made facility or infrastructure, for occupancy, ornamentation or visual communication,
whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. Except as otherwise indicated
structure shall be deemed to include buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, fences and
walls more than 6 feet high other than retaining walls.34
Student: An individual enrolled in a program of study at an educational institution, college or
university, trade school, training facility or similar entity.
Student Housing: A dwelling unit occupied pimarily by unrelated individuals enrolled in a program
of study at an educational institution, college or university, trade school, training facility or
similar entity. (Housing which meets the definition of dormitory shall be considered a dormitory
and not student housing.)
34 Effective November 15, 2012
Definitions
S
180
Student Housing Unit: Unrelated individuals occupying a dwelling unit and meeting the definition
of students.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin to a structure where the cost of restoring the structure
to its before-damage condition would exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, re-construction, alteration, or improvement
to a structure taking place over a 1-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement.
This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of
the actual repair work performed. For purposes of this definition, “Substantial Improvement”
is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either: any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a “historic structure” listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”.
The cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement
of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate. The estimate shall
include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements,
utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures,
including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition
and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time;
contractor’s overhead; contractor’s profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of
plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems,
water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached
structures such as garages, sheds and gazebos.35
Swimming Pool: An enclosure for water, permanently constructed or portable, in-ground or
aboveground used for wading, swimming or bathing and having a depth of 18 inches or more
and having a surface area of at least 100 square feet.
T
T-2 Survey: Surveys shall be prepared in accordance with the regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, Sections 20-300b-1 through 20-300b-20 and “the minimum standards for surveys and
maps in the State of Connecticut”, adopted by the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors,
Inc. on September 26, 1996. Where required, the horizontal and vertical accuracies for the survey
shall be of an accuracy class A-2 and /or T-2, respectively. (See also, A-2 Survey)
Temporary Sign: Any object, device, display or structure, including a banner, pennant, poster, or
advertising that is used for attracting attention to any use, product, service or activity, displayed
for a maximum of thirty days.36
Terminated Vista Locations: A building with architectural articulation of a type and character
that responds visually to the location, as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
35 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010. Amended July 2, 2013. Effective July 8, 2013
36 Effective November 15, 2012
Definitions
S
T
181
Thoroughfare: A major road or highway.
Trailer: A structure on wheels, capable of being towed or hauled, used for short-term human occupancy,
carrying or storing materials, goods or objects, or as a temporary office.
Transect Zone: One of several areas on a zoning map regulated by the SmartCode. Transect zones
are administratively similar to the land use zones in conventional codes, except that in addition to the
usual building use, density, height and setback requirements, other elements are integrated, including
those of the private lot, building and public frontage.
Transfer Station: A central collection point for the solid waste generated within a municipality or
group of municipalities from where it is transferred to a vehicle for removal to another solid waste
facility.
Transit Oriented Development (TOD): An overlay zone that allows for increased density where there
is a concetration of development at nodes along public transit corridors, either rail or bus routes.
Truck Garden: A farm containing between two and five acres and producing vegetables or fruit for the
market. Exclusion: The raising of animals.
Turning Radius:
U
Up-lighting: Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane.
Use: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or intended or for which
land or a building is occupied or maintained.
Use, Accessory: A use of land, building, structure or portion thereof that is located on the same lot and
is incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building or use of land.
1-Radius at the Curb
2-Effective Turning Radius (± 8 ft)
Parking Lane
Moving Lane
2
1
Definitions
T
U
V
182
Use, Commercial: Activity carried out for monetary gain.
Use, Principal: The primary or predominant use of any lot.
V
37Variance From Zoning Regulations Governing Flood Plain Zones and Flood Hazard Areas: A
grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows
construction in a manner otherwise prohibited and where specific enforcement would result
in unnecessary hardship.38
Vector: An insect or rodent or other animal (not human) that can transmit infectious diseases
from one person or animal to another person or animal.
Vehicle, Commercial: Any motor vehicle licensed by the State as a commercial vehicle.
Vehicle, Motor: Any motor vehicle as defined by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut,
as amended.
Vehicle, Recreational: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, that
can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for
recreational camping and travel use including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
Volume Reduction Plant: A plant that is designed primarily for the purpose of reducing the
volume of solid be be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation
for recreational, camping and waste which must be disposed of, including but not
limited to, incinerators, pulverizers, compactors, shredding and bailing plants, transfer stations,
composting plants, and other plants that accept and process refuse for recycling.
Vehicle, Recreational: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, that
can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for
recreational camping and travel use including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
Violation of Regulations Governing Flood Plain Zones and Flood Hazard Areas: Failure of a
structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management
regulation. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation
documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations
is resumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.39
Volume Reduction Plant: A plant that is designed primarily for the purpose of reducing the
volume of solid be be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation
for recreational, camping and waste which must be disposed of, including but not
limited to, incinerators, pulverizers, compactors, shredding and bailing plants, transfer stations,
composting plants, and other plants that accept and process refuse for recycling.
37 Effective November 15, 2012
38 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
39 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
V
183
Vehicle, Recreational: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, that can be towed,
hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreational camping and
travel use including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor
homes.
Volume Reduction Plant: A plant that is designed primarily for the purpose of reducing the volume of solid be
be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping
and waste which must be disposed of, including but not limited to, incinerators, pulverizers, compactors,
shredding and bailing plants, transfer stations, composting plants, and other plants that accept and process
refuse for recycling.
W
Wall Sign: A sign fastened to the wall or other surface of a building, with the face of the sign approximately
parallel to such wall or surface.
Water Surface Elevation: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or
other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal
and riverine areas.40
Working Face: The portion of a solid waste disposal area where waste is deposited, spread and compacted
prior to the placement of cover material.
Y
Yard: A space that is not occupied by a building or structure, is open to the sky, and on the same lot as the
principal building.
Yard, Front: An unoccupied space extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front lot
line (the street line) and the front wall of the nearest building measured perpendicular to the building at the
closest point to the front lot line.
Yard, Rear: A space extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the rear
wall of the principal building measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the rear lot line.
Yard, Side: A space between the principal building and the side lot line extending from the front yard to the
rear yard, measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building.
40 Amended December 14, 2010. Effective, December 17, 2010
Definitions
W
Y
184
Section 840 Zoning Regulations Abbreviations
ac Acre
ADA Americans with Disabilities Act
APZ Aquifer Protection Zone
CAM Costal Area Management
CGS Connecticut General Statutes
CHFA Connecticut Housing Finance Authority
CMU Concrete Masonry Units
DBH Diameter at Breast Height
D.E.P Department of Environmental Protection
DOT Department of Transportation
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FCC Federal Communication Commission
FEMa Federal Emergency Management Agency
ft Feet
GFA Gross Floor Area
GIS Geographic Information System
GVWR Gross Vehicle Weight Rating
HVAC Heating Ventilating and Air Condition
HW Highway
M-Zone Manufacturing Zone
Max maximum
Min minimum
MPH Miles per Hour
n/a Not Applicable
NGVD National Geodetic Vertical Datum
OSD Open Space Development
PUD Planned Unit Development
ROW Right-of-way
R-Zones Residential Zone
Sq. ft. Square Feet
T-Zones Transect Zones
TOD Transit-Oriented Development
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
ZBA Zoning Board of Appeals
ZEO Zoning Enforcement Officer
ARTICLE IX APPENDIX
9.1 Planned Unit Developments
No new Planned Unit Development shall be approved; however, those Planned Unit Developments approved prior to the
effective date of these regulations (Section 920) shall be governed by the following regulations.
A600 Planned Unit Developments
A610 Purpose
The purpose of the planned unit development regulations is to encourage flexibility in the design and development of land
in order to promote its most appropriate use; to facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets and utilities;
and to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas.
A611 Objectives
To preserve and create useable open space for the residents of Hamden as well as create developments that are aesthetically
attractive and economically feasible.
A612 Qualifying Standards
No tract of land will be considered for a planned unit development unless it contains the minimum acreage required for
each separate zone.
No tract of land will be considered for a planned unit development unless it is within a residential zone.
No tract of land will be considered for a planned unit development unless it is so designed in its space allocation, orientation
texture, materials, landscaping and other features as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character,
complementing the design and values of the surrounding neighborhood, and showing such unusual merit as to reflect
credit upon the developer and upon the Town of Hamden.
In the event that a zone change is requested to permit a Planned Unit Development, the Zoning Section of the Town Plan
& Zoning Commission shall amend the zoning map to show Planned Unit Development if said zone change request is
granted.
Granting of this Planned Unit Development zone change request does not constitute approval of the Planned Unit Development
plans which are still subject to the other requirements of Article VI of these regulations.
A613 Permitted Uses
A613.1 Any use permitted in any residential zone. Commercial uses are permitted in the R4, R5 and R6 zones only.
A613.2 Commercial uses permitted within the planned unit development are those which re authorized in the B- Zone
and intended for the use and convenience of the occupants of the development. All such uses shall:
a. Be located within the boundaries of the development,
b. Conform to all the regulations of the B-l Zone.
c. Have a total floor area that does not exceed five per cent (5%) of the gross flood area of all dwellings within the development.
A614 Procedure
Pre-application Conference: Before submitting an application for a planned unit development, an applicant at his option
may confer with the Planning Department to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments
or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
A615 Outline Development Plans
A615.1 An applicant shall make application for the approval of a planned unit development to the Commission. The
applicant shall accompany his application with an outline development plan as specified in this section.1
A615.2 There shall be a filing fee of $100.00 payable to the Treasurer of the Town of Hamden.
A615.3 The Commission shall make the proper arrangements for a public hearing.
A615.4 An outline development plan must include both maps and written statement, and must show enough of the area
surrounding the proposed planned unit development to demonstrate the relationship of the planned unit development
to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed.
A615.5 The maps which are part of the outline development plan may be in general schematic form, and must contain the
following information:
a. The existing topographic character of the land.
b. Existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of buildings and other structures.
c. The character and approximate density of dwellings.
d. The approximate location of all thoroughfares.
e. Public uses, including parks, playgrounds and other open space.
Appendix 185
A615.6 The written statement to accompany the outline development plan must contain the following information:
a. An explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the manner in which it has been planned to take
advantage of the planned unit development regulations.
b. A statement of proposed financing.
c. A statement of the present ownership of all the land included within the planned unit development.
d. A general indication of the expected schedule of development.
e. The applicant shall file three copies of his outline development plan and written statement.
A616 Approval of Outline Development Plan
A616.1 Legal Procedure
a. A public hearing shall be held within 60 days from the time of application to the Town Planning and Zoning Commission
Office.
b. All owners of property adjacent to the planned unit development shall be notified of said hearing by mail.
c. The hearing shall be legally advertised according to the procedure specified by State Law for a change in zoning regulations.
d. The results of the decision of the Town Planning and Zoning Commission shall be legally advertised within 7 days of
said decision.
e. If the outline development plan is approved, the Zoning Section of the Town Plan & Zoning Commission shall amend
the zoning map to show planned unit development. If the outline development plan is approved with modifications,
the Zoning Section of the Town Plan & Zoning Commission shall not amend the Zoning Map until the applicant has
filed with the Commission written consent to the plan as modified. No building permits may be issued on land within
the planned unit development until final plans for the development have been approved by the Commission under the
procedures provided in following sections.
f. Failure to act by the Commission within 60 days after the public hearing for Outline Development Plan approval shall
mean approval by the Commission.
A617 Preliminary Development Plan
A617.1 An applicant seeking approval of a planned unit development shall submit a preliminary development plan, if
an outline development plan has been approved, within six months following its approval.
A617.2 If an outline development plan has been submitted and approved, the Commission may authorize the submission
of preliminary development plans in stages. If a preliminary plan (development) covering at least 20%
of the area of the outline development plan has not been submitted within six months following the approval
of the outline development plan, the Commission shall withdraw its approval of the planned unit development.
In its discretion and for good cause, the Commission may extend for three months the period of filing
of the preliminary development plan.
A617.3 The preliminary development plan must include all of the following information:
a. A map showing street systems, plot lines and plot designs.
b. Areas proposed to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks, streets, playgrounds, public buildings and similar
public and semi-public uses.
c. A plot plan for each building site and open area, showing the approximate location of all buildings, structures, and
improvements and indicating the open spaces around buildings and structures.
d. Elevation and perspective drawings of all proposed structures and improvements except for single-family residences
and their accessory buildings. The drawings need not be the result of final architectural decisions and need not be in
detail.
e. A development schedule indicating (1) the approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin;
(2) the stages in which the project will be built and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be
expected to begin; (3) the anticipated rate of development; (4) the approximate dates when the development of each of
the stages in the development will be completed; and (5) the area and location of open space that will be provided at
each stage.
f. Agreements, provisions or covenants that govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned development
and any of its open areas.
g. The following plans and diagrams, insofar as the Plan Commission finds that the planned unit development creates
special problems of traffic, parking, landscaping or economic feasibility:
i. An off-street parking and loading plan.
ii. A circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods, and pedestrians within the
planned development and to and from existing thoroughfares. Any special engineering features and traffic
regulation devices needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of this circulation pattern must be known.
iii. A landscaping and tree planting plan,
iv. An economic feasibility report or market analysis.
Appendix 186
A617.4 Map Standards for Preliminary Development Plans:
a. Drawn to a scale of 1" = 50'.
b. Survey Information: distances with angles and bearings by a registered surveyor or professional engineer
c. Contours at 5 foot intervals or less,
d. Proposed contour at 5 foot intervals or less,
e. Sanitary sewer and drainage or sewage treatment systems designed by a registered professional engineer,
f. Adjacent streets, names and widths,
g. North point, scale and date.
h. Adjacent property owners and use of adjacent property,
i. Limit of easements, right of way and areas for open spaces dedication,
j. Lot lines, areas and numbers.
k. Street locations, names, widths, radii, curve lengths, grades.
l. Sidewalks,
m. Name of owner.
n. Location of watercourses, trees, wet area and rock outcroppings.
o. Title of Development,
p. Total area of development,
q. Total area of land left in open space,
r. Total number of dwelling units with breakdown of different types, where applicable.
s. Total area to be used for roads
t. In the cases of multi-family or commercial buildings, the Site Plan requirements of Section 250 of these regulations
must be met.
A618 Approval of Preliminary Development Plans
A618.1 If any outline plan has been submitted and approved, the applicant shall file the preliminary development
plan with the Commission.
A618.2 The Commission shall approve the preliminary development plan if it is in compliance with the approved
outline development plan, and if it complies with all other standards for the review of the planned unit developments
which were not considered when the outline development plan was approved.
A618.3 Failure to act by the Commission within 60 days after the submission of a preliminary development plan
shall mean approval by the Commission.
A619 Approval of Final Development Plan
A619.1 Within six months following the approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall file with the Commission
a final development plan containing in final form the information required in the preliminary plan. In its
discretion and for good cause, the Commission may extend for three months the period for the filing of the
final development plan.
A619.2 The Commission shall give notice and provide an opportunity to be heard on the final development plan to:
a. Any person who appeared of record at the hearing on the outline development plan, if any.
b. Any person who has indicated to the Commission in writing his wishes to be notified.
A619.3 The Commission shall act within 60 days after filing of the final development plan.
A619.4 A planned unit development given final approval by the Commission must be filed in the office of the Town
Clerk within 90 days after the final approval date or it will become invalid.
A620 Failure to Begin a Planned Unit Development
A620.1 If no construction has begun in the planned unit development within one year from the approval of the final
development plan, the plan shall lapse and be no longer effective. In its discretion and for good causes, the
Commission may extend for six months the period for the beginning of construction. If a final development
plan lapses under the provisions of this section, the Planning Department shall remove the planned development
from the zoning map and shall file a notice of revocation with the recorded final development plan. The
zoning regulations applicable before the final development was approved shall then be in effect.
A621 Building Permits
A621.1 The Building Inspector shall issue building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the
approved final development plan only if they are in conformance with the approved final development plan
and with all other applicable ordinances and regulations. He shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any
completed building or structure located in an area covered by the approved final development plan if the
completed building or structure conforms to the requirements of the approved final development plan and all
other applicable ordinances and regulations.
Appendix 187
A622 Amendment to Final Development Plan
A622.12 No changes may be made in the approved final plan during the construction of the planned unit development
except upon application to the Commission under the procedures provided below:
a. Minor changes in the location, siting and height of buildings and structures may be authorized by the Town Planner,
if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No change
authorized by this section may increase the cube of any building or structure by more than 10%.
b. All other changes in use, any rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, any changes in the provisions of open
spaces, and all other changes in the approved final plan must be made by the Commission. No amendments may be
made in the approved final plan unless then are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred
since the final plan was approved or by changes in the development policy of the Town of Hamden.
i. Increase the total number of dwelling units within the planned unit development;
ii. Increase the total area of lot coverage within the planned unit development; and
iii. Decrease the total area of open space within the planned unit development.
A622.2 Any changes that are approved for the final plan must be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the
final plan.
A623 Phasing of Construction and Guarantee of Performance
A623.1 The construction and provision of all of the open spaces and public recreational facilities that are shown on
the final development plan must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units. At least once
every month following the start of construction the zoning enforcement officer shall review all of the building
permits issued for the planned unit development and examine the construction that has taken place on the
site. If he shall find that the rate of construction of dwelling units is greater then the rate at which open spaces
and public and recreational facilities have been constructed and provided, he shall forward this information to
the Commission which may revoke the planned unit development zone amendment.
A624 Progress Controls on Density and Open Space
A624.1 The Commission may require adequate assurance in a form and manner which it approves, that the open
space shown in the final development plan will be provided. The following methods of assurance are intended
as illustrative and they may be used singly or in combination:
a. The Commission may accept a bond, corporate surety, or other acceptable financial guarantee, in a form which complies
with the provisions of the Town of Hamden and in an amount sufficient to purchase the open space shown in the
final development plan or alternative acreage, which is equivalent in size and character.
b. The land shown as open space may be put in escrow, the escrow agreement to provide that the land is to be held in
escrow until the Commission has certified to the escrow agent that the planned unit development has been completed,
at which time the open space is to be conveyed to the Town of Hamden. The escrow agreement may provide for the
release of the open space by the escrow agent in stages, the Commission to certify the completion of each stage of the
planned unit development to the escrow agent. The escrow agreement must provide that a portion of the open space
is to be conveyed to the Town of Hamden if the planned unit development is not completed. In this event, the open
space which is conveyed is to bear the same proportion to the open space provided on the final development plan
as the dwelling units that have been built bear to the total number of dwelling units which are allowable by the final
development plan.
A625 Phasing of Non-Residential Construction
A625.1 If a planned unit development contains non-residential uses, these units may be constructed after 50% of the
residential units are completed, and only if the Commission finds - and records its findings on the final development
plan that the non-residential uses would be consistent with the comprehensive plan even though the
residential areas of the planned unit development were not built or not completed.
A626 Changes after Completion of Construction
A626.1 The Commission shall issue a certificate certifying the completion of the planned unit development, and the
Clerk of the Commission shall note the issuance of the certificate on the recorded final development plan.
A626.1 After the certificate of completion has been issued, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration
of any buildings or structures within the planned unit development will be governed by the approved
final development plan rather than by any other provisions of this zoning regulation.
A626.1 After the certificate of completion has been issued, no changes may be made in the approved final plan except
upon application to the Commission under the procedure provided below:
a. Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures that may be authorized by this
section may not increase the cube of any building or structure by more than 10%.
Appendix 188
b. Any uses not authorized by the approved final plan, but allowable in the planned unit development as a permitted use
under the provisions of this Zoning Regulation or permitted as a Special Permit use in the zone in which the planned
unit development is located, may be added to the final development plan under the procedures provided by the Zoning
Regulations for the approval of Special Permit uses.
c. A building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final
development plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved.
d. Changes in the use of open space may be authorized by an amendment to the final development plan.
e. All changes in the final development plan must be made by the Commission under the procedures authorized by these
regulations for the amendment of the Zoning Map. No changes may be made in the final development plan unless
they are required for the continued successful functioning of the planned unit development, or unless they are required
by change in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved or by changes in the development policy
of the Town of Hamden.
A626.4 No changes in the final development plan which are approved under this section are to be considered as a
waiver of any covenants limiting the use of land, buildings, structures, and improvements within the area of
the planned unit development, and all rights to enforce these covenants against any changes permitted by this
section are expressly reserved by the Town of Hamden.
A627 Zoning Requirements
A627.1 Land Area Needed to Qualify for a Planned Unit Development
R-1 Zone 10 acres minimum
R-2 Zone 10 acres minimum
R-3 Zone 10 acres minimum
R-4 Zone 5 acres minimum
R-5 Zone 1 acre minimum
R-6 Zone 1 acre minimum
A627.2 Lot Size
For planned unit developments the lot area required for each dwelling unit may be reduced to the area indicated in the following
table:
R-1 53,000 sq. ft.
R-2 27,000 sq. ft.
R-3 27,000 sq. ft. without sewer or water
R-3 25,000 sq. ft. with sewers or water
R-3 15,000 sq. ft. with sewers and water
For the R-4, R-5 and R-6 Zones, there shall be no reduction in lot size.
A627.3 Dwelling Unit Types
The following dwelling types are permitted in a planned unit development for each separate residential zone.
R-1 Single-family only
R-2 Single-family only
R-3 Single-family only, with no water or sewers
R-3 Single-family only, with water or sewers
R-3 Single-family, two-family garden-type multi-family (building not to exceed two stories), with water and sewers.
R-4 For planned unit developments of from five to fifteen acres; two and three family structures. All types of multifamily
structures, which shall be served with sanitary sewers.
For planned unit developments of fifteen acres or more.
All residential types except that multi-family structures shall be served with sanitary sewers.
R-5 Multi-family structures only.
R-6 Multi-family structures only.
A627.4 Lot Coverage
The following is the maximum percentage of lot coverage allowed in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones.
R-1 15% coverage
R-2 20% coverage
R-3 20% coverage
For the R-4 Zone, where a planned unit development consists of 5 to 15 acres, the lot coverage shall conform to the following
table:
Appendix 189
For 1 and 2 story structures 30%
For 3 story structures 25%
For 4 story structures 20%
For 5 story structures 15%
For 6 story structures 10%
In the R-4 Zone where a planned unit development consists of more than 15 acres the lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
In the R-5 Zone, the lot coverage shall conform to the following table:
For 1 and 2 story structures 30%
For 3 story structures 25%
For 4 story structures 20%
For 5 story structures 15%
For 6 story structures 10%
In the R-6 Zone, the lot coverage should conform to the following table.3
For 1 and 2 story structures 30%
For 3 and 4 story structures 25%
For 5 story structures 20%
For 6 story structures 15%
For structures of 7 or more stories 10%
A627.5 Density (land area per dwelling unit)
The minimum amount of land required for each dwelling unit in a planned unit development, for each zone shall be as
follows:
R-1 53,000 sq. ft.
R-2 27,000 sq. ft.
R-3 27,000 sq. ft. without sewers or water
R-3 25,000 sq. ft. with sewers or water
R-3 1 5,000 sq. ft. with sewers and water
R-44 1 and 2 story structures 10,000 sq ft.
3 story structures 8,000 sq. ft.
4 story structures 6,000 sq. ft.
5 story structures 5,000 sq. ft.
6 story structures 4,000 sq. ft.
R-4 7,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit
R-5 1 and 2 story structures 6,000 sq. ft.
3 story structures 5,000 sq. ft.
4 story structures 4,000 sq. ft.
5 story structures 3,000 sq. ft.
6 story structures 2,000 sq. ft.
R-65 1 and 2 story structures 6,000 sq. ft.
3 story structures 5,000 sq. ft.
4 story structures 4,000 sq. ft.
5 story structures 3,000 sq. ft.
6 story structures 2,000 sq. ft.
Structures of 7 or more stories 1,500 sq. ft.
A627.6 Lot Width6
Within a Planned Unit Development for single-family dwellings in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zones only, the lot
width requirements may be reduced up to 1/3. In all other residential zones in which a Planned Unit Development
is located, lot width requirements shall be met.
A627.7 Front Yards
Within a planned unit development front yard requirements for the zone in which the planned unit development
is located shall be met, except that, multi-family structures shall maintain the front yard requirements
plus half again the required depth of the front yard.
Appendix 190
A627.8 Side Yards
In a planned unit development, the Commission may permit a side yard of not less than 2/3 the width of the
minimum required side yard provided that the distance between any two dwelling structures shall be equal to
twice the width of minimum required side yard of the zone in which it is located.
A627.9 Rear Yard
Within a planned unit development the rear yard requirements for the zone in which the planned unit development
is located shall be met.
A627.10 Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit
Within a planned unit development the floor area per dwelling unit requirements for the zone in which the
planned unit development is located shall be met.
A627.11 Building Height
For each foot of building height over thirty-five feet the distance between such buildings and the side or rear
property lines shall be increased 1 foot in addition to the side or rear yards required.
A627.12 Spacing of Buildings
The spacing between main buildings shall be at least equivalent to the spacing which would be required between
buildings similarly developed under the terms of this regulation on separate parcels, due consideration
being given to building height and to the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys.
A628 Planned Unit Development in More than One Zone
If the planned unit development is in more than one residential zone, the number of allowable dwelling units must be separately
calculated for every portion of the planned unit development that is in a separate zone, and must then be combined
to determine the number of dwelling units allowable in the entire planned unit development. However, the distribution of
dwelling units and lot sizes within the planned unit development shall be based on the requirements of the zone in which
the majority of the acreage is located.
A629 Open Space Requirements
For each dwelling unit in a planned unit development for the following amount of land shall be set aside for usable open
space.
R-l 27,000 sq. ft.
R-2 13,000 sq. ft.
R-3 13,000 sq. ft. without sewer or water
R-3 5,000 sq. ft. with sewers or water
R-3 5,000 sq. ft. with sewers and water
R-4 0 with 5 to 15 acres
R-4 25 % of the total with 15 acres or more land area
R-5 and R-6 All land not devoted to structures, required yards, parking spaces, streets and driveways.
A629.1 No open space may be accepted as open space under the provisions of these regulations unless it meets the
following standards:
a. The location, shape, size and character of the open space must be suitable for the planned unit development.
b. Open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses authorized for the open space must be appropriate
to the scale and character of the planned unit development, considering its size, density, expected population,
topography and the number and type of dwellings to be provided.
c. Open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but open space containing natural features worthy of preservation
may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and improvements which are permitted in the open space
must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the open space and must conserve and enhance the amenities
of the open space having regard to its topography and unimproved condition.
d. The development schedule which is part of the development plan must coordinate the improvement of the open space,
the construction of buildings, structures and improvements in the open space, and the construction of residential
dwellings in the planned unit development.
e. If the final development plan provides for buildings, structures and improvements in the open space of a value in
excess of 25,000 dollars, the developer must provide a bond or other adequate assurance that the buildings, structures
and improvements will be completed. The Planning Commission shall release the bond or other assurance when the
buildings, structures, or improvements have been completed according to the development plan.
A629.2 As an alternative to the provision of some or all of the open space which is required by these regulations, the
developer may provide funds which the Town shall use for the acquisition of public open space adjoining or
within 1,500 feet of the perimeter of the planned unit development. Open space which is so acquired may be
counted as part of the net project area for the purposes of calculating project densities and lot sizes within the
planned unit development.
A629.3 The use and improvement of the open space must be planned in relation to any existing or proposed public or
semi-public open space which adjoins or which is within 1,500 feet of the perimeter of the planned development.
Appendix 191
A629.4 Conveyance and Maintenance of Open Space
a. All land shown on the final development plan as open space may be conveyed under one of the following options:
i. It may be conveyed to the Town of Hamden which will agree to maintain the open space and any buildings,
structures, or improvements which have been placed on it.
ii. It may be conveyed to trustees provided in an agreement establishing a homeowners' association or similar
organization for the maintenance of the planned unit development. The open space must be conveyed to the
trustees subject to covenants to be approved by the Town Planning and Zoning Commission which restrict
the open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide for the maintenance of
the open space in a manner which assures its continuing use for its intended purpose.
b. No open space may be put to any use not specified in the final development plan unless the final development plan has
been amended to permit the use. However, no change of use may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants
limiting the use of open space areas, and all rights to enforce these covenants are expressly reserved.
c. If the open space is not conveyed to the Town of Hamden, either one of the following methods of enforcement must
be provided:
i. The legal right to develop the open space for the uses not specified in the final development plan must be
conveyed to the Town of Hamden.
ii. The restrictions governing the use, improvements and maintenance of the open space must be stated as conditions
to the conveyance of the open space, the fee title to the open space to vest in the Town of Hamden in the
event of a substantial default in the stated conditions.
d. If the open space is not conveyed to the Town of Hamden, the covenants governing the use, improvement, and maintenance
of the open space may authorize the Town of Hamden to enforce their provisions.
A629.5 The Town of Hamden is not obligated herewith to indefinitely keep dedicated land as open space, but may
utilize any dedicated land for any public facilities that are considered necessary and in the best interest of the
Town.
A629.6 The Town of Hamden may accept the dedication of open space for a temporary period not less than 35 years.
If the Town disposes of the open space after that period of time, it must provide an equivalent amount of open
space elsewhere in the Town.
A630 Utilities
All utilities shall be placed underground with the exclusion of overhead utility wires that already exist on existing streets.
A631 Sidewalks
Sidewalks will be required on all streets of all planned unit development.
A632 Sanitary Sewers
Dedicated open space land may not be utilized for leaching fields, or on site sewage treatment systems.
A633 P.U.D. Completion
Any Planned Unit Development not completed as of March 1, 2003 will cease to be eligible to be completed as a Planned
Unit Development.
The Planned Unit Development designation will be removed from the land area and any expansion of land uses will be
governed by the original underlying Zoning Regulations. In the case of an underlying zone being an R6 zone the governing
zone will be R-5.7
__________________________________________________________________________________________
1The following regulations are Effective 10/1/69
2Adopted 10/19/99, Effective 10/26/99 (NOTE: Section 622.1c deleted 3/13/01)
3With 5 to 15 acres
4With 15 acres or more
5Effective 9/01/67
6Effective 9/01/67
7Adopted 3/13/01, Effective 3/13/01
Appendix 192

INLAND WETLANDS
AND
WATERCOURSES REGULATIONS
Hamden, Connecticut
Adopted 10/3/07
Effective 10/31/07
Adopted as Amended 5/6/09
Effective 5/27/09
-1-
Table of Contents
Section Title Page
1 Title and Authority 3
2 Definitions 4
3 Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses 8
4 Permitted Uses as of Right and Nonregulated Uses 9
5 Activities Regulated Exclusively by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection 10
6 Regulated Activities to be Licensed 11
7 Application Requirements 11
8 Application Procedures 15
9 Public Hearings 16
10 Considerations for Decision 16
11 Decision Process and Permit 20
12 Action by Duly Authorized Agent 22
13 Bond and Insurance 23
14 Enforcement 23
15 Amendments 24
16 Appeals 26
17 Conflict and Severance 26
18 Other Permits 27
19 Fees 27
20 Effective Date of Regulations 28
Appendix 29
-2-
Section 1
Title and Authority
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and
irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed.
The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply
of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion;
to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal,
aquatic and plant life. Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in
danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal
of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses,
all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such
unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the
environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the
quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and
recreational values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more. The
preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary,
undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is
essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose
of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection,
preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their
disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the
highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion,
turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and
vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger
of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation,
economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the
state's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and
mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of
the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to
forever guarantee to the people of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit
and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the
Town of Hamden.
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Hamden Connecticut was
established in accordance with an ordinance adopted May 1, 2000 as the successor to the Hamden
Conservation Commission established by the Legislative Council on April 2, 1974, and shall
implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act in the Town of Hamden.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with
the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue, issue with
terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all regulated activities in the
Town of Hamden pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
-3-
Section 2
Definitions
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Agency" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Hamden.
"Bogs" are watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits,
poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down to a two
inch diameter at breast height.
“Commission Member” means a member of the Inland Wetland and Watercourses Commission
of the Town of Hamden, alternatively known as the Agency.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the commissioner of the State of
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow
may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual
hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
“Designated Agent” means an individual(s) designated by the agency to carry out its functions
and purpose.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into wetlands or watercourses of
the state whether or not such substance causes pollution.
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary and
indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1(q) of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
Connecticut General Statute section 1-1(q)
Except as otherwise specifically defined, the words “agriculture” and “farming” shall include
cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural
commodity, including the raising, shearing, feeding, caring for, training and management of
livestock, including horses, bees, poultry, fur-bearing animals and wildlife, and the raising or
harvesting of oysters, clams, mussels, other molluscan shellfish or fish; the operation,
management, conservation, improvement or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools and
-4-
equipment, or salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by storm, as an
incident to such farming operations; the production or harvesting of maple syrup or maple sugar,
or any agricultural commodity, including lumber, as an incident to ordinary farming operations or
the harvesting of mushrooms, the hatching of poultry, or the construction, operation or
maintenance of ditches, canals, reservoirs or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes;
handling, planting, drying, packing, packaging, processing, freezing, grading, storing or
delivering to storage or to market, or to a carrier for transportation to market, or for direct sale
any agricultural or horticultural commodity as an incident to ordinary farming operations, or, in
the case of fruits and vegetables, as an incident to the preparation of such fruits or vegetables for
market or for direct sale. The term “farm” includes farm buildings, and accessory buildings
thereto, nurseries, orchards, ranges, greenhouses, hoophouses and other temporary structures or
other structures used primarily for the raising and, as an incident to ordinary farming operations,
the sale of agricultural or horticultural commodities. The term “aquaculture” means the farming
of the waters of the state and tidal wetlands and the production of protein food, including fish,
oysters, clams, mussels and other molluscan shellfish, on leased, franchised and public
underwater farm lands. Nothing herein shall restrict the power of a local zoning authority under
chapter 124.
“Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering
principles.
"Intermittent watercourse" - see "Watercourse".
“License” means the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of
permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these Regulations under the
authority of the Agency.
"Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing
environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and
sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from
wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment
maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of
wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low and fish and
wildlife will not be adversely affected.
"Marshes" are watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the
dominance of soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the
ground surface throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are
common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to
soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, peat, mud, debris, sand, refuse, waste, leaves,
logs or tree limbs.
"Municipality" means the Town of Hamden.
“Non-Disturbance Buffer Zone” established pursuant to Section 10 of these Regulations, is the
upland area adjacent to a wetland or watercourse that will remain undisturbed by construction,
development or other regulated activity. Such buffer zones serve to improve water quality by,
-5-
among other things, filtering pollutants from stormwater runoff and reducing thermal impacts
from such runoff. Therefore, the Agency shall require, at a minimum, a Non-Disturbance Buffer
Zone encompassing the land area one hundred (100) feet from any wetland or watercourse as a
condition of granting wetlands permits unless the applicant demonstrates through substantial
evidence in the record that such activity within the 100-foot non-disturbance area does not pose
an impact to the regulated area. Factors to be considered in determining the appropriate width of
a buffer zone include but are not necessarily limited to the presence of steep slopes, the intensity
of adjacent land use, soil erodibility, the size and characteristics of a watercourse (e.g.
intermittent versus perennial), vegetation types and conditions, and whether the
wetland/watercourse/floodplain is a tributary to a public water supply reservoir or lies within a
public water supply watershed. The buffer zone shall be protected from site disturbance during
and after construction and native vegetation shall be left in place to the maximum extent feasible.
"Nurseries" means places where plants are grown for sale, transplanting, or experimentation.
"Permit" see license.
"Permittee" means the person to whom a license has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership (limited or general), association (voluntary or
other), corporation, Limited Liability Company, company, organization or legal entity of any
kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of
any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or deposited therein
by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with
any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any
filling, land clearing or excavation activity.
“Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be
derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is
prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative
is imprudent.
"Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a regulated area involving removal or
deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration, or pollution, of such wetlands
or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in section 4 of these regulations.
Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, paving, excavating, constructing, depositing
or removing of material and discharging of storm water within the 200 foot upland review area is
a regulated activity. The Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland
review area or in any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area is likely to impact or affect
wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
“Regulated area” means any wetlands or watercourses as defined in these Regulations.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, grub,
clear cut timber, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological
properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity
or taste.
-6-
"Significant impact" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the following activities
which may have a major effect:
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a
substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses outside
the area for which the activity is proposed;
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural
dynamics of a watercourse system;
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or
watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding;
supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or
perform other functions;
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity,
siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse;
5. Any activity which causes substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or
groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse;
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland
or watercourse; and
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such
areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the federal
Office of Personnel Management.
"Swamps" are watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs.
"Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more
frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of Hamden.
“Upland review area” means the area of land extending for a distance of two hundred (200) feet
in all directions from any regulated area and in which any regulated activity is proposed.
However, the Agency may extend such upland review area beyond such distance if a regulated
activity has the potential to affect a regulated area. The upland review area of two hundred (200)
feet is the minimum distance from a regulated area over which the Agency will exercise its
authority under these Regulations.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute
or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs,
and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Intermittent watercourses shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the
occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of
recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer
than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
-7-
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated
pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, which
consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and
floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of
the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil
moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
Section 3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
3.1 The map of wetlands and watercourses entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
Hamden, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the
general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of
the Town Clerk or the Agency. In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses
shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and
location of watercourses. The Agency may use aerial photography, remote sensing imagery,
resource mapping, soils maps, site inspection observations or other information in determining
the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any person may petition the Agency for an amendment to the map. All petitions for a map
change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and circumstances which
support the change. The petitioner shall bear the burden of proof regarding the proposed map
amendment. Such proof may include, but not be limited to aerial photography, remote sensing
imagery, resource mapping or other available information. The Agency may require such person
to provide an accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with section 15 of these
regulations.
3.3 The Agency shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. The Agency
may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available.
3.4 All map amendments are subject to the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these
regulations.
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Nonregulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted within regulated areas, as of right, after
notification to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission:
a. (i) grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops, and farm ponds of three
acres or less essential to the farming operation, and (ii) activities conducted by, or under the
authority of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or
watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of buildings
not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses with continual flow,
filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow, clear cutting of timber
-8-
except for the expansion of agricultural crop land, the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or
similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. a residential home (i) for which a building permit has been issued or (ii) on a subdivision lot,
provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by a municipal
planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of the effective date of promulgation
of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1,
1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of
right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987;
The individual claiming a use of wetlands permitted as a right under this subdivision shall
document the validity of such right by providing a certified copy of the building permit and a
site plan showing proposed and existing topographic contours, house and well locations,
septic system, driveway, approval dates or other necessary information to document the
entitlement;
c. boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction;
d. uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property. Such incidental
uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include
removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or
watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
e. construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of the Connecticut
General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in chapter 102 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the
impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except
as provided in sections 22a-401and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
f. maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date of any
municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General
Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe is on property which is
zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this
subdivision, “maintenance” means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris
whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as nonregulated uses in wetlands and
watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or
watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or
pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife; and
b. outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study,
hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin and scuba diving, camping, boating, water skiing,
trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing and cross-country skiing where otherwise legally
permitted and regulated.
4.3 All activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging,
clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse not
specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these
regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with section 6 of these
regulations, or for certain regulated activities located outside of wetlands and watercourses from
the duly authorized agent in accordance with section 12 of these regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation and use or a
nonregulated operation and use shall, prior to commencement of such operation and use, notify
the Agency on a form provided by it, and provide the Agency with sufficient information to
-9-
enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or nonregulated
use of a wetland or watercourse. The Agency shall rule that the proposed operation and use or
portion of it is a permitted or nonregulated operation and use or that the proposed operation and
use is a regulated activity and a permit is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be
made no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency following the meeting at
which the request was received. The designated agent for the Agency may make such ruling on
behalf of the Agency at any time.
Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated
activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, agency or
instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education,
pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut General Statues.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal
wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities
authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General
Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required
to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said
dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the
discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to
section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Section 6
Regulated Activities to be Licensed
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit for such
activity from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Hamden.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior
authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject
to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in section 14 of these regulations and
any other remedies as provided by law.
6.3 The Agency shall regulate any activity within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving
removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration or pollution, of such
-10-
wetlands or watercourses and any other activity affecting wetlands or watercourses, unless such
activity is permitted or non-regulated pursuant to section 4 of these Regulations.
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1 Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to conduct
such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The application shall
contain the information described in this section and any other information the Agency may
reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the offices of the Planning and Zoning
Department.
7.2 If an application to the Town of Hamden Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commission
for subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse, the
applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in accordance with this
section, no later than the day the application is filed with such planning, zoning, or planning and
zoning commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed
determination thereon by the Agency.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a proposed activity
involves a significant impact activity.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or drawings:
a. the applicant’s name, home and business mailing addresses, email address, telephone
numbers and fax number;
b. the owner’s name, mailing address, email address and telephone number and written consent
of the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity
is proposed;
c. the applicant’s interest in the land;
d. the geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a
description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands and
watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses to be disturbed,
soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may
be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including,
but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental
damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order
of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. alternatives, which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses
and why the original design as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives
shall be diagramed on a site plan or drawing;
g. a site plan showing the proposed activity, the proposed limit of disturbance, and existing and
proposed conditions (including contours), including all proposed Non-Disturbance Buffer
Zones and Upland Review Areas, in relation to wetlands and watercourses, the boundaries of
which shall be clearly marked and color coded and identifying any further activities
-11-
associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made
inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or
watercourses. Flagging of wetlands and watercourses identified on such site shall be
performed by a certified soil scientist, and shall be concurrent with the application. The site
plan shall depict a line showing the boundary of the two hundred (200) foot upland review
area and the one hundred (100) foot non-disturbance buffer. Site plans showing a subdivision
shall be drawn at a 1” to 40’ scale, however, site plans showing an individual lot or series of
lots on which a wetland or watercourse is present shall be drawn at a 1” to 20’ scale. Each
site plan shall be certified by the professional engineer responsible for preparing the site plan
and, as to the wetlands and watercourse delineation, by the soil scientist responsible for such
delineation. The Commission may request the regulated area and non-disturbance buffer area
be mathematically delineated and geo-referenced on the site plan;
h. names, mailing and property addresses of adjacent land owners. The applicant shall, at the
applicant’s expense, provide each owner of property abutting the property on which the
regulated activity is proposed, with notice of the proposed regulated activity, including a
narrative describing the proposed regulated activity, via certified mail, return receipt
requested. In the case of an application seeking approval of a subdivision, the applicant shall
provide each owner of property that is located within 500 feet of each boundary edge of the
property to be subdivided with the same notice, via certified mail, return receipt requested,
provided to abutters. Proof of notice shall be provided to the Agency. Such proof shall
include a photocopy of the notice and narrative sent to each person required to receive notice.
Failure by the applicant to provide notice of the application shall be grounds for denying the
application;
i. statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in
the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or
through inaccurate or misleading information;
j. authorization for the members and designated agents of the Agency to inspect the subject
land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
k. a completed DEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information provided
by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection in
accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
l. photo documentation of the proposed area to be disturbed in relation to the regulated area is
recommended with photo size as deemed appropriate by the applicant. The photos should be
close up and wide angle pictures, labeled and cross referenced on the site plan;
m. any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant
is proposing;
n. submission of the appropriate application fee, as established by municipal ordinance;
o. a statement identifying which watershed the proposed regulated activity is located, and
whether the regulated activity is located in a public drinking water supply watershed area.
Watershed areas are those areas identified as such in maps on file with the Hamden Planning
and Zoning office;
p. if the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall submit: (1) the name address, phone
numbers and contact person for its parent corporation, if any; (2) the name, address, phone
numbers and contact name for its subsidiary corporations, if any; (3) the name, address and
phone number for each of its directors; and (4) the name, title, address and phone number for
each of its officers;
q. if the applicant is a limited liability company, the applicant shall submit: (1) the name
address, phone number and contact name for each member; and (2) the name address, phone
number and contact name of any manager(s) who, through articles of organization, is vested
the management of the business, property and affairs of the limited liability company;
-12-
r. if the applicant is a limited partnership, the applicant shall submit: (1) the name address,
phone number and contact name for each general partner; and (2) the name, address, phone
number and contact name for each limited partner;
s. if the applicant is a general partnership, the applicant shall submit the name, address, phone
number and contact name for each general partner;
t. if the applicant is a voluntary association, the applicant shall identify any persons authorized
by law to act for such association, or, if no such persons are authorized, provide the names,
addresses and phone numbers for all members of the association; and,
u. incomplete applications may be denied.
7.6 At the discretion of the Agency or its designated agent, or when the proposed activity involves a
significant impact, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the
activity, including but not limited to the following, is required:
a. site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby which show
existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, land contours,
boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses,
all proposed Non-Disturbance Buffer Zones and Upland Review Areas, and other pertinent
features of the land and the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer, land
surveyor, architect or landscape architect licensed by the state, or by such other qualified
person;
b. engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed
activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic modifications to watercourses
and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
c. mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative
Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be
delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s field delineation shall be
depicted on the site plans;
d. a description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses
involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity on these communities
and wetland functions;
e. a description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application, how
each alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or
watercourses, and a description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither
feasible nor prudent;
f. analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed
activity.
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 1500
feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining
municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or
drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
-13-
7.8 Thirteen (13) copies (one original and twelve copies) of all application materials shall be
submitted unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Agency.
7.9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in
accordance with section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the expiration
date of the permit. The Agency at its discretion may waive the 65 day requirement. However, no
application to renew or amend a permit that is filed after the permit has expired will be accepted
by the Agency. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the
information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior application;
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the
schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or
completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting
wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was issued; and
e. the Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew
such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond
the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public
interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity.
7.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted unless the Agency finds that there has been a
substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement
action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued
provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years.
7.11 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or preservation
restriction, the following shall apply:
a. for purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in
the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument
executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but not limited to, the
state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to
retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural,
farming, forest or open space use.
b. for purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in the
form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed
by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state or any political
subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve
historically significant structures or sites.
c. no person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or for
exterior work that does not expand or alter the footprint of an existing building, relating to
property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the
applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction not later than sixty days
prior to the filling of the permit application.
-14-
d. in lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.11c, the applicant may submit a letter from the
holder of such restriction or from the holder's authorized agent, verifying that the application is in
compliance with the terms of the restriction.
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission of the Town of Hamden.
8.2 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d(f), notify the
clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request
or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within fifteen hundred feet
of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within
the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow
through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining
municipality; or
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private
property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within
seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an
inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company
as defined in section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written
notice of the application and a copy of the site plan to the South Central Connecticut Regional
Water Authority (SCCRWA) or its successor. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of the application. The South
Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority (SCCRWA) or its successor, through a
representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of
such notice shall be provided to the Agency. Any notice to the South Central Connecticut
Regional Water Authority (SCCRWA) or its successor shall require completion of its Watershed
Project Notification Form by the applicant.
8.4 The official date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of submission to the
Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or thirty-five days after such
submission, whichever is sooner.
8.5 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as
the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the
time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations. If revised maps are prepared
during the process, they must be submitted a minimum of one week prior to the next scheduled
meeting of the commission.
8.6 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
-15-
Section 9
Public Hearings
9.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses commission shall not hold a public hearing on an
application unless the inland wetlands and watercourses commission determines that the proposed
activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses; a petition signed by at least
twenty-five persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in
which the regulated activity is proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the inland wetlands
and watercourses commission not later than fourteen days after the date of receipt of such
application; or the inland wetlands and watercourses commission finds that a public hearing
regarding such application would be in the public interest. The inland wetlands and watercourses
commission may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this
section is filed with the inland wetlands and watercourses commission on or before the fourteenth
day after the date of receipt of the application. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five
days after the receipt of such application. All applications and maps and documents relating
thereto shall be open for public inspection. At such hearing any person or persons may appear
and be heard.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days,
the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days
before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where
the affected wetland and watercourse is located.
9.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) of record of abutting land no less
than 10 days prior to the day of the hearing.
9.4 In the case of any application that is subject to the notification provision of section 8.2 of these
Regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the clerk of the adjoining municipality
(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof of such notification shall be
entered into the hearing record.
Section 10
Considerations for Decision
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation
b. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the
Town of Hamden:
1. Agency Enforcement Officer
2. Planning and Zoning Department
3. Building Department
4. Natural Resources and Open Space Commission
5. Engineering Department
6. Town Attorney’s Office
7. Planning, Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commissions
8. Quinnipiac Valley Health District
-16-
c. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the New Haven County
Soil and Water Conservation District, the South Central Regional Planning Agency, the
South Central Connecticut Regional Water Authority or other regional
organizations (i.e. Council of Elected Officials); agencies in adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which
may undertake additional studies or investigations.
d. Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in subdivision 10.1b
and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the
Agency.
e. For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and
testimony.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to regulating, licensing
and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into consideration all relevant facts
and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses;
including the effects on the inland wetland’s and watercourse’s capacity to support fish and
wildlife, to prevent flooding, to supply and protect surface and ground waters, to control
sediment, to facilitate drainage, to control pollution, to support recreational activities, and to
promote public health and safety;
b. the applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed
regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to
wetlands or watercourses;
c. the relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated
activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term
productivity of such wetlands or watercourses including consideration of the extent to which
the proposed activity involves trade-offs between short-term environmental gains at the
expense of long-term losses, or vice versa, and consideration of the extent to which the
proposed action forecloses or predetermines future options;
d. irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused
by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would
foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation
measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity
including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other
environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the
following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse
resources. This requires recognition that the inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of
Connecticut are an indispensable, irreplaceable and fragile natural resource, and that these
areas may be irreversibly destroyed by deposition, filling, and removal of material, by the
diversion, diminution or obstruction of water flow including low flows, and by the erection of
structures and other uses;
e. the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use
of property, including abutting or downstream property, which is caused or threatened by the
proposed regulated activity. This includes recognition of potential damage from erosion,
turbidity, or siltation, loss of fish and wildlife and their habitat, loss of unique habitat having
demonstrable natural, scientific or educational value, loss or diminution of beneficial aquatic
organisms and wetland plants, the dangers of flooding and pollution, and the destruction of
the economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values of wetlands
and watercourses to the community;
-17-
f. impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for
which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to,
the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity
and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses;
g. the suitability of the activity to the area for which it is proposed. This requires a balancing of
the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land, with the need to protect
its environment and ecology for the people of the state and the benefit of generations yet
unborn;
h. measures which would mitigate the impact of any aspect of the proposed regulated activity.
Such measures include, but are not limited to, actions which would avoid adverse impacts or
lessen impacts to wetlands and watercourses and which could be feasibly carried out by the
applicant and would protect the wetland’s or watercourse’s natural capacity to support fish
and wildlife, to prevent flooding, to supply and protect surface and ground waters, to control
sedimentation, to prevent erosion, to assimilate wastes, to facilitate drainage, to control
pollution, to support recreational activities and open space, and to promote public health and
safety;
i. the discharge of untreated run-off from paved surfaces; treatment of run-off from such
surfaces shall be required at the discretion of the Agency;
j. maintaining natural drainage systems, including perennial and intermittent streams, swales
and drainage ditches, in an open condition; and
k. a Non-Disturbance Buffer Zone is a necessary part of any permit in order to separate
construction, development or other regulated activities to prevent harm to the regulated area.
Therefore, the Agency shall require, at a minimum, a Non-Disturbance Buffer Zone
encompassing the land area one hundred (100) feet from any wetland or watercourse as a
condition of granting wetlands permits unless the applicant demonstrates through substantial
evidence in the record that such activity within the 100-foot non-disturbance area does not
pose an impact to the regulated area. Factors to be considered in determining the appropriate
width of a buffer zone include but are not necessarily limited to the presence of steep slopes,
the intensity of adjacent land use, soil erodibility, the size and characteristics of a watercourse
(e.g. intermittent versus perennial), vegetation types and conditions, and whether the
wetland/watercourse/floodplain is a tributary to a public water supply reservoir or lies within
a public water supply watershed. The buffer zone shall be protected from site disturbance
during and after construction and native vegetation shall be left in place to the maximum
extent feasible. Therefore the extent and protection of the Non Disturbance Buffer Zone will
be considered in the deliberations. Future applications seeking alteration of any Non-
Disturbance Buffer Zone may be considered and approved by the Agency only upon
determination of a substantial change in circumstance warranting such alteration. Buffer
zones may also be protected using deed restrictions or Conservation Easements as mitigation
for regulated activities.
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by the Agency
that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit
shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent
alternative does not exist. In making this finding the Agency shall consider the facts and
circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this section. The finding and the reasons therefore
shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible
and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on
wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in writing the types of
alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this subsection shall not be construed to
-18-
shift the burden from the applicant to prove that he is entitled to the permit or to present
alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal
life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in
which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 A municipal inland wetlands and watercourses commission shall not deny or condition an
application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an
impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect
the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing
record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. However, the Agency is not
precluded from seeking advice from information already in the record of the public hearing. A
conclusion that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a presumption
that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that the application
is consistent with the purpose and policies of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations
of the Town of Hamden and of Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
10.8 The Commission may require additional technical assistance in evaluating an application for a
permit, or for modification or extension of a permit, or for any other matter properly appearing
before the Commission, if it finds that the nature or intensity of the activity may present
complexities requiring the expertise of a professional or expert environmental reviewer, or the
like, possessing the requisite degree of knowledge, education, or training required to review such
matter on behalf of the Commission, such area of expertise being outside that of the Commission.
In all cases in which the Commission feels such review of the matter is warranted, the applicant
shall be required to pay the cost of such review. This payment shall be made to the reviewer
prior to the review commencing and prior to any decision being rendered on the matter. The
reviewer will render services to and is engaged on behalf of the Commission and Town Planner,
or its designees. Copies of the reviewer’s findings and reports shall be made available to the
applicant and the Commission not less than seven (7) days prior to any meeting of the
Commission to consider the reviewer’s report(s) and the matter, and the applicant shall be given
the opportunity to respond to said report(s) in writing. The reviewer selection shall be preapproved
by the Commission. Failure to pay the reviewer’s charges shall be grounds for denial
of the application, dismissal of the matter, or the like.
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to
subsection 7.11c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to
the inland wetlands agency that granting of the permit application will violate the terms
of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such
restriction, the inland wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval.
10.10 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of
subsections 7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations, the party holding the conservation or
preservation restriction may, not later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of
permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and
-19-
regulations of such agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse
the permit approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such
restriction.
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these regulations, may,
in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon
other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out
the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any
reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would
(a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance
existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources. The Agency, its officers, or its designated
agent may rule that a proposed activity is determined to be de minimis.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after the official receipt of an application, the Agency may hold
a public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be
heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be completed within
thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within
thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the absence of a public hearing,
action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the official date of receipt
of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified
in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than
sixty-five (65) days, or may withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act within
any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to
constitute approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be
withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Agency.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision and, in the case of
any public hearing, such decision shall be based fully on the record of such hearing and shall be
in writing and shall incorporate a statement relative to the consideration of feasible and prudent
alternatives.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within
fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the
Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetlands or watercourse lies.
In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day period, the applicant
may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetlands and watercourses permit also involves an activity
which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special
exception, under sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Agency
shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of Hamden Planning,
Zoning, or Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision
thereon.
-20-
11.6 Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an approval is required
under section 8-3, 8-25 or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be valid for five years
Any regulated activity approved by the Agency shall be completed within one year from the time
such activity is commenced provided the Agency may establish a specific time period within
which any regulated activity shall be conducted and may require that an activity, once
commenced, be completed within a time period of less than one year and further provided the
Agency may extend: (1) under the provisions of section 7.9 of these Regulations, the time period
of the original permit provided such period shall not extend beyond ten years from the date such
permit was granted, or (2) the time period within which an activity, once commenced is required
to be completed under this section.
11.7 No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of
the Agency.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these regulations, the Agency
may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. If the Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if
such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the
permit may be modified, suspended or revoked;
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or future
rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Hamden and convey no rights in real estate or
material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private
rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land
or activity;
c. If the activity authorized by the Agency’s permit also involves an activity which requires
zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under sections
8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland
permit may begin until such approval is obtained;
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement such management
practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm
water discharges and to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution
of wetlands and watercourses. Failure to take such steps may be considered sufficient cause
for revocation of the permit;
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency;
f. A copy of the plans approved by the Agency must be kept at the job site during all activity;
g. The boundary of the Non-Disturbance Buffer Zone(s) adjacent to permitted construction,
development, or other regulated activity shall be marked at every thirty-five foot interval
(unless otherwise directed by the Agency) using such materials, writing, and/or medallions as
the Agency may direct; and
h. All permits may have as a condition of the permit a deed restriction requirement in order to
ensure the awareness of this regulated status by future owners of the property; such restriction
shall be filed and recorded on the Town of Hamden land records. The following shall be
incorporated as a deed restriction for the permitted property:
It has been determined by the Hamden Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission that
regulated areas, as defined by the Hamden Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission’s
-21-
regulations, are present on the property. Any activity in the regulated area must have prior
approval/permitting by the Hamden Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
Restriction on this area shall include:
1. No building or structure of any kind shall be maintained or erected on said area.
2. There shall be no excavation or removal of loam, fill, gravel, soil, rock, sand or other
material, nor any other topographic changes.
3. No dumping of stumps, wood chips, grass clippings, excess soil, ashes, sawdust, bark,
trash, garbage, rubbish or any other unsightly or offensive materials shall be permitted.
4. No activities, actions or uses of the land shall be permitted that would be detrimental or
adverse to erosion control, soil conservation and wildlife habitat preservation. Removal,
especially clear cutting in whole or part, of trees, shrubs, or other vegetation is
prohibited.
5. Activities such as the maintenance of man-made swales, ponds, storm detention basins,
the selective removal of non-native species, and necessary management to promote the
natural character of the area may be conducted, providing prior approval by the
Hamden Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission or its designated agent has
been requested and granted in writing.
6. No use of herbicides and pesticides.
7. The aforesaid covenants and restrictions are deemed to run with the land as binding and
enforceable as servitudes in perpetuity and shall be referenced on all deeds of
conveyance.
Section 12
Action by Duly Authorized Agent
12 .1 The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a license
for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds that the
conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetlands or
watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut
General Statutes. Requests for de minimis approval shall be made on a form or in a format
acceptable to the Agency, with information sufficient for its agent to make an appropriate finding.
Copies of de minimis requests shall be provided to the South Central Connecticut Regional Water
Authority (SCCRWA) or its successor at the discretion of the agent. Notwithstanding the
provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these
regulations, such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time. Applications
processed and approved in accordance with this Section 12.1 shall not be subject to the published
notice and abutter notification provision of Section 7.1 of these Regulations. The Agent shall
provide the Agency a monthly, typewritten report summarizing all approvals issued pursuant to
this Section 12.1.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of such
approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or will have an effect. Any person
may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency within fifteen days after the publication
date of the notice and the Agency shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled
meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Agency
or its agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the
Agency to consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject
-22-
the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with Section 7 of
these regulations.
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13.1 The Agency may require as a permit condition the filing of a bond with such surety in such
amount and in a form approved by the Agency.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with the provisions of these regulations
and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices
of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for
the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Agency or
its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under section 10.2
of these regulations.
14.2 The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated
activities for which permits have been issued, under these Regulations, and of any possible
violations of these Regulations.
14.3 In the case in which a permit has not been issued or a permit has expired, the Agency or its agent
may make regular inspections at reasonable hours.
14.4 If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any
activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the Agency or
its duly authorized agent may:
a. issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting
such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity or to
correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order
the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show
cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts
presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the
person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in
effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision
in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be
effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises or
withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or
bar an action pursuant to section 22a-44 (b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended;
b. issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility
or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Agency, and prescribing
the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting
work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency may request that the individual appear at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or
provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to
-23-
carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order
provided in section 14.4.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law; and
c. seek a civil penalty for each violation as provided at section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
14.5 The Agency may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the permittee has not complied with
the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work
as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking or suspending any
permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The
Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in
compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The
permittee shall be notified of the Agency’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by
certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice
of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality.
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of Hamden
may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with changes in the
Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental
Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes
available.
15.2 An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland
wetlands and watercourses regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be
required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetlands and watercourses regulations,
including changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and
any appeal from the decision of such Agency with respect to such application shall not be
dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the
date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply (1) to the
establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to
any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of
the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of Hamden Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map shall be
amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy
of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations
or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public
hearing on their adoption. (Fee schedules shall be adopted as provided by municipal ordinance.)
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
Hamden, Connecticut, shall contain at least the following information:
a. the petitioner's name, mailing address, email address, telephone and fax numbers;
b. The owner’s name (if not the petitioner), mailing address, email address,
telephone and fax numbers, and a written consent to the proposed action set forth in the
application;
-24-
c. the address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
d. the petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition;
e. map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and
the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in
accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary
locations;
f. the reasons for the requested action;
g. the names and addresses of adjacent property owners;
h. If the petitioner is a corporation, the petitioner shall submit: (1) the name address,
phone numbers and the contact person for its parent corporation, if any; (2) the name,
address, phone numbers and contact name for its subsidiary corporations, if any; (3) the
name, address and phone number for each of its directors; and (4) the name, title, address
and phone number for each of its officers;
i. If the petitioner is a limited liability company, the petitioner shall submit: (1) the name
address, phone number and contact name for each member; and (2) the name address, phone
number and contact name of any manager(s) who, through articles of organization, is vested
the management of the business, property and affairs of the limited liability company;
j. If the petitioner is a limited partnership, the petitioner shall submit: (1) the name address,
phone number and contact name for each general partner; and (2) the name, address, phone
number and contact name for each limited partner;
k. If the petitioner is a general partnership, the petitioner shall submit the name, address, phone
number and contact name for each general partner; and
l. If the petitioner is a voluntary association, which association is not a corporation or a limited
or general partnership, the petitioner shall identify any persons authorized by law to act for
such association, or, if no such persons are authorized, provide the names, addresses and
phone numbers for all members of the association.
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map,
Hamden, Connecticut, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such
proof may include, but is not limited to, professional interpretation of aerial photography and
remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the
Agency. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the
subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer
or purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition shall include:
a. the name, mailing address, email address, telephone and fax number of the
owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land.
Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist documenting
the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag
locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types; and
d. map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and
proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other qualified
individual.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals
-25-
of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days, and the last
not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and
documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection. In addition, the Agency
may require the petitioner to provide notice to all property owners within 1,500 feet of the
wetlands and /or watercourse affected by the petition.
15.8 The agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition. The
hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The agency shall act
upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such
hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be
represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any
period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for
longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the agency to act within
any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to
constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Commission, in accordance with Section 19.4b, may require additional technical assistance,
at the petitioner’s expense, in evaluating a petition to amend/change the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Map if it finds that the change is significant.
15.10 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
Section 16
Appeals
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section
22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection.
Section 17
Conflict and Severance
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the
most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of
any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations
shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part
or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the
provisions of the Act shall govern.
-26-
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other
assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Hamden the State of
Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
Section 19
Fees
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by
certified check or money order payable to the Town of Hamden at the time the application is filed
with the Agency except in the cases of a complex application review.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct application fee and
a complex application fee, if required, is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the
Agency pursuant to subsection 19.6 of these regulations.
19.3 Definitions. As used in this section:
"Residential Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for permanent housing or
being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
"Commercial uses" means activities carried out on property developed for industry, commerce,
trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be occupied for such purposes, for profit or
nonprofit.
"Other uses" means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses.
19.4 Fee Schedule.
(a) Application fees shall be established by recommendation of the Agency subject to approval by
the Legislative Council, and may be amended from time to time as appropriate.
(b) Complex Application Review:
The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission may charge an additional fee sufficient to
cover the cost of reviewing and acting on complex applications as provided in Section 10.8.
19.5 Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Hamden are exempt
from all fee requirements.
19.6 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the
fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the
Agency should consider in its determination under this subsection. The Agency may waive all or
part of the application fee if the Agency determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment
or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be deterred from
initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the application fee;
-27-
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for
reviewing and processing the application; or
c. The applicant has shown good cause.
The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
Section 20
Effective Date of Regulations
20.1 These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a
notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Hamden.
-28-
APPENDIX A
Connecticut General Statute section 8-7d
Hearings and decisions. Time limits. Day of receipt. Notice to adjoining municipality. (a) In
all matters wherein a formal petition, application, request or appeal must be submitted to a
zoning commission, planning and zoning commission or zoning board of appeals under this
chapter, a planning commission under chapter 126 or an inland wetlands and watercourses
commission under chapter 440 and a hearing is required or otherwise held on such petition,
application, request or appeal, such hearing shall commence within sixty-five days after receipt
of such petition, application, request or appeal and shall be completed within thirty-five days
after such hearing commences, unless a shorter period of time is required under this chapter,
chapter 126 or chapter 440. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a
general circulation in such municipality where the land that is the subject of the hearing is
located at least twice, at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days or
less than ten days and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing. In
addition to such notice, such commission, board or agency may, by regulation, provide for notice
to persons who own or occupy land that is adjacent to the land that is the subject of the hearing.
All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection. At
such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent
or by attorney. All decisions on such matters shall be rendered within sixty-five days after
completion of such hearing, unless a shorter period of time is required under this chapter, chapter
126 or chapter 440. The petitioner or applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any
period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be
for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition, application, request or appeal.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, whenever the approval of
a site plan is the only requirement to be met or remaining to be met under the zoning regulations
for any building, use or structure, a decision on an application for approval of such site plan shall
be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such site plan. Whenever a decision is to be
made on an application for subdivision approval under chapter 126 on which no hearing is held,
such decision shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt of such application. Whenever
a decision is to be made on an inland wetlands and watercourses application under chapter 440
on which no hearing is held, such decision shall be rendered within sixty-five days after receipt
of such application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such period,
provided the total period of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed sixty-five days or
may withdraw such plan or application.
(c) For purposes of subsection (a) or (b) of this section and section 7-246a, the date of receipt
of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of such commission, board or agency, immediately following the day of submission to
such commission, board or agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal or
thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner. If the commission, board or agency
does not maintain an office with regular office hours, the office of the clerk of the municipality
shall act as the agent of such commission, board or agency for the receipt of any petition,
application, request or appeal.
-29-
(d) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any action initiated by
any zoning or planning and zoning commission regarding adoption or change of any zoning
regulation or boundary.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if an application involves an activity
regulated pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, and the time for a decision by a
zoning commission or planning and zoning commission established pursuant to this section
would elapse prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the inland wetlands and watercourses
commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five days after the decision
of such agency. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to apply to any
extension consented to by an applicant or petitioner.
(f) The zoning commission, planning commission, zoning and planning commission, zoning
board of appeals or inland wetlands and watercourses commission shall notify the clerk of any
adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan
concerning any project on any site in which: (1) Any portion of the property affected by a
decision of such commission, board or agency is within *five hundred feet* of the boundary of
the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the
site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site; (3) a significant
portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and
significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality; or (4)
water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property
within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application,
petition, request or plan. Such adjoining municipality may, through a representative, appear and
be heard at any hearing on any such application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
*The Town of Hamden CT regulations state fifteen hundred (1500) feet.
-30-
 
 
 
 




 


