Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 10-14-1976 (Ch. 1, Art. II of the 1976 Code)]
§ 1-1. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-24-2009]
Except as otherwise specifically provided by Town ordinance or by the
Connecticut General Statutes, the penalty for violation of an ordinance of
the Town of Monroe shall be a fine not to exceed $250.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-24-2009]
§ 1-2. Adoption.
The compilation of the ordinances of the Town of Monroe of a general and
permanent nature, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
in the form attached hereto and made a part hereof, and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 505, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained, and
enacted as the "Code of the Town of Monroe, Connecticut," hereinafter
called the "Code." All provisions contained in the compilation provided for
herein and known as the "Code of the Town of Monroe" shall be in force and
effect on and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-3. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-4. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code
by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file; publication.
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk of the Town
of Monroe and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town Clerk of the Town of
Monroe, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Town Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held, and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements to any of the
ordinances in the Code of the Town of Monroe, or any new ordinances,
when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention that
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
they be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments, or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted in the Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-7. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Town Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the Code of the
Town of Monroe required to be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for
use by the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by
the Town subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance in such form as to
indicate the intention that they be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes until such changes are included as supplements to said
Code.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Town Clerk of the Town of Monroe or an authorized agent of the
Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by regulation of the Town
Council. The Town Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Town of Monroe, or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Monroe to be
misrepresented thereby, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not more than $150.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or
parts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding
of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for
§ 1-6 MONROE CODE § 1-11
1:6
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of
any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-12
of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights, and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 8, 2008.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued, or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions or any penalty,
punishment, or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit, or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement, or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
changing of boundaries, improvement, acceptance, or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park, or other public place
or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money, or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Town's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease, or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments, or charges or granting of
tax exemptions for certain property.
J. Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or
special assessments therefor.
K. The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary or
final subdivision plats.
L. Ordinances accepting gifts of property or other items to the Town.
M. The Zoning and Subdivision Regulations and any amendments thereto,
and any ordinance or regulation adopting or amending a zoning map.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Town Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. The following changes are made throughout the Code:
(1) References to the "Selectman" are amended to read "First
Selectman" for consistency with the Town Charter.
(2) References to "Chairperson" are amended to read "Chairman" for
consistency with the Town Charter.
C. The amendments and additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number
references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and
appear in the Code.)1
§ 1-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
1. Editor's Note:: In accordance with § 1-14C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 8-24-2009." Schedule A,
which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Town offices.
§ 1-14 MONROE CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 5
AGING, COMMISSION FOR THE
§ 5-1. Establishment; membership. [Amended 4-9-19902]
There shall be a Commission to develop and coordinate programs for the
aging for the Town of Monroe, consisting of the First Selectman, the
Chairman of the Town Council, the Municipal Agent for the Elderly and the
Director of Health, all ex officio, and seven other members to be approved
by the Town Council, at least two of whom shall be representative of the age
group concerned, who shall be electors of the Town.3
§ 5-2. Duties.
The Commission shall study continuously the conditions and needs of
elderly persons in the community in relation to housing, economic,
employment, health, recreational and other matters. It shall analyze the
services for the aged provided by the community, both by public and private
agencies, and shall develop and coordinate programs and make
recommendations to the Town Council regarding the development and
integration of public and private agencies in cooperation with state and
other services to the extent possible.
§ 5-3. Compensation.
The members of the Commission so appointed shall serve without
compensation.
§ 5-4. Terms of office. [Amended 4-9-1990]
The members of the Commission shall serve for terms of three years,
except that, of those first appointed, three shall serve for terms of one year,
three for terms of two years and three for terms of three years. Annually
thereafter, the Council shall approve two or three members, as the case may
be, to succeed the members whose terms expire.
§ 5-5. Organization.
The Commission shall meet within 15 days of its appointment by the Town
Council and appoint a Chairman. Thereafter, the Commission may organize
itself in whatever manner it may determine in order to carry out to the
fullest extent possible the duties set forth in § 5-2 above.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
3. Editor's Note: See also Ch. IV, § 16, Commission for the Aging, of the Town Charter.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:9
§ 5-6. Expenses; authority to participate in programs and grants.
The Town of Monroe may make appropriations for the expenses of the
Commission, and the Commission is authorized and empowered, with the
approval of Council, to participate in state, federal and private programs
and grants concerning the elderly.
Chapter 26
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 26-1. Creation.4
There is hereby created and established a commission to be known as
the "Economic Development Commission of the Town of Monroe." This
Commission is established pursuant to Chapter IV, § 9 of the Charter of the
Town of Monroe.
§ 26-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Economic Development Commission is to:
A. Conduct research into the economic conditions and trends in Monroe.
B. Make recommendations to appropriate officials and agencies in Monroe
regarding action to improve its economic condition and development.
C. Coordinate the activities of and cooperate with unofficial bodies
organized to promote economic development.
D. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, pamphlets
and other materials which may carry out the official purpose of the
Commission.5
§ 26-3. Organization and procedure.
A. At its organizational meeting, the Commission shall elect a Chairman
from among its members and a Secretary who need not be a member
of the Commission. Said Chairman and Secretary shall serve as such
until the next following January 31 and until their successors shall have
been duly elected. Thereafter, at a meeting to be held in the month
of January of each year, the Commission shall elect a Chairman from
among its members and a Secretary who need not be a member of
the Commission, said elected officers to serve for terms of one year,
commencing February 1 following their election, and until their
successors are duly elected. Vacancies in said officerships shall be filled
for the unexpired terms thereof by the Commission.
B. Said Commission shall keep proper minutes and records of its meetings
and activities and shall make an annual report to the Town Council in the
manner required of other agencies, boards and commissions of the Town
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
5. Editor's Note: Original § 10-3, Membership; terms; vacancies; removal, which immediately
followed this section, as amended 10-3-1983, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. IV, § 9 of the Town Charter.
§ 5-6 MONROE CODE § 26-3
1:10
of Monroe. The annual report, in addition to describing the activities of
the Commission for the past year, shall set forth its goals for the future
and compare past achievement with the goals it set.
C. No more than five members of such Commission shall be of the same
political party.
D. The members of said Commission shall receive no compensation but may
be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties.
§ 26-4. Budget, personnel and administration.
All budgetary and personnel concerns as well as the general administration
of the Commission shall be as required of other agencies, boards and
commissions and in such a manner as to conform to the requirements of the
Town Charter.
Chapter 33
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions on elections — See Charter
Ch. VII.
§ 26-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:11

ARTICLE I
Voting Districts
[Adopted 1-21-1992 (Ch. 1, Art. III of the 1976 Code)]
§ 33-1. Established.6
Pursuant to § 9-169 of the Connecticut General Statutes and Chapter VII,
Section 3 of the Monroe Town Charter, there are hereby established four
voting districts within the Town of Monroe. The voting districts and the
boundaries of each district are shown and designated on a map dated
August 21, 2002, which map is on file in the office of the Monroe Town
Clerk and to which map reference is hereby made for a more particular
description of each voting district.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-1
1:13
Chapter 37
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 37-1. Statutory definitions.
The definitions of "emergency management" and related terms used in this
chapter shall be the same as the definitions provided in § 28-1, Chapter 517
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 37-2. Organization.7
A. Authority; established; supervision.
(1) By authority of § 28-7 of the Connecticut General Statutes, an
organization of Town government to be known as the "Department of
Emergency Management" is hereby established.8
(2) The established Department of Emergency Management is to be
under the direction and supervision of a Director of Emergency
Management. The Director shall be responsible for the organization,
administration and operation of said local organization. A Deputy
Director shall assume the duties of the Department in the absence of
the Director.
B. Appointment, powers and duties of the Director and Deputy Director.
(1) The Director of Emergency Management and Deputy Director shall
be appointed by the chief executive officer of the Town and shall
serve at the will of the chief executive officer. The Director and/
or Deputy Director may be removed from office at any time by the
chief executive officer.
(2) The Director of Emergency Management shall report directly to
the chief executive officer. The Deputy Director shall report to the
Director.
(3) The Director shall advise the chief executive officer on all
emergency management matters and related laws, rules,
regulations and requirements of Title 28 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, Public Act 87-535,9 the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950
and the Federal Natural Disaster Relief Act of 1974.
(4) The Director of Emergency Management shall develop, organize,
direct and coordinate the Town's Emergency Management Program
with the goal of saving lives and protecting property by maintaining
emergency operational capabilities that mitigate, prepare for,
respond to and recover from any emergency or disaster.
(5) The Director shall develop and organize the Emergency
Management Program in accordance with local, state and federal
emergency management requirements.
(6) The Director of Emergency Management shall coordinate the
activities of all Town departments, agencies and offices and the
activities of all volunteer organizations but in no instance shall
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. V, § 11 of the Town Charter.
§ 33-1 MONROE CODE § 37-2
1:14
assume direction and control of any Town department, agency or
office unless directed by written authority from the chief executive
officer.
(7) The Director shall be responsible for the development and
maintenance of the Town's Emergency Operations Plan. The
Emergency Operations Plan shall become effective upon the
signature of the chief executive officer and updated according to
state statutes.
(8) The Director of Emergency Management shall be responsible for
the coordination of training and exercises required to maintain
adequate emergency management and emergency response
capabilities in the Town.
(9) The Director shall be responsible for the recruitment and training
of volunteer emergency management personnel.
(10) The Director shall maintain continuous contact with the State
Department of Emergency Management and Homeland Security
and shall prepare and submit reports and all paperwork necessary
to ensure that the Town qualifies for and receives all possible
funding, equipment and other benefits or assistance available from
the state and/or the federal emergency management program. All
requests for outside funding and/or assistance shall be in
accordance with established local procedures.
C. Responsibilities of departments, agencies and offices of Town
government.
(1) Each department, agency and office of Town government required
to have an annex to the Town's Emergency Operations Plan shall
develop and maintain such annex in accordance with local, state and
federal emergency management requirements.
(2) Each department, agency and office of Town government shall
cooperate with the Director of Emergency Management to the fullest
extent possible in the development and maintenance of the local
Emergency Management Program.
D. Emergency management responsibilities and power of the chief
executive.
(1) The chief executive officer of the Town is responsible for the
protection of the health and safety of all residents and all people in
the Town, the protection of property and the preservation of the local
government organization and structure.
(2) The chief executive officer of the Town shall ensure that the local
emergency management organization develops and maintains the
capability of local government necessary to respond to any
emergency or disaster that may affect the Town.
(3) During emergency or disaster situations, the chief executive officer
has the power and authority to issue emergency and/or disaster
declarations and exercise any and all powers granted by the Town
Charter deemed reasonable and necessary for the protection of
9. Editor's Note: See Title 7, Ch. 116, Local Emergency Relief Account, of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 37-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-2
1:15
residents and people in the Town, the protection of property and the
preservation of local government.
§ 37-3. Local Emergency Planning Committee.
A. Formation.
(1) A Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC) shall be established
by appointment by the chief executive officer of the Town and shall
meet at least once a year.10
(2) The LEPC's primary function is to plan and direct the Town's
emergency management programs in accordance with local, state
and federal emergency management requirements.
(3) The LEPC shall contain representatives of Town departments,
agencies and offices and nongovernmental groups, business and
labor concerned with public safety and emergency management and
shall serve in an advisory capacity to the chief executive officer.
(4) The Chairman of the LEPC is the chief executive officer.
(5) The Director of Emergency Management and Deputy Director shall
be members of the LEPC.11
(6) By nature of their positions, the Chief of Police, Fire Marshal and
Public Works Director shall be members of the LEPC.
(7) Other members of the LEPC shall be representatives from the Town
Council, the school system, Health Department, Conservation and
Water Resources Commission and local industry appointed by the
chief executive officer.
B. Terms of office.
(1) The Chief of Police, Fire Marshal and Public Works Director or their
designated representatives shall serve so long as they hold their
office within the Town.
(2) LEPC members appointed from the Town Council, the school system,
Health Department and Conservation and Water Resources
Commission and local industry shall serve so long as they remain
members of the represented body or until removed by the chief
executive officer.
(3) Other LEPC members shall serve for a term of four years or until
removed by the chief executive officer.
Chapter 41
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES COMMISSION
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 37-2 MONROE CODE § 41-1
1:16
§ 41-1. Creation; authority.12
There is hereby created and established a commission to be known as the
"Emergency Medical Services Commission of the Town of Monroe." This
Commission is established pursuant to Chapter 368D of the Connecticut
General Statutes.13
§ 41-2. Organization and procedure.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among its members and a
Secretary, who need not be a member of the Commission. Said Chairman
and Secretary shall serve terms ending on January 31 of the year next
following their respective elections. Said Commission shall keep proper
minutes and records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual
report to the Town Council in the manner required of other agencies, boards
and commissions of the Town of Monroe. No more than four members
of such Commission shall be of the same political party. The members of
said Commission shall receive no compensation but may be reimbursed for
actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 41-3. Purpose and duties.14
The Commission is hereby created for the purpose of acting as an
emergency medical service organization pursuant to Chapter 368D,
Emergency Medical Services, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the
same may be amended from time to time. The Commission shall establish
policy for the planning, coordination and administration of an emergency
medical service for the Town. It shall function in such a manner as to
conform to the requirements of the Town Charter.
Chapter 46
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions on ethics — See Charter
Ch. XII.
§ 46-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this code, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
13.Editor's Note: Original § 9-2, Membership; requirements; terms; vacancies, which
immediately followed this section, as amended 10-3-1983, was deleted at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. IV, § 17 of the Town Charter.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-1
1:17
CONFIDENTIAL — Personal matters and financial matters which, if
disclosed, would be of detrimental interest to the Town and a violation of
the trust placed in that person.
EMPLOYEES — All full- and part-time employees of the Town, or any
agency of the Town, and shall include paid consultants of the Town or of
any agency.
INTEREST — Private financial benefit and interest other than financial
arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or
political association.
OFFICIALS — Elected and appointed officials, whether paid or unpaid,
and members of all governmental bodies created under the provisions of
the Town Charter and all other Town ordinances and applicable statutes.
PARTICIPATING — The rendering of advice or recommendation,
investigation, approval, disapproval or otherwise influencing a decision
or action.
B. Words of the masculine gender shall include the feminine.
§ 46-2. Establishment; purpose; violations.
There is hereby established a Code of Ethics for all Town employees and
officials, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of
this code is to establish suitable ethical standards for all such employees
and officials by prohibiting acts or actions incompatible with the discharge
of their public duties and the best interests of the Town of Monroe and
by directing disclosure of private financial interest or personal interest in
matters affecting the Town by such employees and officials. Any violations
of this Code of Ethics may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from
employment or other disciplinary action as more particularly set forth in
§ 46-6.
§ 46-3. Conflicts of interest.
A. No employee or official shall engage in or participate in any business
or transaction or shall have an interest, direct or indirect, which is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public
interest or would tend to impair his independent judgment or action in
the performance of his official duties.
B. No former employee or official shall appear at any time before any
Town board or agency in which he was formerly employed, acting or
participating on behalf of the Town in connection with any matter or
case with which he was associated while an employee or official at any
time within a period of one year after termination of his service with
the Town. Any such former employee or official may, upon a written
application to the Board of Ethics and filed with the Town Clerk, be
released from this obligation after review of said written application and
relevant facts of his case by the Board of Ethics.
C. Except for contributions to political campaigns made in accordance with
applicable state statutes, no employee or official shall solicit or accept
§ 46-1 MONROE CODE § 46-3
1:18
any substantial gift, whether in the form of a service, loan, thing or
promise, from any person, firm or corporation who or which to his
knowledge is interested in any manner in business dealings with the
Town.
D. Any employee or official who has a substantial or controlling financial or
personal interest in any transaction or contract with the Town or in the
sale of real estate, material, supplies or services to the Town, on which
he may be called to act upon in his official capacity, shall refrain from
voting upon or otherwise participating in the transaction on behalf of the
Town. Any such employee or official shall also be required to disclose
said interest to the Town Clerk and Board of Ethics in the manner, time
and form set forth in § 46-5 of this code.
E. No employee or official shall appear in behalf of private interests before
any board, agency or committee of the Town, except that any such
employee or official may, upon written application made to the Board
of Ethics and filed with the Town Clerk, be permitted to make such
appearance after review and approval of said application and relevant
facts of the case by the Board of Ethics. No employee or official shall
represent private interests against the interest of the Town in any
litigation to which the Town is a party. The Board of Ethics shall render
a decision on such application within 45 days of its filing date.
F. Nothing contained in this code shall prohibit or restrict the employee or
official from appearing before any board or commission of the Town in
his own behalf, or being a party in any action, proceeding or litigation
brought by or against the employee or official to which the Town is a
party. When appearing before a board or commission in the employee's
or official's own behalf or being a party in any action or litigation to
which the Town is a party, written application to and approval from the
Board of Ethics is not necessary.
G. No employee or official shall, without proper authorization, disclose
confidential information concerning Town affairs, nor shall he use such
information to advance the financial interests or private interests of
himself or others.
H. No paid consultant of the Town or of any agency shall represent private
interest in any action or proceeding against the interest of the Town in
any litigation to which the Town is a party if such actions are in conflict
with the performance of his duties as a Town employee.
§ 46-4. Discrimination and favoritism prohibited.
A. No employee or official shall discriminate against or in favor of any
individual or cause based solely upon race, color, national origin,
religion, sex, age or physical disability.
B. No employee or official shall request or permit the use of Town-owned
vehicles, equipment, facilities, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit, except when such are available to the public
generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such
employee or official in the interest of the Town.
§ 46-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-4
1:19
C. No employee or official shall grant any special consideration, treatment,
favor or advantage to any person beyond that which is generally
available to residents and/or taxpayers of the Town.
§ 46-5. Written disclosure of interest.
Any employee or official having any financial or private interest as
designated in § 46-3D shall file written disclosure of said interest with the
Town Clerk and the Board of Ethics as soon as he becomes aware of such
interest. Said written disclosure shall set forth in detail the nature and
extent of such interest.
§ 46-6. Board of Ethics; complaint procedure.
A. There is hereby created a Board of Ethics which shall be charged with
the administration of this Code of Ethics.
B. The Board of Ethics shall be composed of five resident electors, and at
no time shall more than three members be of the same political party.
The Town Council shall appoint all members to this Board. Of the five
members initially appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of five
years, one for a term of four years, one for a term of three years, one
for a term of two years and one for a term of one year. Thereafter,
upon the expiration of the initial term of any member of the Board
or in the event that a vacancy exists on said Board, the Town Council
shall appoint a member to fill the vacancy. All subsequent appointments
and reappointments to the Board shall be for a term of two years. If a
vacancy occurs as a result of a resignation, the Council will appoint a
member to the Board to complete the unexpired term. In no event may
any member of the Board serve on said Board for a period of more than
six years in succession.15
C. The Board shall promulgate and adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for the administration of its proceedings, in accordance with state
statutes. The rules and regulations so promulgated and all amendments
thereto shall be made available at the office of the Town Clerk to any
elector of the Town. [Amended 1-20-1993]
D. Subject to §§ 7-148h and 1-82a of the Connecticut General Statutes as
amended, this Board shall receive complaints of any violations of the
Code of Ethics and shall, upon such complaint, investigate the same and
hold private hearings within 30 days thereof if, in the opinion of the
majority of the Board, said complaint warrants a hearing. Any complaint
received by the Board must be in writing and signed by the individual
making said complaint. This Board shall acknowledge receipt in writing
to the complainant of the complaint. Upon receiving such complaint,
the Board shall privately notify the person against whom the complaint
has been filed, advising the concerned party of the specific nature of
the complaint made and being investigated by the Board. Upon receipt
of said notice from the Board, the party so notified that a complaint
has been filed against him shall have the right to demand a public
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 46-4 MONROE CODE § 46-6
1:20
or private hearing by the Board. In the event that the Board decides
that a hearing is required, or the person whose conduct being called
into question demands a hearing, said hearing shall afford the person
whose conduct is called into question the right to cross-examine anyone
testifying against him or meet or answer any complaint made of his
conduct and to present evidence in his own behalf. No hearing, however,
may be conducted with fewer than four of the five seated members of
the Board in attendance. A final determination requires the vote of all
five seated members. A finding that a violation has occurred requires
the unanimous vote of all five seated members. A seated member is as
defined in the procedural rules of the Board of Ethics and as from time
to time revised. [Amended 1-20-1993; 8-9-1993]
E. The Board shall report to the Town Council where it has voted a probable
cause finding. It shall further report, after public hearing, any final
vote taken on the matter along with any recommendations it may have
concerning the matter. The Town Council shall thereupon take such
action as it may deem appropriate or take action in accordance with
the provisions of the Town Charter. In addition, the Board shall make
public its findings and opinions with such deletions as may be justified,
necessary or desirable, in accordance with §§ 7-148 and 1-82a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. [Amended 1-20-1993;
8-9-1993]
F. The Board of Ethics may, upon the written request of any employee or
official or resident of the Town, or upon its own initiative, render written
advisory opinions concerning any matters relating to the Code of Ethics.
[Amended 1-20-1993]
G. All opinions and recommendations of the Board of Ethics, whether
advisory or the result of a complaint in which probable cause has been
found, shall be kept on file with the Board of Ethics. [Amended
1-20-1993]
§ 46-7. Board of Ethics alternates.
A. Number and term. There shall be three alternates to the Board of Ethics
of the Town of Monroe, who shall be appointed by the Town Council.
Each alternate shall serve for a term of two years.
B. Powers and duties. Such alternates, when seated, shall have all the
powers and duties to act as members of the Board of Ethics. Alternates
shall have the privilege of attending all meetings and hearings without
vote until seated.
C. Designation for service. For each member of the Board of Ethics who
is absent or disqualified, the Chairman of the Board of Ethics shall
designate one alternate to be seated on the Board of Ethics. Said
Chairman shall choose alternates in rotation so that they shall act as
nearly equal a number of times as possible; provided, however, that
in choosing alternates, such alternates shall be chosen so that the
maximum number of members seated on such Board at any time,
including regular members and alternates, who are members of the
same political party shall not exceed four. If any alternate is not available
§ 46-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-7
1:21
in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the
minutes of the meeting.
§ 46-8. Conflicts with state and federal law.
Should any provision of this Code of Ethics conflict with any provisions of
federal law or the State of Connecticut General Statutes, the provisions of
the federal law or the State of Connecticut General Statutes shall prevail.
§ 46-9. Multiple commission positions prohibited; exceptions.
A. No person shall serve on more than one board or commission of the Town
at a time; provided, however, that where such service is not prohibited
by the Connecticut General Statutes, the Charter of the Town of Monroe
or any ordinance of the Town, including this code, the Town Council
shall, upon written application of such person willing to serve, after a
finding that no such violation would occur, approve such person to serve
on more than one board or commission.
B. Where conflicts in the above are now in existence, letters will be sent to
said individuals asking such persons to resign one appointment. If they
refuse, the grandfather clause will go into effect until the end of the term
on one of his or her appointments.
§ 46-10. Amendments.
This Code of Ethics may be amended only by ordinance in conformity with
the provisions of the Town Charter.
§ 46-11. Distribution to officials and employees.
The Town Clerk shall cause a copy of this code to be distributed to every
employee and official within 30 days after enactment of this code. Each
employee and official elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be
furnished a copy of the code before entering upon the duties of office
or employment. All Town officials, upon taking the oath of office, and
employees, upon hiring, must declare, in writing and filed with the Town
Clerk, that they have read the Monroe Code of Ethics and that their
personal affairs do not constitute a conflict of interest.
Chapter 54
FIRE POLICE
§ 54-1. Corps established.
The Town Council does hereby establish and create a corps of fire police
within and for the Town of Monroe as hereinafter set forth.
§ 46-7 MONROE CODE § 54-2
1:22
§ 54-2. Powers. [Amended 7-27-1998]
Said fire police shall be empowered and authorized to preserve the public
peace, including traffic control and regulation, during fires, fire drills, fire
calls and/or other related fire company activity to which a volunteer fire
company of and within the Town of Monroe is called upon to respond.
§ 54-3. Supervision. [Amended 7-18-1979]
The fire police of the Town of Monroe shall act under and be subject to
the direction of the chief of the volunteer fire company to which the fire
policemen belong or any member serving in the capacity of fire officer in
charge of directing activities at such fire or other emergency to which the
fire policemen's company responds.
§ 54-4. Display of badge; other apparel and equipment.16
Each such fire police person, while in the performance of fire police duties,
shall wear the badge of office in plain view of any observer. Each such
fire police person, while directing traffic in performance of the duties of
fire police, shall wear a white helmet with the words "Fire Police" in red
letters on the front thereof or regulation fire police dress uniform cap and,
after dark or in inclement weather, a traffic safety vest, orange or lime
green raincoat or any reflectorized orange or lime green outer clothing that
meets national, state and local traffic safety standards; carry a flashlight,
which shall have a red or orange wand and be capable of projecting a clear
light for the purpose of illumination at nighttime; and utilize hand-held or
portable traffic control devices appropriate for the time of day, weather
and traffic flow. Such helmet, cap, vest, raincoat or outer clothing, badge,
traffic control equipment and flashlight may be supplied by the appointing
municipality or district.
§ 54-5. Appointment of members; qualifications; compensation.
[Amended 7-18-1979]
The Town Council shall appoint fire police persons from a list of fire
company personnel recommended by the volunteer fire companies of the
Town. The fire police persons shall be citizens of the State of Connecticut,
bona fide members of a volunteer fire company of and within the Town of
Monroe and at least 18 years of age. Fire police persons shall submit to the
same criminal record check as required for auxiliary police officers of the
Town of Monroe. The Town Council may refuse to appoint any person who
has been convicted of the crime of moral turpitude. Said fire police persons
shall serve without compensation. The number of fire police persons to
be appointed by the Town Council shall be determined each year upon
recommendation by the volunteer fire companies.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 54-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-6
1:23
§ 54-6. Training. [Added 7-18-1979; amended 7-27-1998]
No person shall be appointed as a fire police person unless he/she shall
have successfully completed a training course in the requirements and
duties of such position of at least four hours in length given by the Monroe
Police Department in cooperation with the volunteer fire companies. No
person shall be reappointed as a fire police person unless he/she shall have
successfully completed a refresher training course of at least two hours
given by the Monroe Police Department in cooperation with the volunteer
fire companies.
§ 54-7. Removal of members.
The Town Council may, upon recommendation of a volunteer fire company,
remove for cause any fire police person appointed hereunder.
§ 54-8. Term of service. [Amended 7-27-1998]
The term of each fire police person shall be one year or until a successor is
duly appointed.
Chapter 60
FUNDS
§ 54-6 MONROE CODE § 54-8
1:24
ARTICLE I
Cornelia H. B. Rogers Memorial Fund
[Adopted 1-30-1911 (Ch. 12, Art. I of the 1976 Code)]
§ 60-1. Trustee appointed; report; bond.
The Treasurer of the Town, and his successors in office, or such other
officers as the Town may at the Annual Town Meeting from time to time
designate, is hereby appointed trustee of said fund so to be received, and
he is to receive said fund after the expenses and fees of the Town's Counsel
have been deducted therefrom, to hold and safely keep the fund so received
by him legally invested. Said fund shall be known as the "Cornelia H. B.
Rogers Memorial Fund" and shall be in memory of Cornelia H. B. Rogers
II and Sarah B. Rogers, daughters of said deceased. The principal thereof
shall be kept intact, and the annual income thereof shall be used for Town
purposes as the Town may from time to time authorize, and said trustee
shall make a report to said Town at its Annual Town Meeting, which report
shall show the amount of the principal of said fund, where and how said
fund is invested and in what securities if said fund shall be invested in
securities, the amount of income received and what disposition has been
made of such income and any additional information which said Town
Meeting or any Town Meeting legally warned and held may require. Said
Town may require said trustee to furnish a bond sufficient in amount to
secure said Town against impairment or loss of said fund, and the Town,
at any Town Meeting regularly warned and held, or the Selectmen of said
Town, may fix the amount of said bond.
§ 60-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-1
1:25

ARTICLE II
Town Deposit Fund
[Adopted 8-2-1924 (Ch. 12, Art. II of the 1976 Code)]
§ 60-2. Findings; separation from other funds.
Whereas it appears that in or about 1837 the Town of Monroe received
from the State of Connecticut the sum of $3,909.02 to be held in trust by
said Town as a fund thereafter known as the "Deposit Fund," the income
therefrom to be appropriated annually towards the support of the common
schools of said Town, and whereas it appears that during the many years
since said date other funds of said Town have in some manner become
added to said fund and carried as a part of said fund and have been for
many years past, by error, reported as a part of said fund and annual reports
by the agent of said Town Deposit Fund, therefore the treasurer and agent
of said Town Deposit Fund is hereby authorized and instructed to separate
said Town Deposit Fund from all other trust funds of said Town in his
hands and hereafter to carry in his records the amount of the principal of
said Town Deposit Fund in his hands as being said sum of $3,909.02 and
hereafter to report in his annual reports on said Town Deposit Fund the
amount of principal of said fund as being said sum of $3,909.02.
§ 60-3. Transfer of other funds and securities.
The agent and treasurer of the Town Deposit Fund is instructed to transfer
to the Stephen Gregory Fund any balance of trust funds and securities
standing in the name of the Monroe Town Deposit Fund after separating the
Town Deposit Fund from other trust funds now in his hands.
§ 60-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-3
1:27

ARTICLE III
Gregory Trust Fund
[Adopted 10-6-1924 (Ch. 12, Art. III of the 1976 Code)]
§ 60-4. Use of income.
The income from the Stephen Gregory Fund shall be applied as indicated
under said will.
§ 60-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-4
1:29

ARTICLE IV
Booth Trust Fund
[Adopted 10-6-1924 (Ch. 12, Art. IV of the 1976 Code)]
§ 60-5. Use of income.
The income from the trust fund of Booth shall be appropriated as specified
as indicated under said will.
§ 60-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-5
1:31

ARTICLE V
Open Space and Land Acquisition Fund
[Adopted 3-28-201117]
§ 60-6. Fund created; purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes, § 7-131r, the
Town of Monroe does hereby create a special fund for the protection and
preservation of Monroe's natural resources and rural character and is in
concert with the Town of Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development.
The fund shall be known as the "Open Space and Land Acquisition Fund."
Such fund shall not lapse at the end of the municipal fiscal year.
§ 60-7. Sources of funding; investments and limitations on fund
use.
A. The Town of Monroe is authorized to and shall deposit all monies
received by it, from whatever source, as monetary gifts for the
acquisition and preservation of open space, including fees, gifts, grants,
donations and loans, unless otherwise restricted, into said Open Space
and Land Acquisition Fund.
B. There shall be deposited in said fund, annually, an amount, not to exceed
the amount which would be generated by the imposition of a tax of two
mills against the property subject to tax in such municipality pursuant
to Chapter 203 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be
appropriated by the municipality.
C. All or any part of the monies in said fund may be invested in any
securities in which public funds may be lawfully invested. All income
derived from such investment shall be placed into the fund and become
a part thereof. The monies so invested shall at all times be subject to
withdrawal for use as hereinafter set forth.
D. No sums contained in said Open Space and Land Acquisition Fund,
including interest and dividends earned, shall be transferred to any
other account within the Town of Monroe budget. No expenditures shall
be made from said account except in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
§ 60-8. Expenditures from fund.
A. The continuation of the Open Space and Land Acquisition Fund shall be
perpetual, notwithstanding that from time to time said fund may be left
with a zero balance or shall be unfunded.
B. Expenditures shall be made from the Open Space and Land Acquisition
Fund only in accordance with the following procedures and
requirements:
(1) Said expenditures shall be made exclusively for the appraisal,
acquisition, and preservation costs relating to parcels of land or
easements, interests or rights therein, the use of which shall be
limited to retention of the parcel in its natural condition or the
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 5-14-2011.
§ 60-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-8
1:33
protection of natural resources for passive recreational or
agricultural purposes.
(2) Recommendations for the appropriation for acquisition of any parcel
and/or easement, right, or interest therein, including the sum to be
expended, shall be approved by a vote of the Conservation and Water
Resources Commission and forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for a report in accordance with Connecticut General
Statutes, § 8-24. This recommendation shall include a full report
from all applicable Town departments, including but not limited to
Planning and Zoning, Inland Wetlands, the Town Engineer, and the
Department of Public Works.
(3) Following review and favorable action by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and incorporation of any changes approved by vote
of the Conservation and Water Resources Commission, any
recommendation for appropriation of monies for acquisition shall be
forwarded to the Board of Finance for approval and then to the Town
Council.
(4) Following the approval of such recommendation by the Board of
Finance for the appropriation of funds, the Town Council shall vote
on it and present it for vote at a duly warned and noticed Special
Town Meeting.
(5) The Town Council shall have the authority to spend up to $6,000
per potential acquisition for expenses incurred in investigation as to
the suitability of land for acquisition by the Town of Monroe. These
expenses shall be taken from the Open Space and Land Acquisition
Fund and shall include such payment for the services of real estate
appraisers, soil scientists, environmental planners and the like.
§ 60-9. Fees in lieu to be deposited.
In the future, fees to the Town of Monroe collected in lieu of any
requirement to provide open space pursuant to the fee-in-lieu-of statute,
C.G.S. §§ 8-25 and 8-25b, if and when authorized by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and added to the Monroe Subdivision Regulations, shall also be
deposited into said Open Space and Land Acquisition Fund.
§ 60-8 MONROE CODE § 60-9
1:34
Chapter 71
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305.
§ 71-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Health Department
Ordinance."
§ 71-2. Formation; authority; purpose.
The Town of Monroe hereby establishes a Health Department which shall
be responsible for protecting the health of residents by enforcing the Public
Health Code of the State of Connecticut established pursuant to § 19a-36 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as well as any local ordinances granting
such authority to the Director of Health. It is hereby declared that the
purpose of the Monroe Health Department is to protect, preserve and
improve the public health of the citizens of Monroe.
§ 71-3. Board of Health.
The Board of Health, as established under the Charter, shall review,
recommend, and/or approve matters of policy of the Monroe Health
Department. Nothing herein shall diminish the authority of the First
Selectman to direct the operations of the Health Department, nor the
authority of the Town Council, as provided elsewhere under the Charter or
the Code of the Town of Monroe.
§ 71-4. Director of Health.
A. Appointment. The First Selectman, after considering the
recommendation of the Board of Health, shall nominate and appoint a
full-time Director of Health pursuant to the procedure and qualifications
set forth in § 19a-200 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
The First Selectman may also nominate and appoint an acting full-time
Director of Health to serve in the Director of Health's absence or if a
vacancy exists, pursuant to the procedure and qualifications set forth in
§ 19a-200 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
B. Powers and duties. The Director of Health shall perform all such duties
as are required of directors of health by the Connecticut General
Statutes or the State of Connecticut Public Health Code. In addition, the
Director of Health shall enforce all ordinances of the Town of Monroe
that provide such authority to the Director of Health, so long as such
ordinances do not conflict with the Connecticut General Statutes or the
State of Connecticut Public Health Code; provided, however, that any
§ 60-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-4
1:35
provision of a Town ordinance which is more strict than the State of
Connecticut Public Health Code shall not constitute a conflict, and the
provision of the Town ordinance shall prevail.
C. Removal. The Director of Health may be removed for cause 1) by the
state Commissioner of Public Health, or 2) by the Town Council upon
the recommendation of the First Selectman, and in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 19a-200 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended.
Chapter 77
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 77-1. Declaration of need.
The Town Council of the Town of Monroe, in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes, § 8-40, does hereby declare, by virtue of this chapter, that
there is a need for a Housing Authority in the Town of Monroe.18
Chapter 84
INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION
§ 84-1. Purpose; creation.
In order to carry out and effectuate the purposes and policies of the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Act, §§ 22a-36 to 22a-45 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, there is hereby created an agency of the Town to be
known as the "Inland Wetlands Commission."
§ 84-2. Appointment; officers; compensation.19
The Inland Wetlands Commission shall be appointed as provided in Chapter
IV, § 12 of the Charter. The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among
its members and a Secretary, who need not be a member of the Commission.
Said Chairman and Secretary shall serve terms ending on January 31 of
the year next following their respective elections. All members shall serve
without compensation.
§ 84-3. Powers and duties.
The Inland Wetlands Commission shall be vested with all powers authorized
by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, as amended, and in particular
shall promulgate such regulations in conformity with the regulations
promulgated by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection as are
necessary to protect the inland wetlands and watercourses within the
18.Editor's Note: See also Ch. IV, § 18 of the Town Charter.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 71-4 MONROE CODE § 84-3
1:36
territorial limits of the Town. The agency shall provide through regulation
the manner in which the boundaries of inland wetlands areas and
watercourses in the Town shall be established, amended or changed and
shall follow the procedures set forth in the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Act. Implementing regulations, to include enforcement
procedures, shall be prepared by the Inland Wetlands Commission and
provided to the Town Council for approval prior to September 1987. The
Inland Wetlands Commission shall be solely responsible for the licensing of
all regulated activities conducted upon an inland wetland or watercourse,
as those terms are defined in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act,
within the Town. In carrying out its licensing activities, the Inland Wetlands
Commission shall follow the standards and procedures set forth in the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act.
§ 84-4. Conflicts of interest.20
No member of the Commission shall participate in the hearing or decision
of such Commission upon any matter in which he is directly or indirectly
interested in a personal or financial sense.21
Chapter 100
LAKE ZOAR AUTHORITY
§ 100-1. Establishment.
The Town of Monroe, acting in concert with any other town or towns having
a portion of Lake Zoar within their territorial limits, hereby establishes a
lake authority for said lake, to be known as the "Lake Zoar Authority."
§ 100-2. Membership; terms of office.
Said Authority shall be composed of three delegates, of whom no more than
two shall be members of the same political party, from each member town
who shall be appointed by the Town Council of each town for terms of three
years, all of which such terms shall commence upon the date when the first
such delegate is appointed, except that the initial appointments shall be for
terms of one, two and three years, respectively.
§ 100-3. Powers.
The Lake Zoar Authority shall exercise all powers granted by the
Connecticut General Statutes under § 7-151a for lake authorities, including,
without limitation, powers relating to the enforcement of boating laws on
said lake and such other powers as from time to time may be granted to
20.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 46, Ethics, Code of.
21.Editor's Note: Original § 13A-5, Effective date; pending applications, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 84-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-3
1:37
said Authority by the legislative bodies of all member towns and the General
Statutes.
Chapter 125
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 125-1. Creation.
There is hereby created the Monroe Parks and Recreation Commission.22
§ 125-2. Location of records and minutes.23
All records of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be maintained and
kept in the office of the Parks and Recreation Department in the Town Hall;
provided, however, that the minutes of each meeting, regular or special,
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 125-3. Powers and duties.
A. The Monroe Parks and Recreation Commission shall be empowered to
advise and make policy as hereinafter specified relating to park and
recreation activity within the Town of Monroe. Said policies shall be
subject to the approval of the legislative body of the Town of Monroe and
shall be carried out and administered by the office of the First Selectman
and the Director of Parks and Recreation of the Town of Monroe.24
B. The Parks and Recreation Commission, in accordance with Chapter IV,
§ 14 of the Monroe Town Charter, shall perform the following advisory
and policy-making duties, subject to the approval of the legislative body
of the Town of Monroe:
(1) Planning and execution of development for acquired recreational
properties, facilities or open spaces.
(2) Establishing policies and programs for the recreational needs of the
Town.
(3) Establishing policies and regulations for the administration of Town
parks and programs.
(4) Developing long-range plans to meet recognized recreational needs
and formally submitting such plans to the Town Council annually.
§ 125-4. Membership; terms; compensation.25
The powers of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be exercised by
the Commission consisting of nine members, who shall be electors of the
Town of Monroe and who shall be appointed for a term of four years by
22.Editor's Note: See also Ch. IV, § 14 of the Town Charter.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 100-3 MONROE CODE § 125-4
1:38
the First Selectman in accordance with the Town Charter. Each appointee
shall serve for such term or until a successor has been duly appointed
or qualified. Such members shall receive no compensation but shall be
reimbursed for the amount of actual expenses incurred by them in the
performance of their duties.
§ 125-5. Officers; minutes.
A. The members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall elect from
within the membership a Chairman at their organizational meeting and
thereafter at their regular meeting in the month of January of each year.
In addition, said Commission shall elect in like manner a Secretary and a
Treasurer, which offices may be combined and which person or persons
need not be a member of the Commission.
B. All officers shall serve without compensation and shall be electors of
the Town of Monroe. All said officers shall serve until the next election
meeting and until a successor is duly elected and qualified. Election shall
be by majority vote of the members of the Commission. Vacancies in
offices shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Commission at a
regular or specially called meeting.
C. Minutes of each meeting of the Commission, whether regular or special
and including public hearings, shall be kept and placed on file in the
office of the Monroe Town Clerk.
§ 125-6. Reports.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall periodically report, upon
request, relating to its programs and activities, to the legislative body of the
Town of Monroe.
§ 125-7. Removal of members; filling of vacancies.26
Removal of members and filling of vacancies shall be as provided in Chapter
IV, § 3 of the Town Charter.
§ 125-8. Duration.
Duration of this Commission shall be perpetual, subject to repeal or
modification of this chapter or the Town Charter of the Town of Monroe.
§ 125-9. Employees subject to Charter and Commission policies.
Any and all employees of the Town of Monroe Parks and Recreation
Department shall be subject to the provisions of the Monroe Town Charter
and policies adopted by the Parks and Recreation Commission, as approved
by the legislative body of the Town of Monroe.
Chapter 130
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 125-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-9
1:39
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
§ 125-9 MONROE CODE § 125-9
1:40
ARTICLE I
Section 401(a) Money Purchase Pension Plan
§ 130-1. Authority; establishment of Section 401(a) Money
Purchase Pension Plan.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the Town Council of the Town of
Monroe (the "Town") by Chapter II Section 4 of the Charter of the Town
of Monroe (the "Charter") and Section 7-450 of the Connecticut General
Statutes, there shall be created and established for the Town of Monroe
(the "Town") the Town of Monroe Section 401(a) Money Purchase Pension
Plan (the "401(a) Plan") in order to provide retirement benefits to certain
employees of the Town in accordance with the requirements of § 401(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code").
§ 130-2. Designation of administrator.
The Town Council has established a pension committee of the Town (the
"Pension Committee") which consists of nine members and includes the
First Selectman, two representatives of the Monroe Town Council, two
representatives of the Monroe Board of Finance, two representatives of
the Monroe Board of Education, the Monroe Town Treasurer, and the
Superintendent of the Monroe Board of Education. The Pension Committee
is designated as the administrator of the 401(a) Plan, and shall have all of
the powers and responsibilities of the administrator of the 401(a) Plan as
provided by applicable law. The members of the Pension Committee shall
receive no compensation for their service.
§ 130-3. Plan documents.
A. The Town, acting through its Town Council, is authorized to adopt the
governing documents of the 401(a) Plan, including but not limited to the
401(a) Plan document and the related trust agreement for the 401(a)
Plan. The Town, acting through its Town Council, is further authorized
to modify, amend, cancel or terminate the 401(a) Plan and its governing
documents, as the Town Council deems appropriate and in accordance
with applicable law.
B. Furthermore, the Town Council is authorized to delegate to the Pension
Committee the authority to adopt amendments to the 401(a) Plan that:
(1) Effectuate the terms of any collective bargaining agreements which
the Town Council has previously approved; or
(1) Are necessary in order to maintain the qualification of the 401(a)
Plan under § 401(a) of the Code.
§ 130-4. Provisions of 401(a) Plan to govern.
The terms of the 401(a) Plan shall govern the ultimate payment and
disbursement of the funds accumulated in the trust for the 401(a) Plan.
Payments shall be made from the 401(a) Plan trust only to provide benefits
to participants and their beneficiaries in accordance with the terms of the
401(a) Plan. Except to the extent permitted by applicable law, no assets of
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:41
the 401(a) Plan trust shall ever revert to, or be used or enjoyed by the Town,
nor shall any such assets ever be used other than for the benefit of the
participants of the 401(a) Plan and their beneficiaries.
§ 130-5. Further actions.
The Town, acting through the First Selectman or his or her designee, is
hereby authorized and empowered to take any further actions that the
First Selectman, in his or her discretion, deems necessary or appropriate
to effectuate the foregoing ordinance, including, without limitation, the
execution of the 401(a) Plan document and its related trust agreement, the
execution of any amendments to such documents, and the submission of
an application to the Internal Revenue Service requesting a determination
regarding the qualification of the 401(a) Plan.
§ 130-4 MONROE CODE § 130-5
1:42
ARTICLE II
Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust
§ 130-6. Authority; establishment of Trust.
Pursuant to the authority granted to the Town Council of the Town of
Monroe (the "Town") by Chapter II Section 4 of the Charter of the Town
of Monroe (the "Charter") and Section 7-450(b) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, there shall be created and established for the Town of Monroe (the
"Town") the Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust (the "OPEB Trust") to
fund certain retiree benefits pursuant to the terms of previously established
plans for the benefit of certain employees and retirees, their spouses and
dependents (the "OPEB System").
§ 130-7. Establishment of Other Post-Employment Benefits Board.
Immediately upon the enactment of this article, there shall be established
an OPEB Board of Trustees (the "OPEB Board") as provided for in
Connecticut General Statutes Section 7-450(b) for the management and
investment of the OPEB Trust. The OPEB Board shall consist of five (5)
members and shall include the First Selectman, the Chairman of the Town
Council, the Chairman of the Board of Finance, the Chairman of the Police
Commission and the Director of Finance. Each member shall serve for terms
coextensive with the terms of their respective positions. Three members
shall constitute a quorum of the OPEB Board. The members of said OPEB
Board shall receive no compensation for service.
§ 130-8. Trust Agreement.
The Town, acting through its Town Council, and the OPEB Board are hereby
authorized and directed to enter into a Trust Agreement to govern the
administration, management and investment of the OPEB Trust and the
assets thereof (the "Trust Agreement"). The Town, acting through its Town
Council, and the OPEB Board, are further authorized to modify, amend,
cancel or terminate the Trust Agreement, as they deem appropriate and in
accordance with applicable law.
§ 130-9. Powers and duties of OPEB Board.
The OPEB Board shall perform the duties set forth in the OPEB Trust
Agreement, as amended from time to time, relating to the management
of the assets held in the OPEB Trust. The Town's Treasurer initially shall
have the care and custody of all funds held in the OPEB Trust and shall
have the power, with the approval of the OPEB Board, to invest such
funds in securities legal for investment for such trust funds. One or more
investment managers and a custodian may be appointed by the OPEB Board
in accordance with the terms of the Trust Agreement.
§ 130-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-10
1:43
§ 130-10. Provisions of OPEB System to govern.
The terms of the OPEB System shall govern the ultimate payment and
disbursement of the funds accumulated in the OPEB Trust. Payments shall
be made from the OPEB Trust only to provide benefits to beneficiaries in
accordance with the terms of the OPEB System. Funds held in the OPEB
Trust may not be used for any purpose other than to:
A. Pay reasonable operating and administrative expenses of the OPEB
Trust;
B. Make payments permitted under applicable Connecticut law;
C. Pay benefits to beneficiaries in accordance with the terms of the OPEB
System; and
D. Make a distribution to a trust or entity whose income is exempt from
federal income taxation under § 115 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended, as specified by the Town upon the termination of the
Trust Agreement as provided in the Trust Agreement.
§ 130-11. Further actions.
The Town, acting through the First Selectman, or his designee, is hereby
authorized and approved to take any further action that he, in his discretion,
deems necessary or appropriate to effectuate the foregoing ordinance
including, without limitation, the filing and executing appropriate
documents and requests with the Internal Revenue Service.
§ 130-10 MONROE CODE § 130-11
1:44
Chapter 138
PURCHASING POLICY
§ 138-1. General purchasing policy.
As provided in Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148v, the Town of Monroe
hereby establishes a general purchasing policy. The purpose of this policy
is to ensure fair competition, to favor businesses located in Monroe and to
achieve the best value for the expenditure while not being detrimental to
the provisioning of Town services in a timely manner.
§ 138-2. Implementation.
A. The First Selectman shall develop implementing procedures for this
policy within 60 days of enactment of this chapter. After approval by the
Town Council, these procedures shall be made available to the public in
the Town Clerk's office and in any other manner deemed appropriate by
the First Selectman and the Town Clerk.
B. The procedures shall include provisions for the preference of businesses
located in Monroe, provided that the Monroe vendors are competitive in
almost all aspects of the purchase and if the First Selectman deems it to
be in the best interests of the Town to do so.
C. The First Selectman may make changes to the policy, provided that the
changes are approved by the Town Council.
D. The procedures shall be effective and valid under applicable laws. If any
provision of these procedures is held invalid under applicable law, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby.27
Chapter 146
REGIONAL COUNCIL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Agency — See Ch. 147.
§ 146-1. Purpose.
The Town of Monroe recognizes that formation of a Regional Council of
Elected Officials will improve the continued operation of the Greater
Bridgeport Regional Planning Agency (the "Agency")28 as the designated
regional planning organization of the Greater Bridgeport Planning Region
by providing a policy board to guide the Agency regarding the study of
issues of mutual concern to two or more members.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Regional Planning Agency.
§ 130-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:45
§ 146-2. Legislative authority.
In accordance with the provisions of §§ 4-124c through 4-124h, inclusive,
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the Town of Monroe
hereby agrees to form and join a regional organization know as the "Greater
Bridgeport Regional Council of Elected Officials" as the designated policy
board to guide the Agency.
§ 146-3. When effective.29
This chapter shall become effective upon the enactment and approval of
a similar ordinance by all other members that will comprise the Greater
Bridgeport Regional Council of Elected Officials.
Chapter 147
REGIONAL PLANNING AGENCY
§ 147-1. Adoption of statute; creation of agency.30
Pursuant to Chapter 127 (§ 8-31a et seq.) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the Town of Monroe hereby adopts said Chapter 127 as amended
from time to time and joins in the creation of a regional planning agency for
the Bridgeport region as defined by the Secretary of the Office of Policy and
Management pursuant to state statute.
§ 147-2. Local representation.
The Town of Monroe shall have two representatives on said agency
pursuant to Chapter 127 as aforesaid. The Town Council of the Town of
Monroe and the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Monroe
are each hereby authorized to appoint to the Regional Planning Agency one
elector of the Town of Monroe for a term of two years. Appointees under this
section shall continue to serve after expiration of their respective terms and
until their successors are appointed, qualified and take office. Appointees
may be reappointed for successive terms.
§ 147-3. Attendance requirements.
Any representative appointed hereunder to the Regional Planning Agency
who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the Regional
Planning Agency and any intervening duly called special meetings thereof
may be considered to have resigned said Regional Planning Agency, and
the appointing authority may, upon majority vote thereof, a quorum being
present, declare a vacancy in said body until the term expires; provided,
however, that the requirements of this section may be waived where illness
29.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 7-24-2010.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 146-2 MONROE CODE § 147-3
1:46
or other extenuating circumstances make it impossible for a representative
to meet the attendance requirements of this section.
Chapter 178
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY
§ 178-1. Establishment.
A board of five members to be known as the "Monroe Water Pollution
Control Authority (MWPCA)" is hereby established pursuant to § 7-246 of
the Connecticut General Statutes.31
§ 178-2. Power and duties.
The Authority shall have all the powers and duties of, and be governed by,
the provisions set forth in Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as the same may be amended. It shall function in such a manner as to
conform to the requirements of the Town Charter, specifically reserving to
the Town Council, the First Selectman, the Board of Finance and the Town
Meeting all powers as provided therein.
§ 178-3. Appointment; compensation; terms of office.32
The members of the Authority, serving without compensation, shall be
appointed by the First Selectman, subject to the approval of the Town
Council, for terms of four years in accordance with Chapter IV, § 20 of
the Town Charter. A member is not precluded from succeeding himself
or herself. All appointed members shall be resident electors of the Town
of Monroe. Members shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their
duties.33
§ 178-4. Vacancies.
In the event of any vacancy, the First Selectman shall promptly appoint,
subject to approval of the Town Council, a member to fill the vacancy for the
unexpired portion of the term.
§ 178-5. Meetings; quorum.
The Authority shall hold regular meetings and keep records of the same.
Meetings shall be held upon the call of the Chairman, or at the call of
the majority of the members of the Authority, or at the call of the First
Selectman. Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum.
31.Editor's Note: See also Ch. IV, § 20 of the Town Charter.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
33.Editor's Note: Original § 29-4, Terms of appointment, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 147-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-6
1:47
§ 178-6. Officers.
At its first meeting, the Authority shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman,
and a Secretary. Subsequently, the Authority shall hold an annual
organizational meeting each July to elect officers; at least four members of
the Authority shall be present and voting. Officers will serve a term of one
year.
§ 178-7. Collection of charges.
The Tax Collector of the Town of Monroe is hereby designated as the
collector of sewerage system connection and use charges pursuant to
Chapter 103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be
amended.
§ 178-8. Sewer use charges.
All charges for the use of sewers constructed in Monroe by the Authority
shall be paid for and apportioned among the users of the sewerage system
in the manner determined by the Authority so that each recipient of waste
treatment services will pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation
and maintenance. Sewer use charges shall include charges made to the
Town of Monroe pursuant to any agreements with the Town of Trumbull and
the City of Bridgeport for the use of the Trumbull system and the Bridgeport
sewerage treatment plant.
§ 178-9. Financial records; annual report; budget.
The Authority shall maintain proper accounting and financial records and
shall make an annual report to the First Selectman. The Authority shall
prepare annually a budget of estimated revenues and expenditures for
the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with the Town's normal budgeting
process.
§ 178-10. Disposition of revenue.
All revenue from benefit assessments and fee charges, and the proceeds of
the sale of notes and bonds, shall be held and accounted for separately from
the other funds of the Town.
Chapter 190
YOUTH COMMISSION
§ 190-1. Establishment.
There shall be a Commission to develop and coordinate programs for the
youth of the Town of Monroe.34
34.Editor's Note: See also Ch. IV, § 21 of the Town Charter.
§ 178-6 MONROE CODE § 190-2
1:48
§ 190-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Monroe Youth Commission is to advise and assist the
First Selectman with developing, planning, coordinating and/or conducting
programs and/or activities that address the health, social, employment and
general welfare needs of the youth of the Town of Monroe. Such programs
and activities shall avoid unnecessary duplication of those provided by
public and private agencies.
§ 190-3. Definition.
A youth is defined as someone under 18 years of age or someone who is
enrolled in but has not yet completed Grade 12 in high school.
§ 190-4. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 2-13-1996]
The members of the Youth Commission shall keep themselves
knowledgeable of the conditions and needs of the youth in Monroe in regard
to health, social, employment and general welfare concerns. The Youth
Commission shall:
A. Act as a liaison to the Town in communicating needs and concerns of the
youth.
B. Evaluate existing programs and current needs and propose new ideas
and programs to fill the needs which are not currently being met.
C. Support, promote and participate in youth development and
achievement-oriented programs.
D. Promote better utilization of existing school and Town facilities for fellow
Monroe youths.
E. Present to the First Selectman an annual report of its activities and such
other reports as may be required.
F. Serve as the Advisory Board of the Youth Services Bureau.
§ 190-5. Membership. [Amended 2-13-1996]
The membership of the Commission shall consist of seven members over
18 years of age, appointed by the First Selectman and approved by the
Town Council. The membership shall include at least one member currently
under 21 years of age and a representative of the school system, the
Police Department, and a private youth serving agency. Also, up to 35
Monroe youths (not more than seven from each of the Grades 8 through
12) regardless of school selected by the Youth Commission shall act as
an advisory board to the Youth Commission with rights of participation in
Commission meetings but no voting rights.
§ 190-6. Terms of office; officers.
A. Members of the Commission shall be appointed for two-year terms.
B. Initially, the Commission shall meet upon the call of the First Selectman
to select a Chairman and Secretary. Subsequently, Commission officers
will be selected annually, in September, in accordance with the bylaws
established by the Commission.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-7
1:49
§ 190-7. Budget and administration.
All budgetary concerns, as well as the general administration of the
Commission, shall be in such a manner as to conform to the requirements
of the Town Charter.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 200
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 200-1. Policy statement.
A. There are or may be adult-oriented establishments, as hereinafter
defined, located in the Town of Monroe ("Town") which will require
special supervision from the Town's public safety agencies in order to
protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the patrons of
such establishments as well as the health, safety and welfare of the
Town's citizens.
B. The continued unregulated operation of adult-oriented establishments is
and would be detrimental to the general welfare, health and safety of the
citizens of the Town.
C. The Constitution and the laws of the State of Connecticut grant to the
Town regulatory and police powers to enact reasonable legislation and
measures to regulate and supervise adult-oriented establishments in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
D. It is not the intent of the Council, in enacting this chapter, to deny to any
person rights protected by the United States and/or state Constitution,
nor is it the intent of the Council to impose any additional limitations or
restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented films, videotapes, books and/or other materials.
Further, by enacting this chapter, the Council does not intend to deny or
restrict the right of any adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented
materials protected by the United States and/or state Constitution, nor
does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights
that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may
have to sell, distribute or exhibit such materials.
§ 200-2. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly
indicated by the context:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition of any adult-oriented
motion picture, live performance, display or dance of any type,
pantomime, modeling or any other personal services offered customers
which as a significant or substantial portion of such performance has any
actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities, as defined
in this section, or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas,
§ 190-7 MONROE CODE § 200-2
1:50
as defined in this section, removal of articles of clothing or persons
appearing unclothed.
ADULT MEDIA OUTLET — A business engaging in the barter, rental
or sale of books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, pictures,
slides, records, audio tapes, videotapes, compact discs, motion pictures,
films and/or other media, if such business is open to the public, patrons
or members and if a substantial or significant portion of such items
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
as defined in this section. For the purposes of this definition, the factors
which may be considered in determining whether a substantial or
significant portion of a business is devoted to the sale or rental of such
items may include, without limitation, the following:
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of fewer than 50 persons regularly used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons regularly used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as defined in this section, for observation by patrons
therein.
ADULT NEWSRACK — Any coin- or card-operated device that offers
for sale by dispensing printed material which is distinguished or
characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in
this section.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT — Includes, without limitation,
adult media outlet, adult motion-picture theater, adult mini motionpicture
theater, adult newsrack and adult retail establishment and,
further, means any premises to which the public, patrons or members
are invited or admitted and which is so physically arranged as to provide
booths, cubicles, stalls, studios or rooms separate from the common
areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures or, further, means any premises wherein an entertainer provides
(1) The number of such items displayed for sale;
(2) The dollar value of such items displayed for sale;
The number of such items included in the entire inventory of the
business; or
(3)
The dollar value of such items included in the entire inventory of the
business.
(4)
§ 200-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-2
1:51
adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a member,
when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or
maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. "Adult-oriented establishment"
further includes, without limitation, any adult entertainment studio or
any premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether
advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, rap studio,
exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio
or any other term of like import.
ADULT RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — A business which offers for sale
or rent instruments, devices, gifts or paraphernalia which are designed
or marketed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, as
defined in this section, clothing that graphically depicts specified
anatomical areas, as defined in this section, or any of the materials
sold or rented in an adult media outlet, as defined in this section, if
a substantial or significant portion of such items is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in
this section. For purposes of this definition, a substantial or significant
portion of a business shall be determined by reference to the factors,
without limitation, set forth in the definition of "adult media outlet."
In determining whether an item is designed or marketed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities, as defined in this section, the
following guidelines may be considered:
COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Monroe, Connecticut.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, including an independent contractor, who
works in or at an adult-oriented establishment, as defined in this section,
or who renders any services directly related to the operation of an adultoriented
establishment.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an
adult-oriented establishment, as defined in this section, whether or not
(1) Expert testimony as to the principal use of the item;
Evidence concerning the total business of a person or business
establishment and the type of merchandise involved in the business;
(2)
National and local advertising concerning the nature of the business
establishment;
(3)
Evidence of advertising concerning the nature of the business
establishment;
(4)
Instructions, graphics or other materials contained on the item itself
or on the packaging materials for the item;
(5)
(6) The physical or structural characteristics of the item; or
The manner in which the item is displayed, including its proximity to
other regulated merchandise.
(7)
§ 200-2 MONROE CODE § 200-2
1:52
a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not the
entertainer is provided as an employee or an independent contractor.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the Town Police Department, Health
Department, Fire Department, including the Fire Marshal, or Building
Department, the Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or any other Town
employee designated by the Council who shall hereby be authorized
to inspect premises regulated under this chapter, to take the required
actions authorized by this chapter in case violations are found on such
premises and to require corrections of unsatisfactory conditions found
on the premises.
MINOR — A person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any person or a proprietor, shareholder, general partner,
member of a limited liability company or limited partner who holds 25%
or more of the shares, ownership interest or partnership interest of any
entity which operates, conducts, owns or maintains an adult-oriented
establishment, as defined in this section.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
B. The foregoing specifications are not intended to include any matter
which is the subject of bona fide medical publications or films or bona
fide educational publications or films; nor do the specifications include
any art or photography publications which devote at least 25% of each
issue to articles and advertisements dealing with subjects of art or
photography; nor do the specifications apply to any news periodical
which reports or describes current events and which, from time to
time, publishes photographs of nude or seminude persons in connection
with the dissemination of the news; nor do the specifications apply to
Less than completely or opaquely covered:
(a) Human genitals;
(b) Human pubic region;
(c) Human buttocks; or
Human female breasts below a point immediately above the top
of the areola.
(d)
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
or opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Genitals in state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
Sex acts, actual or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, sodomy or bestiality; or
(2)
Fondling or erotic touching of genitals, pubic region, buttocks or
breasts.
(3)
§ 200-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-2
1:53
publications or films which describe and report different cultures and
which, from time to time, publish or show photographs or depictions of
nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in which nudity or
seminudity is indigenous to the population.
§ 200-3. Operating requirements.
A. No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall allow
or permit any minor to loiter in any part of such establishment, including
parking lots immediately adjacent to such establishment used by patrons
of such adult-oriented establishment.
B. Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in the Town on and
after June 15, 1997, shall be well lighted at all times and be physically
arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths,
cubicles, stalls, studios or rooms wherein adult entertainment is
provided shall be clearly visible from the common areas of the premises.
Visibility into such booths, cubicles, stalls, studios or rooms shall not be
blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed booths,
cubicles, stalls, studios or rooms within adult-oriented establishments
for the purpose of providing for adult entertainment.
C. On and after June 15, 1997, the operator of each adult-oriented
establishment shall be responsible for and shall provide that any room
or other area used for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion
pictures or other types of adult entertainment shall be well lighted and
readily accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view
in its entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator and
his/her/its agents to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times when any patron is present in the premises.
D. Every act or omission committed by an employee constituting a violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of
the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator or as a result of the operator's
negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator
shall be subject to penalties for such act or omission in the same manner
as if the operator had committed the act or caused the omission.
E. All adult-oriented establishments shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the officers of the Monroe Police Department,
inspectors employed by the Town or such other persons as the Council
may designate.
F. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is less
than 500 feet from an area zoned residential.
G. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is
less than 500 feet from any site upon which is situated any preexisting
residential dwelling, public or private school, place of worship, public
library, public park, day-care center, teen center or municipal facility.
§ 200-2 MONROE CODE § 200-3
1:54
H. No adult-oriented establishment shall be permitted on a site that is
less than 1,000 feet from a site upon which an existing adult-oriented
establishment is located.
§ 200-4. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation who or
which is found to have violated this chapter shall be fined a definite sum
not exceeding $250 for each such violation.35
B. Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense, and
any violation continuing more than one hour of time shall be considered
a separate offense for each hour of violation.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to limit any remedy
the Town may have for the enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 206
ALARM SYSTEMS
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:55

ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 12-13-201036]
§ 206-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce excessive false alarms, which
burden the Monroe Police Department's limited law enforcement resources
by emphasizing to both alarm users and alarm companies the need to
properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems.
This article establishes reasonable expectations of alarm users to ensure
responsibility for the use of their alarm systems.
§ 206-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — The Chief of Police or his designee, who shall
administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer
the provisions of this article.
ALARM COMPANY — A person or a company engaged in selling, leasing,
installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems.
ALARM PERMIT — A permit issued by the Chief of Police allowing the
operation of an alarm system within the Town of Monroe.
ALARM SIGNAL — A detectable signal, audible or visual, generated by
an alarm system, to which the Monroe Police Department is requested to
respond.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any single device or assembly of equipment designed
to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity
requiring immediate attention, and to which law enforcement is requested
to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms,
domestic violence alarms or alarms designed to elicit a medical response.
ALARM USER — Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
governmental or education entity or any other entity owning, leasing or
operating an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained for the protection of such premises.
ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS — A class conducted for the purpose
of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation and
maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.
CANCELLATION — The process where response is terminated when the
alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the Monroe Police
Department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring
police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior
36.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-17-2011.
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-2
1:57
to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of
civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence
of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals activated to
summon law enforcement personnel, unless law enforcement response was
cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement
personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meanings
of this article when, upon inspection by the Monroe Police Department,
evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery or other such crime
was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have
activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be
determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions
of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not
reasonably subject to control by the alarm user.
LOCAL ALARM — An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that
is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored
by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or
user.
PERMIT YEAR — A twelve-month period beginning on the day and month
on which an alarm permit is issued.
RUNAWAY ALARM — An alarm system that produces repeated alarm
signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The
Monroe Police Department may, in its discretion, discontinue police
responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm.
SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01 — The American National
Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA)
CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that
details recommended design features for security system control panels
and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms.
Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized
testing organization will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in
accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm
Reduction."
TOWN — The Town of Monroe or its agent.
VERIFY — An attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative,
to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other
electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to
attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting
law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm
dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall
require, as a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number,
if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify
himself or herself to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid
before requesting law enforcement dispatch.
§ 206-2 MONROE CODE § 206-3
1:58
§ 206-3. Alarm permit required.
A. Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system without first
obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the Town of Monroe. This
applies to new alarm systems as well as existing alarm systems. There
will be no fee required for the initial registration, and the alarm owner
shall renew all information annually with the Monroe Police Department
with no fee charged to the alarm owner. Each alarm permit shall be
assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit
number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch.
B. Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form
provided by the Town of Monroe. An alarm user has the duty to obtain
an application from the Town.
C. Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an
alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining
possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit
within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are
not transferable.
D. Reporting updated information. Whenever the information provided on
the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide
correct information to the Town of Monroe within 30 days of the change.
In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders
will receive from the Town a form requesting updated information. The
permit holder shall complete and return this form to the Town when
any of the requested information has changed; failure to comply will
constitute a violation and may result in a civil penalty.
E. Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems
protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses
and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure
and/or tenant.
§ 206-4. Duties of alarm user.
The alarm user must:
A. Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce
or eliminate false alarms.
B. Provide the alarm company the permit number. (The number must be
provided to the Police Department communications center by the alarm
company to ensure dispatch.)
C. Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's
location within 30 minutes when notified by the Monroe Police
Department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system.
D. Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform
routine maintenance as prescribed by alarm system provider.
E. Obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in
address or ownership of a business or residence.
§ 206-5. Duties of alarm company.
A. Any person engaged in the alarm business in the Town of Monroe shall
comply with the following:
§ 206-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-5
1:59
(1) Obtain and maintain the required State of Connecticut license(s);
(2) Be able to provide the name, address and telephone number of the
license holder or a designee who can be called in an emergency, 24
hours a day, and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified,
within two hours; and
(3) Be able to provide the most current contact information for the alarm
user.
B. The alarm company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of
its alarm users in the proper operation of their alarm system, including
the proper method of turning the system on and off and how to avoid
false alarms.
C. Ninety days after the enactment of this article, the alarm installation
companies shall, on all new and upgraded installations, use only alarm
control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.
D. Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide
instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the
alarm user.
E. The alarm company must provide written information on how to obtain
service from the alarm company for the alarm system.
F. An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:
(1) Attempt to verify an alarm, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm
user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid
before requesting Police Department dispatch. Telephone
verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second call be made
to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user
who can properly identify himself or herself to attempt to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or
robbery-in-progress alarm or in cases where a crime-in-progress has
been verified by video and/or audible means.
(2) Provide an alarm user registration number to the Police Department
communications center to facilitate dispatch and /or cancellations.
(3) Communicate any available information about the alarm.
(4) Communicate a cancellation to the Police Department
communications center as soon as possible following a determination
that response is unnecessary.
§ 206-6. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of
summoning law enforcement when there is no reasonable belief that a
burglary, robbery or any other crime against life or property is being
committed or attempted on the premises or to otherwise cause a false
alarm.
B. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or use an audible alarm system
which can sound continually for more than 10 minutes.
§ 206-7. Penalties for offenses; use of fees.
A. Excessive false alarms/failure to register. Two or more false alarms
within a permit year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance and shall
§ 206-5 MONROE CODE § 206-7
1:60
be unlawful. Fines for excessive false alarms within a calendar year may
be assessed against an alarm user as follows:
(1) First false alarm: Written warning.
(2) Second false alarm: $50.
(3) Third, fourth and fifth false alarms: $75.
(4) Sixth and seventh false alarms: $100.
(5) Eighth and ninth false alarms: $125.
(6) Tenth and over false alarms: $250.
(7) Failure to register/failure to renew annually: $100.
B. Other fees. Violations of other sections of this article will be enforced
through the assessment of a fee in the amount of $100 per violation.
C. Payment of fees. Fees shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the
invoice.
D. Civil noncriminal violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this
article may cause civil action and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or
infraction.
E. Allocation of fees. All fees received under this section shall be credited
to a separate account to be used to improve the police service.
§ 206-8. Alarm user awareness class.
The Town of Monroe may create and implement an alarm user awareness
class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist
in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm
users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how
to help reduce false alarms. The Town may grant the option of attending a
class in lieu of paying one assessed fine.
§ 206-9. Appeals.
A. Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalty(ies) and other
enforcement decisions made under this article may be appealed by filing
a written notice of appeal with the Monroe Police Department within
10 days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil fees or
other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within
this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
assessment of penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall
be heard through an administrative process established by the Town of
Monroe and subject to the Statutes of the State of Connecticut. The
initial appeal shall be heard by the Police Chief or his/her designee.
Secondary appeals shall be submitted directly to the Board of Police
Commissioners who shall act in the capacity of a hearing board.
B. Appeal standard. The hearing board shall review an appeal from the
assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision using
a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a
determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the
assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision, the
hearing board shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil fees or
reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted.
§ 206-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-10
1:61
§ 206-10. Alarm records confidential.
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered
through the alarm registration applications, no-response records,
applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in
confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the Town of Monroe.
§ 206-11. Governmental immunity.
Alarm registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, for response. Any and all liability
and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a
notification is hereby disclaimed, and governmental immunity, as provided
by law, is retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user
acknowledges that the Monroe Police Department response may be
influenced by factors such as the availability of police units, priority of calls,
weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels
and prior response history.
§ 206-12. Exemptions for Town and Board of Education.
No fees or fines shall be assessed for alarm systems installed by or on behalf
of the Town of Monroe or the Board of Education. However, the applicable
municipal department or Board of Education shall register any such alarm
system with the Police Department. There shall be no fees charged to the
Town of Monroe or the Monroe Board of Education for alarm registration.
§ 206-10 MONROE CODE § 206-12
1:62
Chapter 208
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 206-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-12
1:63

ARTICLE I
Possession by Minors
[Adopted 10-24-2004]
§ 208-1. Findings.
A. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor is a matter of a growing
local, regional, and national concern.
B. Consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor unsupervised by a parental
authority creates a health and safety risk not only to our children but
also to the general public.
C. The Town of Monroe seeks to protect, preserve, and promote the health,
safety, welfare and the quality of life of its residents by regulating the
possession of alcohol by minors.
§ 208-2. Purpose.37
The purpose of this article is to regulate the possession of alcoholic
beverages by minors on both public and private property.
§ 208-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — The same meaning as the term defined in Title 30,
§ 30-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time.
HOST — The person who organizes a gathering of two or more persons or
allows the premises under his/her control to be used with his/her knowledge
for a gathering of two or more persons for personal, social or business
interaction.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 21 years old.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency,
or political or administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of
any kind.
§ 208-4. Possession.
No person under the age of 21 shall be in possession of alcoholic liquors,
whether opened or closed, within the Town of Monroe, except when
accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or spouse who has
attained the age of 21 years. This restriction shall apply to public and
private property.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 208-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 208-5
1:65
§ 208-5. Hosting events.
No person shall host an event or gathering at which alcohol will be
consumed by or dispensed to any minor unless said minor is accompanied
by or in the presence of his or her parent, guardian, or spouse who has
attained the age of 21. This restriction shall apply to any event or gathering
within the Town of Monroe whether conducted on public or private
property.
§ 208-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 208-4 and 208-5 of this article shall not apply to the
following:
A. A minor who possesses alcoholic liquor on the order of a practicing
physician or any other person who sells, ships, delivers, or gives any
alcoholic liquors to a minor on the order of a practicing physician.
B. A person over the age of 18 who is an employee or permit holder
under § 30-90a of the Connecticut General Statutes and who possesses
alcoholic liquor in the course of such person's employment or business
or in the course of a sale, shipment, or delivery of alcoholic liquor made
to a person over the age of 18 who is an employee or permit holder
under § 30-90a of the Connecticut General Statutes and where such sale,
shipment, or delivery is made in the course of such person's employment
or business.
§ 208-7. Penalties for offenses.38
A. Any adult violating § 208-5 of this article shall be subject to a fine of
$250.
B. Any minor violating § 208-4 or 208-5 of this article shall be subject to a
fine of $250.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 208-5 MONROE CODE § 208-7
1:66
Chapter 213
AMUSEMENTS
§ 213-1. License required; applicability. [Amended 5-13-1976]
No person shall use any premises or part thereof for holding, conducting,
producing or displaying, indoors or outdoors, any exhibitions, public
amusements or sporting events for which an admission charge or other
charge is made unless he shall have an amusement license of the proper
class issued by the Chief of Police for the premises so used. The provisions
of this section shall apply to exhibitions, public amusements or professional
or amateur sports conducted by public or private schools or charitable,
religious, welfare, fraternal, civic or volunteer firemen's organizations or
bona fide veterans' organizations, as well as any person who engages in
the business of holding, conducting, producing or displaying exhibitions,
public amusements or professional sports as principal, agent, employee or
contractor. Events held on municipally owned property are exempt from the
provisions of this section if sponsored by the municipality.
§ 213-2. Classes of licenses.
Amusement licenses shall be classified according to the purpose for which
issued, as follows:
A. Amusement license, theatrical, which shall permit the conduct of
theatrical performances, whether with living actors or by motion
pictures.
B. Amusement license, dance, which shall permit the conduct of dances.
C. Amusement license, carnival, which shall permit the conduct of a circus,
carnival or other portable show or exhibition.
D. Amusement license, sport, which shall permit the conduct of a sporting
contest.
E. Amusement license, musical, which shall permit the conduct of concerts
and other musical performances, whether indoors of outdoors. [Added
5-13-1976]
F. Amusement license, other, which shall permit the conduct of various
events and gatherings, whether indoors or outdoors, which do not fall
into any of the above categories, e.g., beer festivals, wine-tasting parties,
etc. [Added 5-13-1976]
§ 213-3. License application; term; sign; conditions.
A. Application for license.
(1) Any person desiring an amusement license shall make application
to the Chief of Police for such license on a form provided by such
officer. Such application shall state the class of license desired,
the name and address of the applicant and, if the applicant is a
partnership or corporation, the names and addresses of the partners
or principal officers. Each application shall describe the premises
proposed to be used by the applicant.
§ 208-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-3
1:67
(2) Upon the receipt of any application for an amusement license, the
Chief of Police shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises
described in such application. Said inspection shall take into
consideration the following standards for issuance of a license:
general site location, public access and egress, accessibility to
emergency vehicles and apparatus, public capacity, parking capacity,
traffic congestion, hours of operation, duration of event, impact
on the environment and adjoining property owners and such other
factors as may bear upon the application. Any standard which cannot
be met and creates a condition which is deemed to be detrimental
to the general health, safety and public welfare shall be grounds for
denial of the requested license. [Amended 5-13-1976]
(3) The Chief of Police shall determine if the event for which a license is
sought requires the presence of one or more police officers and shall
make such requirement a condition of the license. Whenever special
police officers are required at an event, the applicant shall make
arrangements for such police protection with the Chief of Police and
shall pay for such services at the current rate. [Added 5-13-1976]
(4) Each applicant for an amusement license who intends to use or
employ passenger-carrying devices shall furnish proof of financial
responsibility in the form of a certificate that the applicant and
the owner and operator of each such device, if the applicant is a
person other than the owner and operator, is insured, with respect
to each such passenger-carrying device, for liability for personal
injury and property damage and that such insurance has personal
injury limits of $100,000/$300,000 and property damage limits of
$5,000/$25,000. Such certificate of insurance shall provide that such
insurance will not be canceled except upon five days' notice of
cancellation to the Chief of Police of the Town of Monroe. Each
applicant may be required to furnish a certificate of inspection by
a licensed engineer certifying that such passenger-carrying device
has been examined within 30 days of the date of application and has
been found to be safe for the carrying of passengers.
(5) Each applicant for an amusement license for the conduct of a circus,
carnival or other portable show or exhibition to be presented out
of doors or under a tent or other portable shelter and involving the
assembly of 100 or more persons shall furnish proof that a license for
the operation of such circus, carnival or portable show or exhibition
has been issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety.39
B. Term. Amusement licenses issued by the Chief of Police shall remain in
force for such period, not exceeding six days, as shall be stated on the
license.
C. Sign. The Chief of Police shall furnish with each license a suitable sign
to be posted on the premises to be used.
D. Conditions.
(1) An amusement license may be issued upon the condition that the
amusement be policed by such number of regular or special
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-3 MONROE CODE § 213-3
1:68
policemen as the Chief of Police may deem necessary in the interests
of public safety. The compensation of the regular or special
policemen shall be paid by the licensee.
(2) No amusement license shall be issued by the Chief of Police where
he deems the proposed event to be to the detriment of public health,
welfare or safety or to create what he deems to be a public nuisance.
A determination by the Chief of Police that an amusement license
will not issue shall be appealed, if the applicant objects thereto, to
the Town Council of Monroe, where an affirmative vote of a twothirds
majority of the Council will reverse the decision of the Chief
of Police. [Added 12-28-1970]
§ 213-4. License fees; waiver. [Amended 5-13-1976; 12-10-1990]
A. The following fees shall be charged for amusement licenses:
(1) Amusement license, theatrical: $10 for the first day and $2 for each
additional day.
(2) Amusement license, dance: $10 for the first day and $2 for each
additional day.
(3) Amusement license, carnival: $25 plus $5 for each passengercarrying
device.
(4) Amusement license, sport: $10 for each day
(5) Amusement license, musical: $10 for the first day and $2 for each
additional day.
(6) Amusement license, other: $10 for each day.
B. The above fees shall be waived where the applicant for a license is a local
public or private school or a charitable, religious, welfare, fraternal, civic
or volunteer firemen's organization or a bona fide veterans' organization.
§ 213-5. Display of sign.
Each person holding an amusement license shall display in a conspicuous
place on the premises to which such amusement license applies a sign
issued by the Chief of Police indicating that a license has been issued. Such
sign shall contain the amusement license number and the date of expiration
of such license.
§ 213-6. Admission of minors.
No person conducting any professional sport, exhibition or public
amusement under an amusement license shall permit any person under
the age of 12 years, unaccompanied by an adult, to enter or remain upon
the premises where such sport, exhibition or public amusement is being
conducted after 8:00 p.m.
§ 213-7. Revocation of license.
Any amusement license may be revoked by the Chief of Police upon the
failure of the licensee to provide such insurance or police protection as may
have been required under these regulations.
§ 213-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-8
1:69
§ 213-8. Penalties for offenses.40
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $250.
Chapter 220
AUCTIONS
§ 220-1. License required; exceptions.
A. License required. No person shall, within the Town, expose for sale by
auction any goods or articles, except provisions, charcoal, wood, the
products of a farm and secondhand household furniture, unless he shall
have an auctioneer's license issued by the Chief of Police.
B. Nonapplicability.
(1) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to an auction held
under the direction of an executor or administrator or under the
provisions of any court order nor to an auction of household goods or
personal effects by the owner thereof.
(2) This chapter shall not apply to any auction conducted by or
contracted for the state in accordance with any court order. [Added
10-14-1976]
(3) Any permanent business conducting auctions located on its premises
within the geographic boundaries of the Town of Monroe whose
primary business consists of public auctions shall only be required
to apply for an auctioneer’s license once per year. [Added
12-12-2011]
§ 220-2. Application for license.
Any person desiring an auctioneer's license shall make application to the
Chief of Police, in writing, on a form provided by such officer. Each
application shall state the address at which the auction or auctions are to
be held and shall contain such additional information as the Chief of Police
may require and shall be sworn to by the applicant. The Chief of Police may
require an applicant to furnish a photograph of himself and to permit an
impression to be taken of his fingerprints.
§ 220-3. Issuance of license; term.
A. Issuance. Where it appears from the application that the applicant is
a suitable person to be so licensed, the Chief of Police shall issue
such license upon the payment of the required fee; provided, however,
that the Chief of Police may decline to issue such license for a period
not exceeding seven days after the submission of the application, for
the purpose of making an investigation, if he deems such investigation
is required in the interest of public safety or if he has reasonable
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 213-8 MONROE CODE § 220-3
1:70
ground to believe any information contained in the application is false or
misleading.
B. Term. Auctioneers' licenses shall expire 15 days after the date of issue,
except as set forth in the provisions in § 220-1B(3). [Amended
12-12-2011]
§ 220-4. License fee. [Amended 12-10-1990; 8-24-2009]
A fee of $50 shall be charged for each auctioneer's license.
§ 220-5. Display of license.
The auctioneer's license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
premises in which such auction is being conducted.
§ 220-6. Revocation of license.
An auctioneer's license may be revoked by the Chief of Police upon
satisfactory evidence that the licensee or any agent of the licensee is
employing any capper or bidder or is making any false or fraudulent
statement as to any article offered for sale by him.
§ 220-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-24-2009]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $250.
Chapter 232
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 237.
Driveway construction — See Ch. 260.
Historic districts — See Ch. 310.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 440.
Street numbers — See Ch. 462.
Water — See Ch. 494.
§ 220-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-7
1:71

ARTICLE I
Building Permits
[Adopted 4-9-1981 (Ch. 44, Art. I of the 1976 Code)]
§ 232-1. Conditions for issuance.
Building permits may be issued for the erection of structures on lots or
parcels abutting on streets or highways that have been either accepted
by the Town of Monroe in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes
§ 13a-48 or approved and bonded in accordance with the applicable
Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe in accordance with the
terms of Connecticut General Statutes § 13a-71.
§ 232-2. Restrictions on issuance and construction.
No building permit shall be issued for, and no building or structure shall
be erected on, a lot abutting on a street or highway which has not been
either accepted by the Town of Monroe in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes § 13a-48 or approved and bonded in accordance with
the applicable Subdivision Regulations and in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes § 13a-71. No building permit shall be issued for the
construction of any structure on any right-of-way, street or highway after
the effective date of this article except in conformance with the Subdivision
Regulations of the Town of Monroe.
§ 232-3. Issuance of certificate of zoning compliance. [Amended
4-28-1986]
A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of zoning
compliance with respect to any lot or parcel of land:
(1) Which appears on an approved subdivision map filed in accordance
with Connecticut General Statutes § 13a-71, as amended, in the land
records of the Town of Monroe prior to March 23, 1956, and which
otherwise complies with applicable building, zoning and subdivision
regulations.
(2) Created by deed recorded prior to April 9, 1981, and appearing on
a map filed prior to April 9, 1981, in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes § 13a-71, as amended, in the land records of the
Town of Monroe and which abuts on a fifty-foot right-of-way to a
Town road or state highway, provided that:
(a) Said parcel has the right to use said right-of-way.
(b) Said right-of-way was in existence prior to April 9, 1981.
(c) No more than three inhabited structures exist or have been
authorized by valid building permits at the time of application
hereunder.
(d) Said right-of-way serves as the principal means of access to said
Town road or state highway at the time of application hereunder.
(e) The lot or parcel otherwise complies with applicable Building,
Zoning and Subdivision Regulations.
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-3
1:73
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals, with the concurring vote of four members,
may authorize the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance and a
building permit for a lot or parcel of land which abuts on a right-ofway
to a Town road or state highway, provided that, upon presentation
of evidence by the applicant at a hearing held in accordance with and
subject to the requirements of § 8-7 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as amended, it finds that:
(1) The lot or parcel was created by deed recorded in the land records
of the Town of Monroe prior to April 9, 1981.
(2) Owing to conditions affecting such lot or parcel but not affecting
generally the district in which the lot or parcel is situated, a literal
enforcement of Subsection A(1) and (2) of this section would result
in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship.
(3) Such authorization will be in harmony with the general purposes and
intentions of the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Monroe.
(4) Such authorization will have no detrimental effect on the public
health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values within the
district or in the Town as a whole.
(5) The applicant as owner of the lot or parcel of land has the legal right
to use the abutting right-of-way.
(6) The lot or parcel of land can reasonably be provided with emergency
and public services, including but not limited to fire, police,
ambulance, sanitation and other health and safety services, over and
through the right-of-way.
(7) Provision has been made for the maintenance and clearing of the
right-of-way.
(8) The lot or parcel of land otherwise complies with applicable Building,
Zoning and Subdivision Regulations.
C. Nothing in this section shall prevent the issuance of a certificate of
zoning compliance and/or building permit for the construction of farm
or accessory buildings or for the alteration or remodeling of existing
residences or accessory buildings which are not in violation of any
Building, Zoning or Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe.
§ 232-4. Penalties for offenses.41
Any person erecting a structure in violation of this article shall be fined
not more than $200 for each day said structure exists, and any structure
erected in violation of this article shall be unlawful and deemed a public
nuisance subject to condemnation and abatement.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 232-3 MONROE CODE § 232-4
1:74
ARTICLE II
Fees
[Adopted 10-15-1975 (Ch. 44, Art. II of the 1976 Code)]
§ 232-5. Authority.
Pursuant to authority under the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code,
fees are hereby established in the following sections.
§ 232-6. Building permits. [Amended 9-11-1980; 1-11-1988]
All building permit fees for new construction shall be based on estimated
value of work to be done.
A. For the first $1,000 of value, the fee shall be $30.
B. For each additional $1,000 or portion thereof in value, the fee shall be
$10.
C. For each addition or renovation, the fee for the first $1,000 of value shall
be $30, and for each additional $1,000 or portion thereof, the fee shall
be $10.
D. For each certificate of occupancy, the fee shall be $20 per square foot,
with a maximum of $2,000 for new commercial/industrial building
construction, and $25 per building for additions or renovations. This
fee schedule shall be effective August 1, 1994 and is applicable to all
applications for which certificates of occupancy have not been issued as
of that date. [Amended 6-27-1994]
§ 232-7. Additional fees for specific work. [Amended 9-11-1980;
1-11-1988]
In addition to the building permit fee provided for in § 232-6, there shall be
paid an additional separate permit fee specifically for the following work:
electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, refrigeration, ventilation and
exhaust systems. Permit fees for the above work shall be based on the
estimated value of work to be done. For the first $1,000 of value, the fee
shall be at the rate of $5 per $100 of value; above the first $1,000, the fee
shall be at the rate of $10 per thousand or portion thereof.
§ 232-8. Removal of buildings.
The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot
to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be at the rate of $2
per $100 of the estimated cost of moving plus the cost of new foundations
and all work necessary to place the building or structure in its completed
location on the site.42
42.Editor's Note: Original § 44-9, Demolition of buildings, which immediately followed this
section, as amended 1-11-1988 and 6-27-1994, was deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now Ch. 237, Buildings, Demolition of.
§ 232-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-9
1:75
§ 232-9. Revocation.
In the case of revocation of a permit or abandonment or discontinuance
of a building project, the volume of the work actually completed shall be
computed by the Building Official, and any excess fee for the incomplete
work shall be returned to the permit holder, except that all penalties that
may have been imposed on the permit holder under the requirements of the
Basic Building Code shall first be collected.
§ 232-10. Revised cost declaration.
If, in the opinion of the Building Official, because of a change in the
scope of work covered under an existing permit, a revised cost declaration
is necessary, he shall require that an additional charge be paid by the
contractor-owner and applied to the original permit.
§ 232-11. Reinspections. [Amended 9-11-1980; 1-11-1988]
A fee of $25 shall be required for all reinspections necessary due to the fault
of the contractor. All requests for reinspections shall be made in writing,
accompanied by said fee, within a period of 10 days from receipt of written
notification. When requested by the enforcing officer, the contractor shall
make arrangements for either himself or his agent to be present on the job
site at a specified time.
§ 232-12. Well permits. [Added 1-26-1988]
The fee charged for obtaining a permit to drill a well in the Town of Monroe
shall be set at $50, to be effective March 1, 1988.
§ 232-13. Account and deposit of fees.
The Building Official shall keep an accurate account of all fees collected for
permits, and such collected fees shall be deposited weekly in the general
fund.
§ 232-9 MONROE CODE § 232-13
1:76
ARTICLE III
Construction Surveys
[Adopted 7-16-1981 (Ch. 44, Art. III of the 1976 Code)]
§ 232-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assure that the construction of permanent
structures within the Town of Monroe shall meet the minimum standards
of all applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances and regulations.
A permanent structure shall be any structure for which a building permit is
required which has a foundation or footings below ground level.
§ 232-15. Standards and required information.
For all construction specified in § 232-16, a survey, certified to be
substantially correct by a registered land surveyor licensed to practice
in the State of Connecticut, meeting the minimum standards of a Class
A-2 Standard of Accuracy (Code of Recommended Practice, Connecticut
Association of Land Surveyors) shall be filed in the Planning and Zoning and
Building Department offices of the Town. Such survey shall be referred to
as a "construction survey" and shall contain the following information:
A. Location of footing or foundations in place (as built) with dimensions to
each boundary line to the nearest hundredth of a foot.
B. Wetland limit lines (where applicable).
C. Floodplain boundary lines (where applicable).
D. Easements and rights-of-way.
E. Existing street storm drains, streams and watercourses.
F. Existing buildings, wells and septic systems.
§ 232-16. Applicability.
A construction survey shall be required in such cases as follows:
A. New dwellings, buildings and structures, except aboveground residential
storage sheds.
B. Additions to existing structures where the addition exceeds 33% of the
square footage of the existing ground floor area.
§ 232-17. Exemptions.43
A construction survey may be waived by agreement of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and the Building Official in the case of an addition to
an existing structure where, considering existing natural features, stone
walls and defined boundaries, the Zoning Enforcement Officer and Building
Official determine that the proposed construction will not be in conflict with
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations and where the addition is at
least 50% further away from all boundaries than required by the applicable
zoning side line and setback requirements.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 232-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-18
1:77
§ 232-18. Filing.
A construction survey under this article must be filed prior to the insertion
of footings or laying of foundations.
§ 232-19. Stop-work order.44
When any person shall fail to file a construction survey required by this
article, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Building Official shall post
upon the construction site a stop-work order requiring the immediate
cessation and termination of all construction activities on the site, and, in
addition, a written notice of the posting of said stop-work order shall be
mailed to the building permittee setting forth the action taken and stating
the reason for the stop-work order. Said order shall remain in full force
and effect until a proper construction survey is filed in accordance with this
article.
§ 232-20. Penalties for offenses.45
Any person in violation of this article, after the posting and mailing of a
stop-work order as aforesaid, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not
to exceed $250 for each day the violation continues. Nothing herein shall
prevent the Town from seeking any and all applicable civil remedies.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 232-18 MONROE CODE § 232-20
1:78
Chapter 237
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 232. Historic districts — See Ch. 310.
§ 237-1. Requirements for issuance of demolition permit. [Amended
8-24-2009; 12-12-2011]
No permit for the demolition of any building, structure or part thereof
which is 500 total square feet in size or larger and at least 60 years old or
constructed prior to 1950 shall be issued until the following requirements
are satisfied:
A. The filing of an application for a demolition permit with the Building
Department upon a form provided by the Building Official,46 which form
shall contain:
(1) Name and address of structure to be demolished.
(2) Location and identification of property to be demolished.
(3) Age and type of structure to be demolished.
(4) Square footage of structure to be demolished.
(5) Name and address of owner.
(6) Name and address of firm undertaking the demolition.
(7) Reason for demolition.
(8) Date on which demolition is to begin.
(9) Names and addresses of all property owners abutting the property
on which the building, structure(s) or part thereof to be demolished
is located, according to an attached copy of a current Town of
Monroe Assessor's Map.
B. Publication by the Building Official of notice of the demolition permit
application in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the
municipality. The notice shall be published within seven days following
the filing of the demolition permit application.
C. The applicant shall mail such notice, by certified mail, with postal
receipts provided to the Building Official for incorporation into the
applicant's file, within seven days of filing, to the Historic District
Commission, Town Historian and the Monroe Historical Society.
D. The applicant shall provide notification by mail, within seven days
following the filing of the demolition permit application, of the owners
of all property abutting the property on which the building(s) to be
demolished is located. The identity of the owners entitled to notification
under this provision shall be those abutting property owners as shown
on the then current Monroe Assessor's Map.
46.Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Chief Building Inspector" were
amended to "Building Official" 8-24-2009.
§ 232-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-1
1:79
E. The Building Official shall post in a conspicuous location on the property
for 30 consecutive days a sign at least 36 inches by 48 inches visible
from the nearest public street or other accessway adjoining the property.
Such sign shall include a copy of the legal notice and shall contain the
word "Demolition" in capital letters no less than three inches in height. If
there is more than one structure proposed for demolition, one sign shall
be posted for each structure. All signs required hereunder shall remain
posted on the property, if the permit is issued, until the completion of all
demolition activities authorized by the permit.
F. The applicant shall pay a fee of $250 for said demolition permit.
G. There shall be a waiting period of 180 days following the filing of the
application for the demolition permit. This waiting period may be waived
upon written consent signed by the Chairman of the Historic District
Commission. The waiting period of 180 days shall expire automatically
after 60 days if no action is taken by the Historic District Commission or
its Chair.
H. Properties and structures located within any historic district shall be
additionally governed by the historic district regulations as established
by the current sitting Historic District Commission.
§ 237-2. Emergencies.
The provisions of § 237-1 hereinabove shall not apply to orders issued by the
Director of Health and/or the Building Official for emergency application
because of a threat to public health and safety.
§ 237-3. Other regulations and authority.
This chapter is intended to supplement and not limit any requirements now
or hereafter imposed by the Connecticut General Statutes and regulations
adopted thereunder on any applicant for or recipient of a demolition permit,
or any authority now or hereafter granted to the Building Official by the
Connecticut State Building Code, including but not limited to his authority
as it applies to unsafe structures, fire-damaged structures, or deteriorated
structures and the demolition and/or removal of the same.
§ 237-4. Term of permit.
Any demolition permit shall be valid for a period of six months from date of
issuance.
§ 237-5. Penalties for offenses.
Demolition of a structure without a permit shall subject the violator to all
applicable penalties under the law, including a fine of the greater of $1,000
or the assessed value of the property demolished for each violation.
Chapter 246
CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 237-1 MONROE CODE § 237-5
1:80
ARTICLE I
Vending Machines
[Adopted 1-28-2002 (Ch. 60 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 246-1. Restrictions.
No person shall dispense or cause to be dispensed cigarettes, tobacco or
smokeless tobacco products from vending machines except as provided in
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-289a(b) and (c), and further provided
that only restricted cigarette vending machines, as defined in Connecticut
General Statutes § 12-285, shall be permitted for use within the territorial
limits of the Town of Monroe. "Restricted cigarette vending machine" means
a machine used for the dispensing of packaged cigarettes which
automatically deactivates after each individual sale, cannot be left operable
after a sale and requires, prior to each individual sale, a face-to-face
interaction or display of identification between an employee of the area,
facility or business where such machine is located and the purchaser.
§ 246-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall subject the owner/
operator of any establishment in which such cigarette vending machine is
located to civil penalties equal in amount and severity to those set forth in
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-289a(g), as the same may be amended
from time to time. Those penalties shall be assessed and collected by the
Town of Monroe.
§ 246-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-2
1:81
Chapter 260
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 232. Highway modification — See Ch. 308.
§ 260-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS — The travelway for vehicles between the edge of the road and the
property line, commonly referred to as the "apron."
AGENT — The Director of Public Works or individual, partnership or
corporation duly appointed by the Town to undertake the duties and
exercise the authority herein conferred upon the Director.
DRIVEWAY — The travelway for vehicles between the access and the garage
and/or off-street parking area.
FIRST SELECTMAN — The chief executive officer of the Town vested with
the powers as listed in the Town Charter.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Limit of the public-owned and/or -maintained land,
including the paved travelway, shoulder area and other areas dedicated and
utilized for public access and utility locations/service.
ROAD — Public vehicular and pedestrian travelways (limits of maintained
pavement), referred to as "roads," "streets" or "highways." Said roads
include all public through traffic and nonoutlet travelways.
STREET LINE — Common property boundary line between the Town
roadway right-of-way (ROW) and a private property line (typically the front
yard property line of a private parcel).
TOWN — The Town of Monroe.
§ 260-2. Conformance.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed or locate or relocate
or repave any driveway or access as defined in this chapter except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter
308, Highway Modification, §§ 308-1 through 308-13, of this Code.
§ 246-2 MONROE CODE § 260-3
1:82
§ 260-3. Permit required.47
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, locate or relocate an
access or a driveway in the Town without a highway modification permit as
detailed in Chapter 308, Highway Modification, §§ 308-1 through 308-13, of
this Code.
§ 260-4. Driveway turnarounds for new house construction.
An adequate paved or graded area for backing from a residential garage
and/or parking space shall be provided in order to preclude backing into
a public street. Said turnaround area shall be large enough to allow for
a moving passenger vehicle to turn a full 180° while performing only one
backing movement. The configuration of the turnaround shall be shown on
a certified site plan submitted with the required application for a building
permit. The property owner is responsible for providing, maintaining and
replacing said turnaround area. Driveway turnarounds should also be
provided for existing driveways, whenever possible, but are not a specific
requirement of this chapter.
§ 260-5. Excavation and deposition of fill.
Where an access or a driveway requires filling, cutting or regrading in
or near wetlands, watercourses or floodplains, a permit to remove/deposit
fill may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Inland
Wetlands Commission, the Floodplain Administrator and/or any other
applicable federal, state or local agencies, boards or commissions prior to
the issuance of a driveway access permit.
§ 260-6. Design standards.
A. Location and layout.
(1) No access shall be located within 50 feet of the intersection of
the street lines of two or more roads, unless it is unavoidable in
developing an approved building lot that is in existence at the time
of the adoption of this chapter. No more than one driveway shall
be constructed on the same premises unless the distance between
access aprons is 50 feet or more for driveways within residential
properties and 100 feet or more for all nonresidential properties.
(2) A parking space, at least 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length, with
adequate configuration for vehicular access to the same, must be
constructed adjacent to the street ROW and access (apron) in cases
where the driveway exceeds 100 feet in length and/or the grade of
the driveway exceeds 5% beyond the street line.
(3) Provisions in this Subsection A shall not apply to driveways with
access onto a permanent nonoutlet turnaround or cul-de-sac, unless
the Town Engineer determines that the location of said driveway
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-6
1:83
access in relationship to the overall length of the nonaccess road
warrants that this Subsection A should apply.
B. Angle. A driveway access shall enter a road at right angles when
possible and in no case shall the angle be less than 60°. This shall apply
for a distance of 40 feet from the center line of the road.
C. Width. All residential driveway access shall be no less than 10 feet
wide at the property line or at any point along the driveway and no
greater than 20 feet wide at the roadway edge, unless a variation of this
requirement is requested in writing and approved by the Town Engineer.
All other driveway widths shall be as required by the planning and
zoning regulations/application process.
D. Grade.
(1) The grade of the driveway access shall not exceed 3% within a
distance of 20 feet from the edge of the paved roadway. The
remaining portion of the driveway from the Town road/ROW to the
internal lot garage and/or parking area(s) shall comply with the
following:
(a) Residential properties. Paved driveways shall not exceed 10%
and unpaved driveways shall not exceed 8% in profile slope.
(b) Commercial properties. Paved driveways shall not exceed 8%
and unpaved driveways shall not exceed 6% in profile slope.
(2) In all cases, said driveway shall include a paved access (apron)
with, in the case of a driveway located down gradient of the paved
roadway, a high point located at the street line or other appropriate
location as accepted by the Town Engineer. A minimum of twopercent
pitch shall be utilized in establishing said high point.
E. Design and construction. The design and construction of the access shall
conform to Chapter 308, Highway Modification, of this Code, established
Rules and Regulations for Highway Modification and all other applicable
federal, state and local codes, ordinances, standards, regulations,
notices, resolutions and/or requirements and practices.48
F. Paved lip. A paved one-inch minimum lip with rounded edges shall be
provided at the edge of the driveway access (apron) located along the
roadway gutter and said paved lip shall be maintained by the owner of
the premises.
G. Interference with culverts and drainage. The driveway or access shall be
so designed as not to interfere with the function of existing culverts or
drainage.
H. Water. Water from a driveway or access must be diverted or intercepted
before reaching the roadway travel path, unless conditions are accepted
by the Town Engineer as being of minimal impact to the roadway system.
I. Sight line. The area along the edge of the road being entered shall
be unobstructed for a distance of 50 feet in each direction from a
point 10 feet back from the edge of the existing or proposed travelway.
Adequate sight line distance shall also be provided in accordance with
best management practices and the Connecticut Department of
Transportation Highway Design Manual methods and criteria, in
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 260-6 MONROE CODE § 260-6
1:84
addition to the current American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials standards. Said sight line distance shall be
reviewed and accepted by the Town Engineer and shall in no case be less
than 250 feet in either direction.
§ 260-7. Access on state highways.
A. Access on state highways shall not require permits, provided that the
proposed work complies with all requirements of the State Highway
Department of the State of Connecticut and required permits are
obtained from the State Highway Department of the State of
Connecticut, and provided further that a copy of such permit is furnished
to the Town Engineer and filed in the Building Department, along with
the application for a building or zoning permit, prior to the
commencement of any work.
B. Persons receiving state permits, as provided above, shall file an
informational form or copy of the state permit with the Director of Public
Works, Town Engineer and/or the Town Planner if requested as part of a
Town permit or Commission approval process.
§ 260-8. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. Violations of this chapter shall bear a penalty of $25 for each offense.
B. Each day a driveway or access exists in violation of this chapter (which
is more than seven days following notice by the Town to the owner of the
property on which said driveway or access is located, or to the person
in charge of or occupying said property) shall be considered a separate
offense under this chapter.
C. In addition to any other penalties as there may be, access to or egress
from any driveway constructed, located or relocated in violation of this
chapter may be prohibited at the discretion of the Town. No regular
access to or egress from a property by vehicle shall be provided except
by an approved driveway and access.
§ 260-9. Exceptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the maintenance and
repair of a driveway or access in existence or for which a permit has
been issued at the time of or prior to the adoption of this chapter.
B. The driveway grade requirements pertaining to the portion of the
driveway located fully within the parcel, as detailed in this chapter,
and sight line requirements, as also detailed in this chapter, shall not
be required for properties existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter if site conditions preclude the provision of the same as
demonstrated on a furnished certified site drawing (by appropriate
professional engineer and/or land surveyor) and accepted by the Town
Engineer.
§ 260-10. Indemnification.
Nothing in this chapter shall require the Town to repair or improve any
driveway or access or shall render the Town liable to a property owner
§ 260-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:85
for failure to make said repair or improvement except where such repair
or improvement is made necessary as a result of the widening, repair,
maintaining or relocation of a Town road.
Chapter 270
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 270-1. Criteria for property to be taken.
Neither the Town of Monroe nor any agency of the Town of Monroe shall use
the power of eminent domain to take private property unless the property
to be taken meets one of the following criteria:
A. The property is to be owned by the Town of Monroe or an agency of
the Town of Monroe and is to be used or set aside for one or more
public facilities, such as, but not limited to, streets, bridges, parkways,
sidewalks, rights-of-way or other public ways, parks, playgrounds,
schools, or public sewer, water or waste disposal or transfer facilities;
B. The property is to be owned by the Town of Monroe and set aside for
permanent open space or drainage or erosion control facilities; or
C. The property poses a danger to public health or safety as a result of
physical deterioration, pollution or contamination and is to be taken by
the Town of Monroe for the purpose of remediating such conditions or
minimizing danger to the public.
Chapter 278
FARMING
§ 260-10 MONROE CODE § 270-1
1:86
ARTICLE I
Right To Farm
[Adopted 3-28-201149]
§ 278-1. Purpose and intent.
A. Agriculture plays a significant role in Monroe's heritage and future.
The Town officially recognizes the importance of farming to its rural
quality of life, heritage, public health, scenic vistas, tax base, open space,
wetlands and wildlife, and local economy. This right to farm article
encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based
economic opportunities, and protects farmland within Monroe by
allowing agricultural uses and related activities to function with minimal
conflict with abutters and Town agencies.
B. It is the declared policy of the Town of Monroe to conserve, protect and
encourage the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for
the production of food and other agricultural products, for its natural
and ecological value and for the activities associated with agriculture.
It is hereby further determined that whatever impact may be caused to
others through generally accepted agricultural practices, such impact is
offset and ameliorated by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood,
community and society in general.
§ 278-2. Definitions.
The terms "agriculture" and "farming" shall have all those meanings set
forth in § l-l(q) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 278-3. Declaration; nuisance liability; effect on powers of
commissions and departments.
A. No present or future agricultural operation conducted or maintained
in a manner consistent with accepted agricultural practices, which is
engaged in the act of farming as defined in this article shall become
or be considered a nuisance solely because such activity resulted or
results in any changed condition of the use of adjacent land. Agricultural
operations may occur any day or night, provided such activities do
not violate applicable health, safety, fire, zoning, wetlands, life safety,
environmental or building codes and regulations and shall include,
without limitation:
(1) The incidental noise from livestock or farm equipment used in
generally acceptable farming practices;
(2) Odors from livestock, manure, fertilizer or feed;
(3) Dust and fumes associated with normally accepted farming
practices;
(4) The use of agricultural chemicals, provided such chemicals and the
method of their application conform to practices approved by the
State of Connecticut; and
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 5-14-2011.
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-3
1:87
(5) Irrigation and water management associated with generally
accepted farming practices.
B. These provisions shall not apply whenever a nuisance results from the
negligent or improper operation of any such agricultural operation.
C. Inspection and approval of the agricultural or farming operation, place,
establishment or facility by the Commission of Agriculture or his/her
designee shall be prima facie evidence that such operations follow
generally accepted agricultural practices. Nothing contained in this
article shall restrict the powers of the Monroe Inland Wetlands
Commission, Planning and Zoning Commission or Building or Health
Departments under Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 278-3 MONROE CODE § 278-3
1:88
Chapter 284
FIRE ZONES
§ 284-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon
a highway within public or private parking areas or otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually loading or unloading
merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs and
signals.
§ 284-2. Establishment of zones. [Amended 10-22-2007]
The Board of Police Commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered, as
the safety of the public may require, to establish fire zones along any public
or private street, highway, passageway or parking lot, in which parking is
prohibited, to advise the general public of said zones by means of signs
reading "No Parking — Fire Zone — Tow-Away Zone" or "Fire Lane — No
Parking — Tow-Away Zone" and to fix penalties not to exceed those
designated in § 284-3A.
§ 284-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to affix
to each vehicle parked in violation of this chapter a ticket directing the
owner to report to the Police Department. Each such owner shall, within
14 days of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay
or cause to be paid to the Police Department, as a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $85.50
B. In the event that such owner fails to make such payment as aforesaid
within 14 days, the penalty due shall be doubled, and such owner shall
be liable for the so-doubled penalty.
§ 284-4. Removal of vehicles.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to direct the removal from any fire
zone of the Town any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter. Upon such
removal, the owner of such vehicle shall, in addition to any fines or penalties
imposed, be required to pay the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
Such cost shall be determined by reference to state regulations pertaining
thereto.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 278-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-5
1:89
§ 284-5. Notice of established zones.
Upon establishing any fire zone within the Town, the Board of Police
Commissioners shall file notice thereof with the Town Clerk.
Chapter 291
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305. Peddlers and transient sellers — See Ch. 397.
§ 291-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the same meaning
as defined in the Connecticut Public Health Code: "authorized agent,"
"catering food service," "Class I, II, III, IV," "designated alternate,"
"farmers market," "food," "food service establishment," "food service
classification," "food store," "itinerant food vendor," "on-site sewage
disposal system" (OSDS), "potentially hazardous food," "qualified food
operator," "ready-to-eat food," and "temporary food service
establishment."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health for the Town of Monroe.
COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH — The Commissioner of the Department
of Public Health, State of Connecticut.
CONNECTICUT PUBLIC HEALTH CODE — The Connecticut Public
Health Code, as may be amended from time to time, established in
accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 368a, Section
19a-36, as amended.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health for the Town of
Monroe or his/her duly authorized agent.
FOOD PREPARATION — The conversion of any food product into a state
ready for human consumption.
FOOD STORE or GROCERY STORE — Any place which sells or dispenses
for sale at wholesale or retail any groceries, prepackaged foods, whole
or bulk bakery products, whole vegetables and fruits, raw meat or fish or
packaged dairy products.
IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD — A condition which is likely to cause an
immediate threat to life or serious risk of damage to the health, safety,
and welfare of the public if no immediate action is taken.
LICENSE — The whole or any part of a certificate of approval, or similar
form of permission which may be required of any person or persons
§ 284-5 MONROE CODE § 291-1
1:90
by the provisions of these regulations. Said license shall be in writing
and shall be issued only by the Director of Health or by his/her duly
authorized agent.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION —
OWNER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
company, governmental agency, club or organization of any kind, and
includes the plural.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
company, organization, institution, public or municipal body, or other
legal entity of any kind including municipal corporations, government
agencies, or subdivisions thereof, including the plural, as well as the
singular.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The owner, designated employee or employee
who is the apparent supervisor of the operation at the time of inspection.
If no individual employee is the apparent supervisor, then any employee
present at the time of inspection may be considered the person in
charge.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any permanent or temporary place, premises,
building or group of buildings which is freely accessible to persons other
than employees; or any of the above which is open to the public for the
purpose of conducting business or for public gatherings of any character.
SEASONAL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A food service
establishment which is seasonal in nature and operates for a period of
time not to exceed six months in any one year.
§ 291-2. Authority.
The Director of Health shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
An organization holding a tax exempt status as defined by the United
States Internal Revenue Code and which is exempt from local real
estate and personal property tax (if owned) under Connecticut
General Statute, Section 12-81; or
(1)
(2) Religious groups; or
(3) Schools; or
(4) Youth organizations; or
Agencies funded in whole or in part by tax dollars from federal, state
or local government facility.
(5)
§ 291-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-3
1:91
§ 291-3. Emergency powers.
In the event of an imminent health hazard, the Director of Health may take
whatever action is deemed necessary to protect public health in accordance
with applicable statutes, regulations, codes and rules.
§ 291-4. Severability.
If any provision or application of this chapter is held invalid for any reason,
that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter.
§ 291-5. Supplementary provisions.
Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in either the
Connecticut General Statutes or the building, fire safety or public health
codes, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in the
Connecticut General Statutes or as in these codes. Where terms are not
defined under the provisions of either the Connecticut General Statutes,
building, fire safety or public health codes, including this Code, they shall
have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted dictionary meanings of such
as the context may herein imply.
§ 291-6. Fees.
The Board of Health may establish reasonable fees to defray the cost of
the administration and issuance of permits, licenses, approvals, conducting
inspections and other associated activities. The Board of Health shall submit
a fee schedule to the Town Council for approval as necessary but not less
than annually prior to each fiscal year.
§ 291-7. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Director of Health may
appeal such order, per Connecticut General Statutes Section 19a-229.
§ 291-8. License requirements.
A. No person shall operate a food service establishment without a valid
license issued by the Director of Health. Only a person who complies
with the requirements of this Code shall be entitled to receive or retain
such a license.
B. The food service license shall be posted in a location easily observed by
consumers.
C. Licenses shall be valid until the expiration date indicated on the license
unless suspended or revoked by the Director of Health, or until such
time as the facility changes owners, closes, or goes out-of-business. The
food service establishment licensing year begins on April 1 and ends on
March 31 of the next year. Licenses issued after April 1 in any licensing
year are valid until March 31 or the specific date indicated for seasonal
food establishments, temporary food events or itinerant vendors.
D. Changes in menu or operations may result in a reclassification of the
establishment as determined by the Director of Health. No food service
§ 291-3 MONROE CODE § 291-8
1:92
establishment shall change operations to a different classification
without prior written approval from the Director of Health. Any
operation that fails to comply may be subject to suspension or immediate
closure.
E. Application and issuance of license.
(1) Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall
make written application for a new license on forms provided by
the Director of Health. Such application shall be submitted and
approved prior to the start of construction, substantive remodeling,
converting, or taking ownership of a food service establishment. A
plan review will be required as part of the license application process
whenever an establishment is being constructed or substantially
remodeled, or when there is a change of owner or menu. The
application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
(2) Prior to the issuance of final approval for licensure, the Director of
Health shall conduct preoperational inspection(s) of the food service
to determine compliance with the provisions of this code, the
Connecticut Public Health Code, and other applicable codes,
regulations or statutes.
(3) The Director of Health shall issue a new license to the applicant
if the inspection reveals that the food service complies with the
requirements of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code
and any other applicable codes, regulations or statutes, and the
licensing fee has been paid.
(4) Any person who does not make application for renewal of his food
service license before the expiration date of such license shall be
required to pay a late fee for each day beyond the expiration date
of his license in addition to the regular license fee and/or any other
penalties.
F. Whenever a qualified food operator is required by the Connecticut Public
Health Code, such individual must possess a non-expired certificate from
a State-approved testing organization as defined by the Connecticut
Public Health Code.
G. The owner or manager of the food service establishment shall designate
an alternate person who has the specific elements of knowledge and
competence specified in the Connecticut Public Health Code to be in
charge at all times when the qualified food operator cannot be present. A
signed statement by the owner or manager attesting that the designated
alternate has the specific elements of knowledge and competence
specified in the Connecticut Public Health Code must be kept at the food
service establishment.
§ 291-9. Inspections; right of entry.
A. The Director of Health or his/her authorized agent shall be permitted,
after proper identification, to enter at any reasonable time any food
service establishment for the purpose of making inspections, as deemed
necessary by the Director of Health, to determine compliance with this
code, the Connecticut Public Health Code, and any other applicable
codes, regulations or statutes.
§ 291-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-9
1:93
B. The Director of Health may examine records of the establishment to
obtain information pertaining to food and/or beverages and supplies
purchased, received or used, persons employed, employee training
records, qualified food operator training certification certificates,
designated alternate records, but not including financial records.
C. Refusal to allow entry to inspect shall result in a presumption that
the establishment presents an immediate and substantial hazard to the
public health. The Director of Health shall issue a notice of immediate
suspension of food operations and immediate closure of the food service
establishment.
§ 291-10. Facilities operating without license.
When it comes to the attention of the Director of Health that a food facility
is operating without a valid license, the Director of Health shall order
such food service establishment to close and to cease all food operations
immediately.
§ 291-11. Suspension of license.
A. In the event that the Director of Health or his duly authorized
representative finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation
of the food service establishment which in his judgment constitutes a
violation of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code or any other
applicable code, regulation or statute, the Director of Health may issue
a written notice of intent to suspend the license to the license holder
or operator citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to
be taken and specifying the time period within which such action shall
be taken and, if deemed necessary, order immediate correction. Except
for conditions that constitute an imminent, or immediate and substantial
hazard to public health as provided herein, the time period for which
such corrective actions shall be taken shall be no less than 48 hours.
B. If correction is not made in the stated time, the license may be
suspended and a written order issued to the owner or operator to cease
the operation of the food service establishment. Food service operations
shall immediately cease upon receipt of the order.
C. The food service establishment shall not resume operations until written
approval of re-instatement of the license has been issued by the Director
of Health. A suspended license shall be removed from the premises by
the Director of Health.
D. One copy of the order to cease food service operations shall be posted
by the owner upon the inner surface of the window of the front entrance
door of the food service establishment or upon the nearest window
thereto in such a manner as to be clearly visible to the general public
from the exterior of such establishment. Said order to cease operations
shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the Director of
Health.
E. The Director of Health may immediately suspend, without warning, prior
notice or hearing, any license or other permit to operate a food service
establishment if the operation constitutes an imminent, or immediate
§ 291-9 MONROE CODE § 291-11
1:94
and substantial hazard to public health which shall include but is not
limited to:
(1) A lack of equipment capable of maintaining the product temperature
as required by the Connecticut Public Health Code.
(2) A food-borne illness outbreak reasonability connected to the food
service establishment.
(3) The absence of potable water, supplied under pressure, in a quantity
which, in the opinion of the Director of Health, is capable of meeting
the needs of the facility.
(4) A backup of sewage into the facility or a sewage overflow on the
premises.
(5) An infestation of vermin.
(6) A lack of facilities to wash, rinse, and sanitize food contact surfaces,
equipment, and utensils.
(7) If there is a failure to correct a substantial violation that is
continually found and reported on the inspection form.
(8) If the owner, operator or person in charge has interfered with the
performance of the Director of Health's duties.
(9) If a qualified food operator (with an unexpired training certificate
from a state-approved testing organization) is not employed on site,
except as provided by the qualified food operator replacement
provision in the Connecticut Public Health Code, Section
10-13-B42(s)(7), the food service establishment has 30 days to
comply. If correction has not been made after 30 days, the Director
of Health shall take immediate steps to close the food service
establishment.
F. Suspension shall be effective immediately upon delivery of written order
to the license holder or person in charge of the food service
establishment by the Director of Health. The operators shall not resume
until written approval of re-instatement of the license has been issued by
the Director of Health. A suspended license shall be removed from the
premises by the Director of Health.
§ 291-12. Revocation of license.
The Director of Health may, after providing opportunity for hearing and
appeal, revoke a license for imminent health hazards or repeated violations
of any of the requirements of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health
Code, other applicable codes, regulations or ordinances, or for repeated
interference with the Director of Health in the performance of his/her
duties or for cases where the license to operate has been obtained through
nondisclosure, misrepresentation or intentional misstatement of a material
fact. Prior to revocation, the Director of Health shall notify the license
holder or person in charge, in writing, of the reasons for which the license
is subject to revocation and that the license shall be revoked at the end
of 10 days following service of such notice unless an appeal is filed with
the Director of Health by the license holder within 72 hours (excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and Town holidays) of receipt of the notice. If no appeal
is filed within these 72 hours, the revocation of the license becomes final.
§ 291-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-13
1:95
§ 291-13. Hearings.
The Director of Health shall conduct hearings provided for in this chapter
at a designated place and time. The Director of Health shall make a final
finding based upon the complete hearing record, and shall affirm, modify
or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The Director of
Health shall furnish a copy of the written report of the hearing decision to
the license holder within 10 calendar days of the hearing date.
§ 291-14. Appeals.
The owner or operator of a food service establishment aggrieved by any
written notice or order may, within 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and Town holidays) after the receipt of such notice and/or order, appeal to
the Director of Health who shall thereupon immediately examine the merits
of such case and may vacate, modify, or affirm, such written notice or order.
The owner or operator of a food service establishment who is aggrieved by
such action of the Director of Health may, no later than 72 hours (excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and Town holidays) after the date of receipt of such
appeal to the State of Connecticut Commissioner of Health as provided by
the Connecticut General Statutes and the Connecticut Public Health Code.
§ 291-15. License reinstatements.
A. Subsequent to suspension: Whenever a license has been suspended, the
holder of the suspended license may request a hearing with the Director
of Health for license reinstatement within five working days following
the receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the
applicant that, in his opinion, the conditions causing the suspension
have been corrected, the Director of Health shall make a reinspection. If
the Director of Health determines that the applicant has complied with
the requirements of this Code and the Connecticut Public Health Code,
the license shall be reinstated and returned to the license holder upon
receipt of the reinstatement fee.
B. Subsequent to revocation: After a period of 60 days from the date of
revocation, a written application may be made for the issuance of a
new license. Procedures delineated in this chapter for obtaining a new
license shall be followed.
§ 291-16. Service of notices or orders.
Written notices and orders provided for in this chapter shall be deemed to
have been properly served when a copy of the notice or order has been
delivered personally or sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner, license holder or person in charge of the food
service establishment. Such written notices and orders shall also be deemed
to have been properly served provided it has been posted on the front
entrance door of the food service establishment or upon the nearest window
thereto in such a manner as to be clearly visible to the general public
from the exterior of the establishment. Said notice shall not be defaced
or removed by any person except the Director of Health or his authorized
§ 291-13 MONROE CODE § 291-16
1:96
agent. A copy of any such notice or order shall be filed in the records of the
Director of Health.
§ 291-17. Food examinations; hold orders; condemnation.
Food may be examined or sampled by the Director of Health or his
authorized agent as often as necessary for enforcement of this chapter or
the Connecticut Public Health Code.
A. Hold order.
(1) The Director of Health or his authorized agent may, upon written
notice to the owner or person in charge specifying with particularity
the reasons therefore, place a hold order on any food or beverage
which he believes is unfit for human consumption. The Director of
Health or his authorized agent shall tag, label or otherwise identify
any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order
shall be used, served or moved from the establishment.
(2) The Director of Health shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in the hold order unless storage is not possible
without risk to the public health, in which case immediate
destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall
state that an appeal may be filed with the Director of Health within
48 business hours and that if no appeal is filed, the food shall be
destroyed. The Director of Health shall hold an appeal hearing, if so
requested, and on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the
hold order may be vacated or the owner or person in charge of the
food may be directed, by written order, to denature or destroy such
food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or the Connecticut Public Health Code.
B. Condemnation. Food shall be subject to immediate condemnation by the
Director of Health when it is found to be unfit for human consumption by
reason of: appearance; odor; decomposition; adulteration; contamination
by exposure to fire, water, smoke or heat; lack of proper temperature
maintenance; animal or insect contact; or exposure to non-food
chemicals. Said action of condemnation shall only be used when, in
the opinion of the Director of Health, there is substantial risk that the
suspected food would otherwise be used for human consumption, or if
the license holder agrees to the grounds for the condemnation.
§ 291-18. Food from establishments outside of Town of Monroe.
Food from food service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Town
of Monroe may be sold within the Town if such food service establishments
conform to the provisions of the Connecticut Public Health Code or to
substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance
with such provisions, the Director of Health or his authorized agent may
accept reports from local health authorities in jurisdictions where such food
service establishments are located.
§ 291-19. Long-term compliance.
§ 291-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-19
1:97
A. Food service operators, owners/operators have options for continuous
improvement in addition to routine inspections and reinspections.
B. The owner or operator of any food service establishment may at any time
request an inspection for the purpose of improving the rating score of
the food service establishment.
C. When a routine food service inspection is found to be in noncompliance
with this code the holder of the license or the person in charge may
request an inspection by appointment in advance of the reinspection due
date. During this appointment, the Director of Health will work with
the holder of the license at the food service establishment to develop a
plan to correct the violations from the failed inspection as well as verify
that corrections already made are satisfactory. Although not required,
the owner/operator of any food service establishment is encouraged to
indicate in writing how conditions that constitute violations have been
addressed. Once verified, this documentation will be included in the food
service establishment's file. Establishments with ongoing violations and
a history of continuous failed routine inspections may be required by
the Director of Health to participate in the food service establishment
improvement program.
D. The owner/operator of the establishment assigned to the food service
establishment improvement plan will receive from the Director of
Health, in writing, notification of such assignment after a hearing. The
Director of Health will schedule a meeting with the owner and/or
manager to develop a list of issues needing improvement. Each plan will
be tailored to the individual food service establishment to achieve long
term compliance. Short-term voluntary closures may be a necessary first
step.
E. The Director of Health and owner/operator will then collaborate on a
schedule for correction. A food service establishment improvement plan
may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Development of an employee training program.
(2) Improvement of food handling practices.
(3) Review of structural deficiencies to plan a schedule of
improvements.
(4) Equipment upgrade schedule to replace equipment in poor repair.
(5) Development of an integrated pest management program.
(6) Menu review to assess need for: cold storage, hot holding, dry
storage and food preparation facilities.
(7) Design and implementation of a cleaning program.
F. Hazard analysis critical control point inspection. The Director of Health
may require a hazard analysis critical control point inspection (HACCP)
for establishments with continuous food handling violations. A HACCP
inspection is designed to identify food safety hazards and determine
the necessary steps that are needed to control the identified hazards.
Following a HACCP inspection, the Director of Health will work with the
owner/operator to develop procedures to reduce risk factors in the food
service establishment.
§ 291-19 MONROE CODE § 291-20
1:98
§ 291-20. Emergency situations.
If any food service establishment loses power, potable water, or is impacted
by structural damage, discharge of an ansul system, fire or flooding, it must
cease the preparation of food immediately and close the operation. During
events that cause loss of power, more than four hours, the food service
establishment must receive authorization from the Director of Health prior
to restocking and reopening the food service establishment. In order to
open following a power outage all food service establishments must have
all the critical components for food safety functional. These components
include, but are not limited to:
A. Hot (110º F.) and cold potable running water.
B. Power to all refrigeration/freezer units.
C. Power or gas to all cooking equipment and active fire suppression
system.
D. Adequate lighting for safety.
E. Functioning restrooms
§ 291-21. Equipment requirements.
A. All equipment used in the storage, preparation, holding, display, service
and transportation of food shall be commercial-grade and conform to the
design and fabrication standards of the National Sanitation Foundation
(NSF) or equivalent.
B. If custom-fabricated equipment is proposed, adequate shop drawings
depicting elevations must be provided. The fabricator must demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Director of Health that they are an NSFapproved
fabricator for the piece of proposed equipment.
C. The Director of Health may establish an equipment remediation plan
for preexisting food service establishments that lack commercial-grade
equipment, not conforming to the design and fabrication standards of
the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) or equivalent.
D. A food preparation sink with a minimum of one drain board shall be
provided when the menu is such that:
(1) Fruits/vegetables are processed.
(2) Foods are thawed prior to cooking.
(3) Any other processes within the operation, which in the opinion of
the Director of Health requires such a sink for the safe and sanitary
handling of the food. Food preparation sinks shall be indirectlydrained.
(4) In certain areas, such as, but not limited to coffee stations or service
bars outside of the main food preparation area, a "dump sink" may
be approved in place of a food preparation sink.
(5) At least one curbed cleaning facility or mop sink shall be provided
and used for cleaning of mops and disposal of mop water or cleaning
waste. The sink shall be provided with hot and cold running water.
The disposal of mop water and cleaning waste shall not be done at
hand wash sinks, food preparation sinks or three-compartment sinks.
(6) In cooking and preparation areas, sufficient equipment must be
proposed with casters to facilitate adequate cleaning of floors, walls
and sides of equipment.
§ 291-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-22
1:99
§ 291-22. Grease interceptors, waste disposal, and water supply.
A. Grease interceptors. The design, installation, and maintenance of grease
interceptors shall comply with the requirements of the Department of
Energy and Environmental Protection and the Water Pollution Control
Authority of the municipality in which the Class III or IV Food
Establishment is located and only for those who discharge to a municipal
sewer. Food Establishments that discharge to an on-site sewage disposal
system must have an external grease trap sized according to the daily
design flow. The design, installation, and maintenance shall comply with
the Technical Standards for Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems.
Automatic grease recovery units can be retrofitted in lieu of an external
grease trap for existing buildings if approved by the Director of Health.
B. Waste disposal.
(1) Wastewater from all plumbing fixtures shall be discharged into
municipal sewers or an approved on-site sewage disposal system
(OSDS). OSDS shall comply with the Connecticut Public Health Code
On-site Sewage Disposal Regulations and Technical Standards for
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems.
(2) All new food establishments who are going into an existing building
and discharge to an OSDS shall conform to the Connecticut Public
Health Code. A flow analysis shall be conducted by a professional
engineer to evaluate the existing OSDS and proposed flows. A septic
inspection is required by a licensed septic installer and witnessed by
the Monroe Health Department before a food license can be issued
by the Director of Health.
C. Water supply.
(1) The water supply shall be adequate, of a safe, sanitary quality, be
in conformance with the regulations of Connecticut state agencies
and be from an approved source which is in conformance with the
regulations of Connecticut state agencies.
(2) A food service establishment utilizing a well for its water supply is
required to test for all of the following constituents and include the
test results with the license renewal application and fee: bacteria,
physical parameters (color, odor, turbidity, nitrate nitrogen, nitrite
nitrogen, sodium, lead and copper). Results of water analyses from
within the last three months are acceptable providing all of the
above-listed parameters are included.
§ 291-23. Plan review.
A. When food service establishments are constructed, substantially
remodeled or converted or when an existing establishment changes
owner, properly prepared scaled plans detailing equipment layout,
equipment specification and finish surfaces shall be submitted.
B. The plans and specifications shall be submitted along with a proposed
menu and completed plan review application which outlines the
requirements for the construction or remodeling of the establishment
based on a review of the proposed menu. No construction or remodeling
shall be performed without the written approval of the Director of
Health.
§ 291-22 MONROE CODE § 291-23
1:100
C. The Director of Health shall have the authority to adopt technical
standards to assure the safe operation of food service establishments.
Such standards shall not contravene any of the provisions of this chapter
or any state or municipal laws, ordinances or regulations, and may be
amended or revised as deemed necessary from time to time to reflect
updates in industry standards or other information which is deemed to
be critical to preserving food safety.
Chapter 305
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Department — See Ch. 71.
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
178.
Food service establishments — See Ch. 291.
Littering — See Ch. 349.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 405.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 420.
Salons — See Ch. 425.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 440.
Solid waste — See Ch. 452.
§ 305-1. State Public Health Code adopted.
In any public health matter where the Code of the Town of Monroe is silent,
the Town of Monroe hereby adopts the relevant standards of the Public
Health Code of the State of Connecticut established pursuant to § 19a-36
of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended from
time to time. In any public health matter where the Code of the Town of
Monroe is found to be in conflict with Connecticut General Statutes and/
or regulations, including but not limited to regulations of the Connecticut
Department of Public Health and Department of Consumer Protection, the
provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail.
Chapter 308
HIGHWAY MODIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 232.
Driveway construction — See Ch. 260.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 430.
Standard specifications — See Ch. A601.
§ 291-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-1
1:101
§ 308-1. Intent and purpose.
The Town of Monroe hereby adopts the following chapter, in accordance
with the powers granted by the Town Charter and the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended, in order to ensure the adequate safety and protection
of the public and proper operation and maintenance of the Town's public
highways, rights-of-way (ROW), easements and other public properties.
§ 308-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — An individual, partnership or corporation licensed to
perform work in an appropriate trade respective to an application for a
highway modification permit. Said contractor shall be approved/accepted
(by virtue of compliance with the requirements of this chapter) by the Public
Works Director and/or the Town Engineer to work within the jurisdictional
limits of the Town streets or other properties as detailed above.51
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Town of Monroe or
individual, partnership or corporation duly appointed by the Town to
undertake the duties and exercise the authority herein conferred upon the
Director, and also the representatives of said Director when acting within
and limited by particular duties and powers assigned to each.
HIGHWAY — An accepted public street, public way or public ROW,
easement or other property owned by the Town of Monroe, including the
entire width between the street lines or ROW lines.
INSPECTOR — Any person authorized by the Director bearing proper
credentials and identification.
§ 308-3. Permit required; emergency work.
A. No work on any portion of a public highway shall commence until a
contractor (or property owner, in the case of a request for resident
exemption) has obtained a permit from the Town in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Emergency work may occur, whenever it is essential to public health
or safety, without first obtaining a permit. However, immediate notice
shall be given to the Police and Fire Departments by the contractor
and a permit shall be obtained at the earliest possible time after an
emergency excavation, noting that all other provisions of this chapter
must be otherwise complied with.
C. Work performed as a result of the issuance of a highway modification
permit shall comply with all other applicable federal, state and local
Town codes, ordinances, standards, regulations, notices, resolutions and
requirements (including local building and plumbing codes), noting that
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 308-1 MONROE CODE § 308-3
1:102
it is solely the responsibility of the applicant to meet other applicable
requirements and obligations.52
§ 308-4. Bonds and insurance.
A. The Town will make available to the contractor the Town's specifications
and standard details, the required performance bond form and liability
requirements for all work to be performed, including but not limited
to the following: trenching, filling, excavation, utility installation,
restoration, stabilization, backfilling, temporary maintenance and
resurfacing of the highway.
B. The contractor shall be protected by and shall pay premiums for policies
of insurance satisfactory to the Town. Said policies shall provide
insurance for the contractor against liability in the minimum amounts
of $500,000/$1,000,000 for personal injury and $50,000/$100,000 for
property damage. Said policies must be issued by an insurance company
licensed in the State of Connecticut, noting that verification of special
coverage for blasting shall be provided when applicable/needed. All
insurance policies shall designate the Town of Monroe and its agents
as additional insured. The contractor shall also carry workers'
compensation insurance in the amount of statutory limits. Certificates of
insurance shall be provided to the Town.
C. The contractor shall provide a performance bond in an amount to be
determined by the Director for the faithful performance of the work
contemplated, and said bond shall be issued by an approved surety
company licensed in the State of Connecticut. It shall be for a minimum
amount of $5,000 and may be increased on larger projects in an amount
as required by the Director. The bond must be in force from January 1
to December 31 and shall cover any work/activities undertaken by the
contractor until the expiration of the guaranty period for that project.
The guaranty period shall be for six months from the completion of the
temporary patch and/or initial work activities.
§ 308-5. General conditions.
A. The contractor or his agent shall under no circumstances start work on
a Town highway or Town property until the requirements of this chapter
are satisfied and the required permits are obtained. Said permits are to
be available for inspection by the Director or his agents at the site of the
work, during its continuance.
B. At least one-way traffic shall be maintained in the Town roads at all
times. However, the Traffic Authority may, in writing, permit the
temporary closing of a road, in which case the contractor shall, prior to
such closing but after receiving permission from the Traffic Authority,
notify the Public Works Department, Police and Fire Departments, First
Selectman and the Board of Education to advise of the location and
approximate duration of such closing. The same notifications shall also
be provided when the road is reopened to traffic. A traffic control person
or police officer, as required by the Police Department, shall be provided
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 308-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-5
1:103
at the contractor's expense when fewer than two lanes of traffic are
maintained or when necessary or advisable in the opinion of the Police
Department. Notification to the Board of Education shall be provided
when any work is in the vicinity of a public school.
C. Adequate barricades, detour signage, lights and red flags shall be
erected and maintained at the contractor's expense in the street until all
work is completed.
D. The contractor shall schedule all work for a normal workday so that the
work may be inspected. Arrangements shall be made in advance with the
Director when work is to be done outside of the normal workday, and the
contractor shall pay for any overtime inspection costs. The contractor
shall give the Director 48 hours' notice before any work is to begin,
except in the case of an emergency.
E. All work performed under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the inspection and approval of the inspector.
F. The contractor shall provide safe and practical access for inspection at
all times during the course of the construction.
G. The contractor shall pay all costs to repair any and all damage to
curbs, sidewalks, roadway pavement, utilities, mailboxes, driveways,
trees, plantings (including seasonal growth), signs, drainage facilities
and any other items within the Town highway/property, whether said
items are privately owned or owned by the Town.
H. If, in the performance of the work, any property marker, highway bound
or control point is disturbed or destroyed, it shall be replaced at the
contractor's expense by a land surveyor licensed to practice in the State
of Connecticut. Verification of replacement or alteration (resetting) shall
be furnished to the Town in the form of an updated drawing (mylar)
certified by the aforementioned surveyor.53
§ 308-6. Application for permit.
A. The application for a permit shall be on a form provided in the Public
Works Department and shall include the following information or any
other information as may reasonably be required by the Director:
(1) The exact location of the proposed work, including location in
relationship to nearest streets and/or intersections.
(2) The purpose of the proposed work/activity.
(3) An estimate and sketch (including dimensions) of the anticipated
area of the excavation showing the area dimensioned in square feet.
(4) The date and time when the work will commence and the period
within which the work will be completed.
(5) The name, address, telephone number, fax number and e-mail
address of the contractor.
(6) The names, addresses, telephone numbers, fax numbers and e-mail
addresses of persons who may be contacted in case of emergency or
after regular working hours.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee.
53.Editor's Note: Original § 53-5.9, which immediately followed this subsection and
referenced former Ch. 53, Excavations, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 308-5 MONROE CODE § 308-7
1:104
§ 308-7. Rules and regulations.
A. All permits are subject to compliance with Chapter 260, Driveway
Construction, of this Code, Rules and Regulations for Highway
Modification (as established by the Public Works Department), and
adopted (current) Fee Schedule for Highway Modification.54
B. Said rules and regulations are available in the Public Works Department
and shall be regarded as additional requirements for all work subject to
this chapter.
§ 308-8. Permit fee.
A. A permit fee shall be determined prior to issuance of permit.
Determination of the specific fee, which will vary contingent on the
extent of the proposed work, will be based on the following categories:
(1) Off pavement: this is for all work within the Town ROW/property that
does not involve direct disturbance of the roadway pavement cross
section but will affect the shoulder area.
(2) One-half roadway width: this is for a typical utility patch anticipated
to be five feet in width for a distance of up to 1/2 the existing
roadway width.
(3) Entire roadway width: same as above, only the entire width of the
existing roadway.
(4) Longitudinal work: this involves all other applications where work is
within the existing roadway, but includes a varied disturbance to the
extent of limits beyond the above-detailed categories.
B. A schedule of permit fees, respective to the above categories, will be
recommended as a fee schedule by the Town Engineer, proposed by the
Director, accepted by the First Selectman and approved by the Town
Council.
C. Established fees for each of the categories are based on an average
patch width required for the installation of one utility/application.
Accordingly, additional utilities within the same trench and/or other
conditions which are anticipated to dictate a wider patch will require
additional and/or separate permits even though the end result may be
one contiguous roadway patch.
D. The permit fee is only refundable upon receipt of written notification
to the Director that work has not been started and has been canceled.
Future work of any kind at the same location will require a new permit
and fee. Said notification shall include the permit number and location.
A processing fee of $30 will be deducted from all reimbursements.
E. Portions of the permit fee will not be refunded in situations where the
final work does not extend to the proposed limits of the issued permit.
F. In situations where work needs to be extended beyond the originally
proposed limits, the applicant/contractor shall notify the Director, in
writing, and pay an additional fee that, when added to the original fee,
will equal the fee required for the newly determined category respective
to anticipated work. No new permits will be issued until the outstanding
permit fee is paid in full.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 308-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-8
1:105
G. The contractor is responsible for the installation of the temporary patch
and maintenance of the same in accordance with this chapter. The Town
or its agent will perform all work to provide a permanent pavement
patch unless a waiver from this requirement (and respective fee) is
granted.
§ 308-9. Enforcement.
A. Any contractor who violates any provision of this chapter or the rules
and regulations issued by the Director shall be liable to the Town for any
expense, loss or damage which may be caused to the Town highway or
property by reason of such violation.
B. The Director may refuse to issue any permits to a contractor who is in
violation of any provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations
issued by the Director until such time as satisfactory compliance is
obtained.
C. All permits expire and are deemed void 30 days after the date of issuance
if the contractor does not perform any work prior to that time. When a
permit becomes void, it is the responsibility of the contractor to reapply
and obtain a new permit before any work is performed.
D. The cancellation of the bond or insurance shall automatically void any
permit which has been issued.
§ 308-10. Waiver of requirements.
A. The following may make a written request to the Director to waive the
performance bond and permit fee (processing fee still applies), provided
that they provide written verification of bonding with the Secretary of
the State, as required per Connecticut General Statutes § 16-230, and
agree to conform to all other requirements of this chapter and/or the
rules and regulations issued by the Director in addition to any conditions
imposed by the Director:
(1) Utility companies.
(2) Contractors performing work directly for utility companies (the
utility company must cosign the application).
(3) Contractors performing work directly for the Town (Town projects
and/or contracts).
(4) Contractors or developers working on subdivisions or other
developments approved and bonded by the Town Planning and
Zoning Commission (PZC) and/or the Town Inland Wetlands
Commission (IWC).
(5) Individual Town resident, working without any assistance from a
separate entity, through the "Property Owner Waiver Arrangement"
(form available in the Public Works Department). A Property Owner
Waiver Arrangement allows for work to be performed by a resident,
as long as the work does not include the use of labor and/or
equipment not specifically/solely owned, operated and maintained by
said resident (property owner and occupant of the house to which
the location of the work/permit applies). A waiver shall not apply if
the equipment or provided labor is part of a commercial business,
whether owned by the property owner or not.
§ 308-8 MONROE CODE § 308-10
1:106
B. Utility companies are required to maintain temporary patches and,
within six months of the installation of the temporary patch and after
a proper settling period, install the permanent patch to conform to
requirements of this chapter and/or the rules and regulations issued by
the Director.
C. A processing fee of $30 will be charged for all permits utilizing this
section.55
§ 308-11. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter,
contingent on acceptance by the Director:
A. Work duly authorized by the Town officials and performed by Town
employees as a function of their assigned duties and responsibilities.
B. Aboveground work performed by public utility companies to install,
maintain, repair or replace service lines and/or utility poles.
C. Work involving adjustment of valves, hand holds, manholes and other
structures or devices which in the opinion of the Director require no
significant amount of excavation or disturbance.
D. Work performed under the control and supervision of the State of
Connecticut.
E. Minor repairs by respective property owners to curbing, planting areas,
sidewalks, mailboxes, driveways or other small areas within the ROW
but off the roadway pavement.
§ 308-12. Existing permits.
Provisions of this chapter in effect at the time of issuance of a permit will
remain in force until such time that all outstanding requirements have been
adequately addressed.
§ 308-13. Driveways.
A. The installation of driveways (including driveway aprons) within the
Town ROW requires the posting of a cash deposit of $500 for each
location, in addition to a nonrefundable processing fee of $30. Said cash
deposit shall be in the form of cash or check made payable to the Town
of Monroe.
B. Cash deposits will be reimbursed (with no interest) to the applicant upon
written request once work has been adequately completed.
C. In the case where a certificate of occupancy is being requested and
conditions do not allow for completion of the driveway apron, an
additional deposit of $1,000 for each location shall be provided.
D. The posting of cash deposits is in addition to all other requirements
relative to bonding and insurance as set forth in this chapter.
E. All work shall be in accordance with Chapter 260, Driveway
Construction, §§ 260-1 through 260-10 of this Code.
F. A processing fee is required for the purpose of driveway construction.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 308-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 308-13
1:107
G. The highway modification permit bonding is not required for the
repaving of existing driveways. However, all other insurance and permit
fees (processing fee) shall apply.56
Chapter 310
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 232. Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 237.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 308-13 MONROE CODE § 308-13
1:108
ARTICLE I
Monroe Center Historic District
[Adopted 1-13-1977 (Ch. 65 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 310-1. Creation; purpose; statutory authority.57
In order to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare
of the Town of Monroe and others through the preservation and protection
of buildings and places of historic interest and through the development
of appropriate settings for such buildings and places, a Monroe Center
Historic District, as shown on the map referred to in § 310-2 of this article,
is hereby established pursuant to §§ 7-147a through 7-147k, inclusive, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 310-2. Location.
The boundaries of the Monroe Center Historic District shall be as shown
on a map titled "Map Showing Proposed Boundaries of the Monroe Center
Historic District," attached hereto and incorporated and made a part of this
article.58
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
58.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the Town Clerk's office.
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-2
1:109
Chapter 334
JUNK DEALERS
§ 334-1. License required; application for license. [Amended
4-13-1992]
No person shall engage in business as a dealer and trader in junk or
metals, scrap, rags, wastepaper or other secondhand articles without first
making application in writing to the First Selectman for a license to conduct
such business. Such application shall set forth such information as the
First Selectman shall reasonably require, including a description of the
premises where said business is to be conducted and where the junk is to
be stored, and shall be accompanied by the registration certificate of the
Motor Vehicle Department of the State of Connecticut as required by Title
21, Chapter 405, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
§ 334-2. Issuance of license; fee. [Amended 12-10-1990;
4-13-199259]
Upon the approval of such application by the First Selectman, he shall issue
a license for the conduct of such business by the applicant at the designated
location for a period of one year from the date of issuance, and the applicant
shall pay to the Town a license fee of $10 for each team or vehicle used in
connection with such business. The applicant shall pay a like fee for each
renewal of such license.
§ 334-3. Considerations for licensing. [Amended 4-13-1992]
The First Selectman may revoke or refuse to renew any such license for
cause, and in considering the granting, revoking or renewing of any such
license he shall take into account:
A. The financial ability of the applicant to establish, maintain or operate
such business.
B. The suitability of the location of such business in relation to the nature
and development of the surrounding property.
C. The proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings or other
places of public gathering.
D. The visibility and screening from any public road or highway.
E. The sufficiency and number of other such businesses in the vicinity.
F. The health, safety and general welfare of the public.
§ 334-4. Promulgation of rules and conditions. [Amended
4-13-1992]
The First Selectman may make and impose such reasonable rules and
conditions as he may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 310-2 MONROE CODE § 334-4
1:110
chapter and of Title 21, Chapter 405, of the Connecticut General Statutes,
as from time to time may be amended.
§ 334-5. Penalties for offenses.60
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject, for each violation, to such
fines and jail sentences, or both, as provided by § 21-13 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended.
Chapter 349
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 405. Solid waste — See Ch. 452.
§ 349-1. Littering prohibited.
No person shall discard or throw any trash, rubbish, litter, etc., upon any
public highway, road, street or way or upon any public park, green or
grounds within the Town of Monroe.
§ 349-2. Securing of loads. [Added 2-22-1982]
No vehicle carrying a dust-producing load shall be driven or moved on any
street or highway within the Town of Monroe without protection or covering
sufficient to prevent such load or dust therefrom from dropping, sifting,
leaking, blowing or otherwise escaping therefrom into the air or upon any
public or private property or upon any street or highway within the Town.
The term "dust-producing load" as used in this section shall mean coal,
charcoal, coke, sand, gravel, dirt or any other substance composed of, mixed
with, producing or otherwise capable of spreading or disseminating dust.
§ 349-3. Penalties for offenses.61
Any person violating this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$250.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 334-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-3
1:111
Chapter 390
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire zones — See Ch. 284.
§ 349-3 MONROE CODE § 349-3
1:112
ARTICLE I
Regulation of Parking
[Adopted 11-22-1960 (Ch. 102, Art. I, of the 1976 Code)]
§ 390-1. Authority to regulate parking. [Amended 6-5-1974]
The Board of Police Commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered,
as the volume and conditions of traffic on the streets and land of the Town
may require, to establish zones along said streets and on said land in
which parking is prohibited or regulated as to length, to post signs advising
the general public of said zones and to fix penalties, not to exceed those
designated in § 390-3.
§ 390-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon
a highway or upon land of the Town otherwise than temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs and signals.[Amended 6-5-1974]
§ 390-3. Fines for parking violations. [Amended 6-5-1974]
A. The members of the Police Department shall be authorized to affix to each
vehicle parked in violation of said regulations a ticket directing the owner
to report to the Police Department. Each owner shall, within 14 days of
the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay or cause to
be paid to the Police Department, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction
of such violation, the following sums: [Amended 4-9-1981; 1-12-1987;
4-23-1990; 8-24-2009]
Violation Penalty
Parking time limit $20
Parking in no-parking area $20
Parking in crosswalk $20
Parking within 10 feet of fire hydrant $50
Parking within 25 feet of intersection $20
Parking in front of driveway $20
Parking in Town park $20
Parking in restricted area $30
Parking in handicapped zone See § 390-3B
Other violations $20
§ 390-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:113
B. Any person parking in a handicapped zone except as authorized by
§ 14-253a of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be subject to a fine as
provided in Subsection (l) of 14-253a. [Added 8-24-2009]
C. In the event that such owner fails to make such payment as aforesaid within
14 days, the penalty due shall be doubled, and in 14 days thereafter such
owner shall be liable for the penalty hereinafter provided for violations of
the provisions of this article.
§ 390-4. Removal of vehicles. [Amended 6-5-1974]
The Board of Police Commissioners or, in an emergency situation, the
Chief of Police, is hereby authorized to direct the removal from the public
highways or land of the Town of any vehicles parked in violation of said
regulations. Upon such removal the owner of such vehicle shall, in addition
to any fines or penalties imposed, be required to pay the cost of said
removal.
§ 390-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-24-2009]
Unless otherwise provided, every person who shall violate this article shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.
§ 390-3 MONROE CODE § 390-5
1:114
ARTICLE II
Parking of Commercial Vehicles on Public Roads
[Adopted 10-12-201062]
§ 390-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate, as authorized by § 14-307 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, the parking of commercial vehicles and
commercial motor vehicles upon the public highways within the
geographical limits of the Town of Monroe, Connecticut.
§ 390-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle over three-fourths-ton
capacity or over 10,000 pounds gross combination weight, whichever is
less. Excluded are station wagons, compact-type bus vehicles and pickup
trucks used for private transportation.
HIGHWAY — Any state or other public highway, road, street, avenue, alley,
driveway, parkway or place, under control of the state, the Town, or any
political subdivision thereof, dedicated, appropriated or open to public
travel or other use.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or association holding titles to
a vehicle or having legal right to register the same, including purchasers
under conditional bill of sale.
§ 390-8. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner to park or leave standing commercial
vehicles, whether occupied or not, on any highway or portion thereof in
a residential zone, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner to park or leave standing commercialgrade
trailers, whether occupied or not, on any highway or portion
thereof in a residential zone, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
§ 390-9. Penalties for offenses; enforcement.
A. Any owner violating this article shall be fined $100 per day with the fine
increasing to $200 per day after seven days of continuous violations.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to emergency vehicles
and to maintenance vehicles displaying flashing lights or to prohibit
a vehicle from stopping or being held stationary by any officer in an
emergency to avoid accident or to give right-of-way to any vehicle or
pedestrian as provided by law.
C. The Chief of Police shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this
article and to collect those fines specified. Any vehicle or motor vehicle
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-3-2011.
§ 390-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-9
1:115
owner in violation of this article shall make payment to the Town of
Monroe through the Town of Monroe Police Department within seven
days of the violation. All fines collected shall be directed into the general
fund.
§ 390-9 MONROE CODE § 390-9
1:116
Chapter 397
PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT SELLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 213.
Auctions — See Ch. 220.
Cigarettes and tobacco products — See Ch.
246.
Food service establishments — See Ch. 291.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 334.
Littering — See Ch. 349.
§ 390-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-9
1:117

ARTICLE I
Peddling
§ 397-1. License required.
No person shall engage in business as a peddler within the Town unless
he shall have a peddler's license of the proper class issued by the Chief of
Police.
§ 397-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — A person who goes from place to place within the Town, either
as principal or agent, selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter,
or exposing therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or
in or upon a vehicle, or offering to perform or performing a service for
remuneration.
§ 397-3. Classes of licenses.
For the purpose of these regulations, peddlers' licenses shall be classified
as follows:
A. Class A, which shall authorize peddling without the use of a vehicle.
B. Class B, which shall authorize peddling with a vehicle.
§ 397-4. Applicability.
A. No license shall be required for an agent or employee of a licensed
peddler holding a Class B peddler's license, provided that a separate
license shall be issued for each vehicle used within the Town by such
licensed peddler.
B. This article shall not apply to:
(1) Sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms,
gardens and greenhouses, including fruit, vegetables and flowers;
(2) The sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, spices,
groceries, meats and bakery goods;
(3) Sales on approval, to conditional sales of merchandise, or to the
taking of orders for merchandise for future delivery when full
payment is not required at the time of solicitation; or
(4) To itinerant food vending as defined in the Public Health Code of
the State of Connecticut, provided that such itinerant food vendor is
properly licensed by the Director of Health and operates with written
permission from:
(a) The property owner while on private property; or
(b) The First Selectman while on Town property.
§ 397-5. Application for license.
Any person desiring a peddler's license shall make application to the Chief
of Police in writing on a form provided by such officer. Each application shall
§ 397-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-5
1:119
state the class of license desired, shall contain such information as the Chief
of Police may require and shall be sworn to by the applicant. The Chief of
Police may require an applicant to furnish a photograph of himself and to
permit an impression to be taken of his fingerprints.
§ 397-6. Issuance or denial of license.
A. Where it appears from the application that the applicant is entitled to
a license, the Chief of Police shall issue such license upon the payment
of any required fee; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may
decline to issue such license for a period not exceeding 30 days after the
submission of the application for the purpose of making an investigation
if he deems such investigation is required in the interest of public safety
or if he has reasonable grounds to believe any information contained in
the application is false or misleading. If such investigation should reveal
that the issuance of a license is not in the interest of public safety or if
there are reasonable grounds to believe any information contained in the
application is false or misleading, the Chief of Police may decline to issue
such license. When an application for a license is refused or declined,
the application will be returned to the applicant stating, in writing, the
reason for refusal.
B. Peddlers' licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year in which
issued, except temporary peddlers' licenses, which may be issued by the
Chief of Police for periods not exceeding seven days.
C. The Chief of Police shall furnish with each license a suitable badge or
sign to be worn by the peddler or affixed to the vehicle as hereinafter
provided.
§ 397-7. Fees.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the following fees shall be charged for
peddlers' licenses:
(1) For each peddler's license, $200, such license to expire December 31
in the year of issue.
(2) For each temporary peddler's license, $50, such license to expire in
seven calendar days, maximum of two licenses in any calendar year.
B. A veteran meeting the criteria established in § 21-37 of the Connecticut
General Statutes shall not be required to pay a license fee.
§ 397-8. Display of badge and sign.
A. Each person holding a license shall, when engaged in peddling, wear
conspicuously on his outer clothing a suitable badge furnished by the
Chief of Police indicating that such person is a licensed peddler. Such
badge shall contain the peddler's license number and the date of
expiration of such license.
B. Each person holding a license shall, when engaged in peddling from the
vehicle for which such license is issued, plainly display on each side of
such vehicle a sign issued by the Chief of Police indicating that such
person is a licensed peddler. Such sign shall contain the peddler's license
number and the date of expiration of such license.
§ 397-5 MONROE CODE § 397-9
1:120
§ 397-9. Peddling from vehicles or other conveyances.
No person while engaging in the business of peddling from a vehicle or
other conveyance shall permit such vehicle to remain in any one location
for a continuous period exceeding 10 minutes. Any vehicle which remains
within the property lines of real property owned by one owner or group
of owners for a period exceeding 10 minutes, even if said person changes
location within said boundaries, shall be deemed to have remained standing
in one location for purposes of this article. Furthermore, no person,
including an associate, agent or employee, operating under the same
peddler's license, once having stood in a location, may return to said
location or any location previously used for a second time within 24 hours.
No vehicle will be permitted to locate at or on private property without
written consent from the owner thereof, which consent must state the
specified time of permission. No vehicle or other conveyance shall be
allowed to stop at a location that is not in the public interest or constitutes
a hazard or compromise of public safety.
§ 397-10. Noisemaking devices.
No peddler shall use or employ others to use any noisemaking device for the
purpose of attracting patronage between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.
§ 397-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall receive a
citation, said violation to carry a cost of $199.
§ 397-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-11
1:121

ARTICLE II
Transient Sellers
§ 397-12. License required.
No person shall engage in business as a transient seller within the Town
unless he shall have a transient seller's license issued by the Chief of Police.
§ 397-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSIENT SELLER — A person, principal or agent, who remains at one or
more locations within the Town, which are upon real property or within the
permanent structures, selling or bartering or carrying for sale or barter or
exposing therefor any goods, wares or merchandise or offering to perform
or performing a service for remuneration.
§ 397-14. Application for license.
Any person desiring a transient seller's license shall make application to
the Chief of Police in writing on a form provided by such officer. Each
application shall contain such information as the Chief of Police may require
and shall be sworn to by the applicant. The Chief of Police may require an
applicant to furnish a photograph of himself and to permit an impression to
be taken of his fingerprints.
§ 397-15. Issuance and term of license; badge or sign to be
displayed.
The term "transient seller" shall not include:
Farmers or gardeners selling the produce of their own farms or
gardens located within the Town of Monroe;
(1)
Persons owning the real property upon which said transactions
occur;
(2)
Persons renting said real property for a period of one year or more;
nor
(3)
To itinerant food vendors as defined in the Public Health Code of
the State of Connecticut, provided that such itinerant food vendor
is properly licensed by the Director of Health and operates with
written permission from:
(a) The property owner while on private property; or
(b) The First Selectman while on Town property.
(4)
A.
Public and private schools, charitable, religious or civic organizations
and volunteer fire companies shall also be exempt from this article.
B.
§ 397-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-15
1:123
A. Where it appears from the application that the applicant is entitled to
a license, the Chief of Police shall issue such license upon the payment
of the required fee; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may
decline to issue such license for a period not exceeding 30 days after the
submission of the application for the purpose of making an investigation
if he deems such investigation is required in the interest of public safety
or if he has reasonable grounds to believe any information contained in
the application is false or misleading.
B. Transient sellers' licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which issued. If, after a license is issued, any violation, such as false or
misleading information on the application, is found, the Chief of Police
may revoke the license, and all fees will be forfeited by the applicant.
The applicant will pay any other penalties that may be imposed.
C. The Chief of Police shall furnish, with each license, a suitable badge or
sign to be displayed in a conspicuous place at all times.
§ 397-16. License fee.
The following licensing fee shall be charged said transient sellers: $250.
§ 397-17. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined
not more than $250.
§ 397-15 MONROE CODE § 397-17
1:124
Chapter 405
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 232.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 237.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 334.
Littering — See Ch. 349.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 447.
Solid waste — See Ch. 452.
§ 397-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-17
1:125

ARTICLE I
Storage of Junk
[Adopted 9-27-1971 (Ch. 68, Art. II of the 1976 Code)]
§ 405-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Enforcement Officer or his
designated agent or deputy.63
JUNK — Any old, used or secondhand materials of any kind, including
cloth, clothing, rags, bags, papers, rubbish, bottles, glassware, crockery,
rubber, iron, brass, copper, other ferrous and nonferrous metals,
furniture, fixtures, plumbing materials, waste materials, or any other
article or thing which from its worn condition renders it practically
useless for the purpose for which it was made and which is commonly
classed as junk.64
JUNK APPLIANCE — Washing machine, drying machine, stove,
refrigerator, freezer, air-conditioning device and machine, water heater
and water cooler and device for the storage of hot water or cold water,
dishwasher, television receiver, furniture, office equipment, and machine
or implement for business, manufacturing or farming purposes and any
other similar thing or part thereof in an inoperative or discarded
condition.
JUNK VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or part thereof which is not in
condition for lawful operation on the public highways of this state and
is in a rusted, wrecked, discarded, partly dismantled, inoperative or
abandoned condition.65
OPERATOR — Any person who has apparent charge, custody, care or
control, possession or occupancy of land.
OWNER — Any person who has any legal title to or beneficial interest
in any land, with or without actual possession or occupancy thereof, or
who has charge, custody, care or control of any land as an owner or as an
agent of an owner, or as an officer, director or employee of a corporation
or other business entity which is an owner or an agent of an owner, or as
an executor, administrator, trustee, conservator or guardian of an owner
or the estate of an owner.
PERSON — Any individual person, firm, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
64.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-1
1:127
B. Words of the male gender shall include the female gender, and words of
the singular number shall include the plural number, as the context and
the circumstances require.
§ 405-2. Findings.
It is hereby found and declared that junk, junk vehicles and junk appliances
upon any property within the Town of Monroe are nuisances and also
are detrimental to the public safety, health, convenience and welfare; that
they constitute a nuisance and particularly imperil the health and safety
of children, constitute a potential source of fire and explosion, are and
may become harborages for rodents and breeding places for insects and
threaten and depreciate neighboring properties; that the preservation of
public health, the elimination of such public peril and the general protection
of property and maintenance of property values are proper concerns of the
Town of Monroe; and that enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection and preservation of the public safety, health, convenience and
welfare and of property and property values.
§ 405-3. Restrictions. [Amended 9-22-197766]
No owner or operator of any parcel of land wholly or partially within the
Town of Monroe shall deposit or cause or permit to be deposited, or retain
or cause or permit to be retained, any junk, junk vehicle or vehicles or junk
appliances on such land, except when all such storage is visually screened
to a height of at least six feet from the street and all adjoining properties,
and except when all such storage areas are maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion so as not to create health hazards, insect breeding places or rodent
harborage, and except when all such exterior storage areas are securely
locked and physically inaccessible to any person not authorized or legally
entitled to be on the premises or not employed or engaged in the business if
a business is located on said premises. All presently existing areas wherein
junk, junk vehicles or junk appliances are stored, kept or situated shall
comply with this section within six months from the effective date hereof.
§ 405-4. Notice of violation. [Amended 10-14-1976]
On information or complaint of any violation of § 405-3, the enforcement
officer shall cause to be served written notice, either personally or by mail,
upon the owner or operator of the land on which said violation is found
or complained of, setting forth the nature of said violation and ordering
correction thereof. Said notice shall be in the form prescribed by the Town
Council of the Town of Monroe from time to time as it may determine.
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 68-10, Enforcement of notice; costs,
and § 68-13, Nonapplicability, of this article.
§ 405-1 MONROE CODE § 405-5
1:128
§ 405-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-14-197667]
Any person who, as owner or operator of any parcel of land, fails, neglects
or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article after notice served
in accordance with § 405-4 hereof shall be fined not more than $250, and
each day of noncompliance with said notice shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation and may be prosecuted as such. Any person who resists,
obstructs or interferes with any agent, servant or officer of the Town of
Monroe engaged in the enforcement or execution of any provision of this
article shall be fined not more than $250. The penalties provided in this
section shall be in addition to any other relief or remedy provided by this
article or the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 405-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-5
1:129

ARTICLE II
Blighted Premises
[Adopted 1-14-2002 (Ch. 71 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 405-6. Authority and purpose.
A. This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the Town of
Monroe under Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv).
B. This article prohibits any owner, agent, tenant or person in control of
real property located in the Town of Monroe from allowing, creating,
maintaining or causing to be created or maintained a blighted premises.
This article also establishes penalties for violations of this article.
§ 405-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them:
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Any building or structure or parcel of land,
proximate to other residential properties, commercial structures, or road,
in a state of disrepair, dilapidation or abandonment.
"State of disrepair or dilapidation" shall mean in a physically
deteriorating condition causing unsafe or unsanitary conditions and a
nuisance to the general public and shall be evidenced by one or more
of the following conditions:
Persistent missing, broken or boarded up windows and doors,
otherwise not required by order of any other Town official acting
within the scope of his or her authority;
(1)
(2) Collapsing or missing exterior walls or roof;
(3) Seriously damaged or missing siding;
(4) Unrepaired fire, wind or water damage;
Persistent rodent harborage and/or infestation that may pose a
significant public health or safety risk;
(5)
(6) Persistent garbage or trash on the property;
Seriously overgrown brush, shrubs and weeds, at least one foot in
length, that may pose a significant public health or safety risk;
(7)
Felled or damaged trees that may pose a significant public health
or safety risk;
(8)
(9) Sinkholes that may pose a significant public health or safety risk;
Significant and persistent accumulations of debris bordering on
adjacent properties;
(10)
A.
§ 405-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-7
1:131
PLAN OF ACTION — Any written plan submitted by a responsible party,
in response to an enforcement citation as defined in this article, that sets
forth a definite schedule for the remediation of all items set forth in the
enforcement citation.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The party who owns the real property in question,
as well as any tenant, occupant or person who resides at or controls the real
property at issue or who is contractually obligated to maintain the property
by virtue of such tenancy or occupancy. In no event shall a contractual
obligation protect or absolve the owner of the property of the duty to comply
with the terms of this article. "Responsible party," as used in this article,
shall not be limited to the singular.
§ 405-8. Blighted premises prohibited.
No responsible party shall allow, maintain or cause to be maintained a
blighted premises in the Town of Monroe.
§ 405-9. Designated enforcement officer.
The designated enforcement officer and/or other individuals designated
by the First Selectman are charged with the enforcement of this article.
The designated enforcement officer is hereby authorized to take such
enforcement actions as are specified in this article.
§ 405-10. Notice of violation.
A. The Town of Monroe, through its designated enforcement officer, shall
serve written notice of violation to the responsible party. The notice may
be hand delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the last known address of the responsible party named in the notice.
Such notice shall state the violation(s) and demand the abatement
thereof within 14 business days of the date of the notice. The notice
Parking lots left in a persistent state of disrepair or abandonment;
and
(11)
Seriously damaged or deteriorating structures, including but not
limited to barns, sheds, swing sets, and jungle gyms, that may pose
a significant public health or safety risk or be termed an attractive
nuisance.
(12)
In determining whether a premises is "blighted," as defined in this
article, mitigating factors to be considered include:
The nature and use of the premises as farmland and/or open space
acreage;
(1)
The transient seasonal presence of snow, water, ice, and/or animal
harborage, due to the natural topography of the property, and the
feasibility of remediation of such conditions; and
(2)
(3) The status of the premises as a recognized historic structure.
B.
§ 405-7 MONROE CODE § 405-10
1:132
shall also set forth and explain the various time limits set forth in this
article for preparing and submitting a plan of action and responding to
an enforcement citation, if one is issued. The designated enforcement
officer shall file and retain an original or certified copy of the notice.
B. If the responsible party fails to correct the violation(s) or to prepare
and submit a plan of action to the designated enforcement officer, he/
she may issue an enforcement citation as specified in this article. If
the responsible party submits such a plan of action, the designated
enforcement officer may, in his or her discretion:
(1) Accept or reject the plan as prepared in writing within 10 days of its
submission.
(2) Accept the plan subject to conditions recommended by the
enforcement officer within 10 days of the plan's submission, which
conditional plan of action must be acknowledged in writing by the
responsible party as acceptable within 10 days of the conditional
acceptance.
§ 405-11. Enforcement citation.
If any violation remains unabated, or if a plan of action is not submitted
and accepted, after the fourteen-business-day notice period has elapsed,
the designated enforcement officer is hereby authorized to serve an
enforcement citation upon a responsible party. Service shall be in the
manner provided for a notice of violation. If an enforcement citation is not
issued within 30 days of the elapsing of the fourteen-business-day notice
period, the notice of violation shall expire and a new notice of violation must
be issued, which will begin a new fourteen-business-day notice period.
§ 405-12. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine
of $100 for each day any and all violations remain unabated following
service of an enforcement citation. Penalties shall be stayed during the
consideration of a plan of action by the enforcement officer and shall only
begin to accrue:
A. The day after a plan of action is rejected by the enforcement officer; or
B. The day after the time period for acknowledgement of the acceptance of
a conditional plan by the responsible party has elapsed.
§ 405-13. Citation procedures.
A. After issuance of an enforcement citation, fines will accrue until the
responsible party submits to the enforcement officer a statement in
writing that the conditions have been rectified. Submission of the
statement will stay further accrual of fines until the enforcement officer
ascertains whether the conditions have abated. If the conditions have
not been rectified satisfactorily, the enforcement officer shall notify the
responsible party in writing, which shall have the effect of lifting the stay
of the accrual of fines until notice has been received from the responsible
party that the condition has once again been rectified. Fines shall stop
accruing when the enforcement officer issues to the responsible party, in
§ 405-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-13
1:133
writing, a notice that the conditions have been satisfactorily addressed.
Payment of accrued fines is due 30 days after the notice from the
enforcement officer that the conditions have been rectified is received
by the responsible party.
B. The final period for contesting an enforcement citation under this article
shall be 30 days after the mailing or delivery of the citation itself or,
in the event of the filing of a plan of action, 30 days after such plan
of action is rejected or the ten-day period has elapsed during which a
responsible party must acknowledge acceptance of a conditional plan.
A responsible party may file with the enforcement officer, in writing, a
petition to contest the enforcement citation. The procedures for hearing,
disposition and enforcement shall be as set forth in § 7-152c of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as the same may be amended from time
to time. Filing of a petition shall stay payment but not accrual of fines
under this article.
C. Upon the filing of such a petition, the designated enforcement officer
shall present the case before a three-person Anti-Blight Appeal Board,
which persons shall be appointed pursuant to Chapter IV, § 2 of the
Town Charter. The responsible party shall also be heard. Neither the
designated enforcement officer nor any regular members of the Planning
and Zoning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals nor any
employee of the Town of Monroe may be appointed to the Anti-Blight
Appeal Board. If the Anti-Blight Appeal Board finds in favor of the
responsible party, all fines accrued to the date of decision shall be
waived. If the Anti-Blight Appeal Board upholds the enforcement
citation, the fines that have accrued will then become due and payable,
and additional fines may accrue if the conditions remain unabated.
§ 405-14. Recording of lien.
Any unpaid fine imposed shall constitute a lien upon the real estate in
accordance with Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148aa. Each such lien
shall be continued, recorded and released as provided for in § 7-148aa.
§ 405-15. Correction of violation by Town; recovery of costs.
In the event that any responsible party shall fail to abate or correct any
violation specified in any notice, after the issuance of an enforcement
citation for such failure, which citation has become final through the failure
of such party to contest the citation before the Anti-Blight Appeal Board,
or by such appeal being unsuccessful, the Town of Monroe, acting through
its designated enforcement officer, issuing such notice of violation, may
cause or take such action as is necessary to correct such violation. The cost
to take such action shall be recovered under the applicable provisions of
Connecticut General Statutes § 7-148(c)(7)(E).
§ 405-16. Exception for pending applications.
Any blighted premises for which an application for a special permit, site
plan or other improvements to the blighted premises is pending prior to or
§ 405-13 MONROE CODE § 405-16
1:134
submitted within 10 days of the issuance of an enforcement citation in the
Town Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, and/
or the Inland Wetlands Commission shall be exempt from the provisions of
this article until a decision is reached on the same, but in any event not
longer than a period of 130 days from the date of submittal of a complete
application. The responsible party must notify the designated enforcement
officer in writing that he or she has already filed, or submit a complete
copy of any application to the enforcement officer in the event that the
responsible party files a special permit or site plan application within 10
days of the issuance of an enforcement citation, which notice or submission
will maintain the property's exempt status until a hearing is concluded and
a decision is reached. No fines shall accrue until a decision has been issued
by the applicable board or commission.
§ 405-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-16
1:135
Chapter 420
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Department — See Ch. 71. Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305.
§ 420-1. Authority.
The Director of Health shall have the authority to enforce provisions of this
chapter.
§ 420-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the term "public pool" shall have the same
meaning as defined in the Connecticut Public Health Code.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONNECTICUT PUBLIC HEALTH CODE — The Public Health Code of
the State of Connecticut.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The local Director of Health of the Town of
Monroe, or his/her duly authorized agent.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, municipality, political subdivision, community governmental
agency, club, organization, or other entity owning or operating a pool.
PERSON IN CHARGE — Any individual present at the public pool who is
the apparent supervisor of the public pool at the time of the inspection.
If no individual claims to be the supervisor, then any employee present is
deemed to be the person in charge for the purposes of this chapter.
POOL OPERATOR — A person at least 18 years of age who is responsible
for the daily operation of the public pool and who shall be held
responsible for compliance with all applicable provisions of the Town of
Monroe, Public Pool Code and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
PUBLIC POOL — An artificial basin as defined in Section 19-13-B33b of
the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
§ 420-3. License requirements.
A. No person, firm, corporation, or association shall operate a public
swimming pool within the Town of Monroe unless in possession of a valid
license issued by the Director of Health. Only a person who complies
with the requirements of this regulation and Section 19-13-B33b of the
Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut shall be entitled to
receive and retain such a license.
§ 405-16 MONROE CODE § 420-3
1:136
B. Any person desiring to operate a public swimming pool shall make
written application for a license, at least 10 business days prior to
opening a new public pool, or prior to the expiration of an existing
license, or change of ownership, on forms provided by Director of
Health. Such application shall include but not be limited to, the name
and address of the swimming pool operator(s) of the public swimming
pool, the type and location of the pool and the signature of each owner
or authorized representative.
C. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
D. Each public pool at a single location which has its own recirculation and
water treatment system shall be deemed to be a separate pool and shall
be required to have a separate permit.
E. Prior to the issuance of final approval for a license, the Director of
Health shall inspect the swimming pool to determine compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut, any other applicable codes, regulations or statutes.
F. The Director of Health shall issue a license to the applicant if the
inspection reveals that the swimming pool complies with the
requirements of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut, and any other applicable codes, regulations or
statutes.
G. All licenses shall expire on April 30 of each year, unless otherwise
indicated, and may be renewed for another year upon application and
payment of an annual fee provided that the swimming pool is in
compliance with this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code of
the State of Connecticut, and any other applicable codes, regulations or
statutes.
H. In the case of a transfer of ownership of an existing swimming pool to
a new owner, the new owner shall submit an application for a license
on forms provided by the Health Department. The swimming pool shall
be brought into compliance with this chapter, the Connecticut Public
Health Code and any other applicable codes, regulations or statutes by
correcting all violations before a license to operate can be issued. The
license is not transferable.
§ 420-4. Supervision of public pools.
Every pool shall be under the immediate supervision of a swimming pool
operator at least 18 years of age who shall be responsible for compliance
with all provisions and regulations relating to equipment, pool operation,
maintenance, testing, and the safety of bathers. The operator shall be
knowledgeable in the operation of the pool and in pool chemistry and
testing. This person must be certified as a "certified pool operator" or
successfully complete equivalent training in pool operations acceptable to
the Director of Health.
A. The Director of Health may require the pool operator obtain additional
training if inspection(s) of the pool demonstrate that the pool operator
lacks knowledge to properly and safely operate the pool.
B. Information on how to contact the swimming pool operator shall be
posted at the swimming pool whenever the operator is not on the
§ 420-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-4
1:137
premises where the public pool is located. The names(s) of the swimming
pool operator(s) shall be submitted to the Director of Health at the time
of application for a license and shall be kept updated whenever there is
a change in personnel.
§ 420-5. Inspections.
A. Prior to the issuance of an initial license and periodically thereafter,
the Health Department shall visit every public pool within the Town
of Monroe to make as many inspections as necessary, but at least one
annually, for the enforcement of this chapter and the Public Health Code
of the State of Connecticut, and shall be permitted to examine all records
pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the public pool.
B. Such inspections shall be performed during regular business hours
whenever possible, or at any reasonable time upon request of the Health
Department.
§ 420-6. Public pools operating without license.
When it comes to the attention of the Director of Health that a public pool
is operating without a valid license, the Director of Health shall order the
public pool to close immediately.
§ 420-7. Suspension of license.
A. The Director of Health may suspend any license to operate a public
swimming pool if the license holder does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code or any
other applicable code, regulation or statute.
B. In the event that the Director of Health or his duly authorized
representative finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of
the public swimming pool which in his judgment constitutes a violation
of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code or any other
applicable code, regulation or statute, the Director of Health may issue
a written notice of intent to suspend the license to the license holder
or operator citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to be
taken and specifying the time period within which such action shall be
taken and, if deemed necessary, order immediate pool correction.
C. If correction is not made in the allotted time, the license shall be
suspended and a written order issued to the owner or operator to cease
operation of the public swimming pool. The pool shall immediately close
upon receipt of the order.
D. The public pool shall not resume operations without written approval
or re-instatement of the license by the Director of Health. A suspended
license shall be removed from the premises by the Director of Health or
his/her designee.
E. One copy of the order for pool closure shall be posted by the owner
upon the inner surface of the window of the front entrance door of the
public swimming pool, or upon the nearest window thereto, or upon the
entrance gate in such a manner as to be clearly visible to the general
§ 420-4 MONROE CODE § 420-7
1:138
public from the exterior of such facility. Said order to close pool shall not
be defaced or removed by any person except the Director of Health.
F. The Director of Health may immediately suspend, without warning, prior
notice, or hearing, any license to operate a public pool if the owner,
operator or person in charge has interfered with the performance of
the Director of Health's duties or if the pool operation constitutes a
significant health nuisance or imminent safety hazard to the public. A
significant health nuisance or imminent safety hazard to the public shall
include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
(1) The clarity of the water does not comply with the provisions of
Section 19-13-B33b(b)(4) of the Connecticut Public Health Code, as
amended.
(2) The amount or residual disinfection is less than the minimum amount
specified in Section 19-13-33b(b)5 of the Connecticut Public Health
Code, as amended.
(3) Severe structural deficiencies and/or disrepair of the public pool
presents a substantial safety hazard to patrons. This includes the
malfunction or nonfunction of the pool recirculating system.
(4) The safety equipment required by Section 19-13-B33b(b)(10), (14),
(16), (18), (c)(1)(3)(4) of the Connecticut Public Health Code, as
amended, is not provided.
(5) Discharge of fecal or vomit matter into the pool has occurred.
(6) The temperature of the pool exceeds 104º F. in a public whirlpool
spa, Section 19-13-B33b(e)(2), as amended.
(7) The pH of the water does not comply with the provisions of Section
19-13-B33b(b)(6) of the Connecticut Public Health Code, as
amended.
G. A written order to cease and desist, issued to the license holder of the
public pool from the Director of Health, will follow within 24 hours.
When a license is suspended, pool closure under this chapter shall be
effective immediately upon delivery of written notice to the person in
charge at the pool by the Director of Health and shall not resume until
written approval has been issued by the Director of Health.
§ 420-8. Revocation of license.
The Director of Health may after providing opportunity for hearing and
appeal, revoke or refuse to renew any license to operate a public pool
for unsanitary or injurious conditions or an imminent health hazard to
the public, or repeated violations of provisions of this chapter or the
Connecticut Public Health Code, or for interference with the Director of
Health in the performance of their duties. Prior to revocation, the Director
of Health shall notify the license holder or person in charge, in writing,
of the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and that the
license shall be revoked at the end of 10 days following service of such
notice unless an appeal is filed with the Director of Health by the license
holder within 48 business hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and Town
holidays) of receipt of the notice. If no appeal is filed within these 48
business hours, the revocation of the license becomes final. A revoked
license shall be removed from the premises by the Director of Health.
§ 420-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 420-9
1:139
§ 420-9. Service of notice.
Written notices and orders provided for in this chapter shall be deemed to
have been properly served when a copy of the notice or order has been
delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the owner, permit holder or person in charge of the public swimming pool.
Such written notices and orders shall also be deemed to have been properly
served provided it has been posted on the front entrance door of the public
swimming pool or upon the nearest window or entrance gate thereto in such
a manner as to be clearly visible to the general public from the exterior
of the facility. Said notice shall not be defaced or removed by any person
except the Director of Health. A copy of any such notice or order shall be
filed in the records of the Director of Health.
§ 420-10. Hearings.
The Director of Health shall conduct the hearings provided for in this
chapter at a designated place and time. The Director of Health shall make
a final finding based upon the complete hearing record, and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The
Director of Health shall furnish a copy of the written report of the hearing
decision to the license holder within 10 calendar days of the hearing date.
§ 420-11. Appeals.
The owner of a public pool aggrieved by any written notice or order may,
within 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and Town holidays) after
the receipt of such notice and/or order, appeal to the Director of Health who
shall thereupon examine the merits of such case and may vacate, modify
or affirm such written notice or order. The owner or operator of a public
pool who is aggrieved by such action of the Director of Health may, no
later than three business days after the date of receipt of such notice or
order, appeal to the State of Connecticut Commission of Health who shall
thereupon immediately notify the authority from whose order the appeal
was taken and examine the merits of such case and may vacate, modify or
affirm such action in accordance with the Connecticut State Statutes.
§ 420-12. Reinstatement of license.
A. Subsequent to suspension: Whenever a license has been suspended,
the holder of the suspended license may make a request for license
reinstatement. Within five days following receipt of such request, the
Director of Health shall make a reinspection. If the applicant is found to
be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the Connecticut
Public Health Code, other applicable codes, regulations or statutes, and
the conditions responsible for the suspension have been corrected, the
license shall be reinstated and returned to the license holder.
B. Subsequent to revocation: After a period of 30 days from the date of
revocation, a written application may be made for the issuance of a
new license. Procedures delineated in this chapter for obtaining a new
license shall be followed.
§ 420-9 MONROE CODE § 420-13
1:140
§ 420-13. Food service operations requiring licenses.
When provision is made for serving food and/or beverages at the pool,
no containers of glass or other material, which might cause a hazard to
bathers, shall be used. The pool facility shall be so arranged and posted to
permit consumption of food and beverages only in a specified area. Any food
service area shall comply with the Connecticut Public Health Code and the
Code of the Town of Monroe.
§ 420-14. Animals.
Domestic animals are prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by law, at a
public swimming pool or within the pool barrier during swim season.
Chapter 425
SALONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Department — See Ch. 71. Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305.
§ 425-1. Authority.
The Director of Health shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 425-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the terms "barbering" and "hairdressing and
cosmetology" shall have the same meaning as defined in the Connecticut
Public Health Code, as amended.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of
barbering for the public.
CHANGING ROOM — A separate and discrete area, not a toilet facility,
where customers may change from their street clothes to a gown prior
to receiving services.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health of the Town of
Monroe, or his/her duly authorized agent.
DISINFECT — To use a chemical or physical process to destroy harmful
organisms, including bacteria, viruses, germs, and fungi.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises, building, or part of a building, where
any salon activity permitted by the Director of Health is practiced.
§ 420-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-2
1:141
HAIRDRESSING AND COSMETOLOGY SALON — Any establishment
engaged in the practice of hairdressing, cosmetology, and/or barbering
for the public.
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR — A person who works in an
independent trade, business, or profession in which they offer their
services to the public. They are generally not employees of the company
and perform services for another person under an expressed or implied
agreement.
MOBILE WORK STATION/MOBILE SALONS — A modular space which
can be used for multiple purposes through the use of mobile equipment.
NAIL SALON — An indoor establishment or kiosk that offers, provides,
permits or allocates space for the manicuring of healthy fingernails and
pedicuring of healthy toenails or enlists the use of chemicals which
include but is not limited to resins, plasticizers, solvents, pigments,
creams, emollients, adhesives, paints or compressed air brush
equipment for the purpose of treating, painting, repairing, and
enhancing of the human fingernails and toenails.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person, who for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes or enhances the appearance of the healthy nails of the hands
and feet, including but not limited to, the application and removal of
sculptured or artificial nails.
OPERATOR — An operator is any person, including, but not limited to,
a licensed, hairdresser/cosmetician or barber, or unlicensed person who
is performing tasks allowed under the scope of this Code and the Public
Health Code of the State of Connecticut.
SALON — Includes any shop, store, day spa or other commercial
establishment at which the practice of barbering, hairdressing and
cosmetology, tanning or the services of a nail technician, or any
combination thereof, is offered and provided.
SANITIZE — Effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides
sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the
bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment.
SHAMPOO STATION — A shampoo station consists of a shampoo bowl
(sink) and a shampoo chair.
TANNING DEVICE — Any equipment used for tanning the skin that
emits ultraviolet radiation, including but not limited to, a tanning booth,
tanning bed or sunlamp which includes high pressure tanning lamps.
Tanning devices are any accompanying equipment, including, but not
limited to, protective eyewear, timers, and handrails.
TANNING SALON/FACILITY — A room or booth that houses equipment
or beds used for tanning human skin by the use of fluorescent sun lamps
using ultraviolet or other artificial radiation.
§ 425-2 MONROE CODE § 425-2
1:142
TREATMENT ROOM — Rooms located in an establishment where
services/procedures are performed, such as waxing, facials, and
massage.
WORKING AREA — A working area is defined as a separate room with
more than one work station, or a private room set aside to serve one
customer at a time.
WORK STATION — A work station is defined as a chair, countertop and
floor space set aside for the purpose of serving a customer, including
floor space for the operator to stand while serving the customer.
§ 425-3. License requirements.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall own, operate, or maintain a salon
without a valid license issued by the Director of Health. Only a person,
firm or corporation who complies with the requirements of this code
shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license.
B. All separate businesses or establishments, e.g., a "salon within a salon,"
shall be separately licensed.
C. Licenses shall be valid until the expiration date indicated on the license
unless suspended or revoked by the Director of Health, or until such time
as the facility changes owners, closes, or goes out-of-business.
D. Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person or from location
to location. The valid license shall be posted in a location easily observed
by consumers.
E. All salon licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year, unless
otherwise indicated, and may be renewed for another year upon
application and payment of an annual fee, provided that the salon is
in compliance with this Code, the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut, and any other applicable codes, regulations or statutes.
F. A temporary license may be granted to operate a salon for events not to
exceed 14 consecutive calendar days.
§ 425-4. Contract workers.
A. Any barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology shop, or tanning salon owner
contracting out a chair, "work station," or floor space shall state such on
the permit application form.
B. The shop owner will ensure that all contractors safely perform their
duties within their scope of practice.
§ 425-5. Application and issuance of license.
A. Any person desiring to operate a salon shall make written application
for a license, at least 10 business days prior to opening a new salon, or
the change of ownership, on forms provided by the Director of Health.
Such application shall be submitted and approved prior to start of
construction, remodeling, converting, or taking ownership of a new
salon. A plan review will be required as part of the license application
process whenever a salon is being constructed or remodeled, or when
there is a change of owner.
B. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee.
§ 425-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-5
1:143
C. Prior to the issuance of final approval for license, the Director of Health
or his authorized agent shall conduct a preoperational inspection of the
salon to determine compliance with the provisions of this Code, the
Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, and other applicable
codes, regulations or statutes.
D. The Director of Health shall issue a new license to the applicant if the
inspection reveals that the salon complies with the requirements of this
chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code and any other applicable
codes, regulations or statutes. Licensed facilities must comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the Connecticut Public Health Code and
any other applicable codes, regulations or statutes.
E. Any person who does not make application for renewal of his salon
license before the expiration date of such license shall be required to
pay the Monroe Health Department a late fee for each day beyond the
expiration date of his license in addition to the regular license fee.
F. No salon license shall be granted to any individual to operate as a
barbershop or hairdressing/cosmetology salon unless such person is
properly licensed as a barber or hairdresser/cosmetician for a minimum
duration as provided by Connecticut General Statutes.
G. The chief corporation officers shall be designated as owners in the event
of a corporation.
H. State-licensed operators in a barbershop and hairdressing/cosmetology
salon shall have and display a current hairdresser/cosmetician or
barbers license issued by the State of Connecticut.
§ 425-6. Annual inspections.
At least once a year, the Director of Health, or authorized agent, shall
inspect each barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology shop, and/or tanning
salon and shall make as many additional inspections as are necessary for
the enforcement of this Code and the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut. Any shop offering pedicures as a service will be inspected a
minimum of twice a year.
§ 425-7. Right of entry.
The Director of Health or his authorized agent shall be permitted, after
proper identification, to enter during normal business hours of the
establishment, or at any other reasonable time, any salon for the purpose
of making inspections, as deemed necessary by the Director of Health or
his authorized agent, to determine compliance with this chapter, the Public
Health Code of the State of Connecticut, and any other applicable codes,
regulations or statutes.
§ 425-8. Establishments operating without license.
When it comes to the attention of the Director of Health that a salon is
operating without a valid license, the Director of Health shall order the
establishment to close and to cease all operations immediately.
§ 425-5 MONROE CODE § 425-9
1:144
§ 425-9. Suspensions of license.
A. The Director of Health may suspend any license to operate a salon if the
license holder does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, the
Connecticut Public Health Code or any other applicable code, regulation
or statute.
B. In the event that the Director of Health, or authorized agent, finds
unsanitary conditions or other conditions in the operation of a
barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon, or tanning salon,
which in his judgment constitutes a violation of this chapter, the
Connecticut Public Health Code or any other applicable code, regulation
or statute, or if a repeated violation or set of violations appears on more
than one consecutive inspection report, the Director of Health may issue
a notice of intent to suspend the license to the license holder or operator
citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken and
time frame within which action shall be taken, if deemed necessary,
order immediate correction.
C. If correction is not made in the allotted time, the license shall be
suspended and a written order issued to the owner or operator to cease
the operation of the salon. Salon operations shall immediately cease
upon delivery of written order.
D. The salon establishment shall not resume operations until written
approval of reinstatement of the license has been issued by the Director
of Health. A suspended license shall be removed from the premises by
the Director of Health or his/her designee.
E. One copy of the order to cease salon operations shall be posted by
the owner upon the inner surface of the window of the front entrance
door of the salon establishment or upon the nearest window thereto in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to the general public from the
exterior of such establishment. Said order to cease operations shall not
be defaced or removed by any person except the Director of Health, or
his authorized agent.
F. The Director of Health may immediately suspend, without warning, prior
notice, or hearing, any license to operate a salon if the owner, operator
or person in charge has interfered with the performance of the Director
of Health's duties or if the operation constitutes an imminent health
hazard to the public. An imminent health hazard shall include, but not
be limited to, any of the following:
(1) An ongoing outbreak of an infectious, pathogenic or toxic agent
capable of being transmitted to consumers;
(2) The absence of potable water, supplied under pressure, in a quantity
which, in the opinion of the Director of Health, is capable of meeting
the needs of the facility;
(3) A sewage backup into the facility;
(4) An individual performing procedures requiring licensure by the
State of Connecticut when such individual does not have a valid state
license;
(5) The absence of an approved sanitizer/disinfectant or evidence that
sanitizer/ disinfectant is not being used properly to thoroughly clean
implements and equipment after each client;
§ 425-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-9
1:145
(6) The absence of adequate hot water supply as provided in this
chapter.
G. A written order to cease and desist, issued to the license holder of the
facility from the Director of Health, will follow within 24 hours. When a
license is suspended, all salon operations within the establishment shall
cease immediately and shall not resume until written approval to resume
has been issued by the Director of Health. The Director of Health, or
authorized agent, shall remove a suspended license from the premises.
§ 425-10. Revocation of license.
The Director of Health may, after providing opportunity for hearing and
appeal, revoke a license for repeated imminent health hazards or repeated
violations of any of the requirements of this chapter, the Connecticut Public
Health Code, other applicable codes, regulations or ordinances, or for
repeated interference with the Director of Health or his authorized agent in
the performance of their duties. Prior to revocation, the Director of Health
shall notify the license holder or person in charge, in writing, of the reasons
for which the license is subject to revocation and that the license shall be
revoked at the end of 10 days following service of such notice unless an
appeal is filed with the Director of Health by the license holder within 72
hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and Town holidays) of receipt of the
notice. If no appeal is filed within these 72 hours, the revocation of the
license becomes final.
§ 425-11. Service of notice.
Written notices and orders provided for in this Code shall be deemed to
have been properly served when a copy of the notice or order has been
delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the owner, license holder or person in charge of the salon. A copy of any
such notice or order shall be filed in the records of the Director of Health.
§ 425-12. Hearings.
The Director of Health shall conduct the hearings provided for in this
chapter at a designated place and time. The Director of Health shall make
a final finding based upon the complete hearing record, and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The
Director of Health shall furnish a copy of the written report of the hearing
decision to the license holder within 10 calendar days of the hearing date.
§ 425-13. Appeals.
The owner or operator of a salon aggrieved by any written notice or order
may, within 72 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and Town holidays)
after the receipt of such notice and/or order, appeal to the Director of
Health who shall thereupon immediately examine the merits of such case
and may vacate, modify or affirm such written notice or order. The owner
or operator of a salon who is aggrieved by such action of the Director of
§ 425-9 MONROE CODE § 425-13
1:146
Health may, no later than 72 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and
Town holidays) after the date of receipt of such notice or order appeal
to the State of Connecticut Commissioner of Health who shall thereupon
immediately notify the authority from whose order the appeal was taken
and examine the merits of such case and may vacate, modify or affirm such
action in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 425-14. License reinstatements.
A. Subsequent to suspension. Whenever a license has been suspended, the
holder of the suspended license may request a hearing with the Director
of Health for permit reinstatement. Within five business days following
the receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the
applicant that, in his opinion, the conditions causing the suspension
have been corrected, the Director of Health, or his/her authorized agent,
shall make a re-inspection. If the Director of Health, or authorized agent
determines that the applicant has complied with the requirements of this
Code and the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, the license
shall be reinstated and returned to the license holder.
B. Subsequent to revocation. After a period of 60 days from the date of
revocation, a written application may be made for the issuance of a
new license. Procedures delineated in this chapter for obtaining a new
license shall be followed.
§ 425-15. Plan review and preoperational inspections.
Whenever a salon having a permanent location is to be constructed,
substantially remodeled or altered, or converted, or when an existing
establishment changes owner, properly prepared scaled plans detailing
equipment layout, equipment specification and finish surfaces shall be
submitted along with a completed plan review application which outlines
the requirements for such construction, remodeling or alteration of the
salon. Any such construction, remodeling, or alteration without written plan
review approval from the Director of Health shall be in violation of this
chapter.
§ 425-16. Equipment and facilities.
A. Water supply.
(1) An adequate supply of hot and cold running water, at proper
temperatures, from a municipal or approved private source shall be
provided for service for customers, cleanliness of employees and for
washing floors, walls, ceiling and equipment. All sinks and showers
in the establishment must have hot and cold running water at all
times. Hot water shall be supplied at a minimum of 105º F. and, at
any faucet or shower, shall not exceed 110º F.
(2) Any salon utilizing a well that meets the definition of a public
water system according to the Public Health Code of the State
of Connecticut, Section 19-13-B102a (as amended), will be subject
to all statutes and regulations that are applicable to public water
systems.
§ 425-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-16
1:147
(3) In a tanning salon each customer shall have access at all times to a
safe and sanitary supply of drinking water.
B. Waste disposal.
(1) Wastewater from all plumbing fixtures shall be discharged into
municipal sewers or approved subsurface sewage disposal systems.
Oils, greases, industrial/commercial wastes, toxic chemicals and
wastewater that is not sewage, as defined in Public Health Code
of the State of Connecticut, Section 19-13-B103b (a), shall not be
discharged to a subsurface sewage disposal system.
(2) Mineral oil and chemical laden swabs or cloth shall be placed in a
metal container with a foot-actuated cover. The use of mineral oils
shall be closely supervised. All waste receptacles shall be emptied
at least once per work shift or sooner as needed. All waste materials
from nail salon workstations shall be removed from the premises
to exterior commercial refuse storage containers before closing of
establishment for the business day.
C. Equipment. Equipment used in the establishment must be commercial
grade and designed for such purpose. Homemade equipment or
equipment not designed for such purpose is prohibited.
D. Plumbing fixtures.
(1) Plumbing fixtures shall be of impervious material and of a type
which is easily cleanable. They shall be free from cracks and from
parts which are not readily accessible for cleaning. They shall be of
a type which does not constitute a hazard to a public water supply
through back siphonage, or cross-connection.
(2) All plumbing installation and fixtures shall conform to applicable
building and plumbing codes.
(3) There shall be one shampoo sink for every three work stations.
(4) Shampoo bowls shall be used for barbering, hairdressing and
cosmetology work only.
(5) A utility sink must be provided for cleaning the facility. Those
premises in continuous operation by a single licensee prior to March
11, 2009, are exempt from this requirement.
(6) At least one hand wash sink shall be located in each private
treatment room and in each work area in order to provide for
proper hand washing before each customer and by the technician,
prior to rendering services. Hand wash signs shall be posted at all
hand sinks designating sinks as such. Those premises in continuous
operation by a single licensee prior to March 11, 2009, are exempt
from this requirement.
(7) Each establishment shall have a minimum of one sink for the
purpose of cleaning and disinfecting implements and utensils.
(8) If showers are provided in tanning salons, shower floors shall be
constructed of non-absorbent, non-slippery materials, and sloped
toward a properly installed floor drain.
E. Floors. Floors shall be nonporous and easily cleanable. Floors where
tinting or shampooing are done, or where chemicals for bleaching hair
are used, shall have hard and washable surfaces. Floors shall be kept
clean and in good repair. If carpeting or similar material is used for a
§ 425-16 MONROE CODE § 425-16
1:148
floor covering, it shall be of a light color with a single loop pile of not
more than 1/4 inch in height. Such floor covering shall be kept clean
by vacuuming at least daily and shampooing at least annually or more
frequently if the covering is not clean.
F. Cove base. Any cosmetology shop that offers hair dressing or barbering
shall have properly fitted sanitary cove base installed.
G. Lighting fixtures. Lighting fixtures shall be in sufficient number and
properly placed so as to provide adequate illumination.
H. Process ventilation.
(1) The establishment shall be properly and adequately ventilated so
as to remove chemical vapor emissions, excess heat and odors.
Ventilation shall comply with state and local building codes and
ordinances.
(2) Nail salons using nail polishes, enamels, basecoats, hardeners, and
chemical solvents are deemed to create indoor vapor emissions
and shall not pollute nor negatively affect the indoor air quality of
adjacent premises.
(3) The Director of Health may order the correction of nuisance
conditions should they occur.
I. Cabinets. Cabinets shall be provided for storage of chemicals, clean
linens, towels, blankets and gowns. Cabinets shall have tight-fitting
doors that shall be kept closed at all times. Linens, towels, blankets and
gowns are not to be stored on the floor or in a coat/utility closet.
J. Receptacle for used towels and gowns. A covered receptacle, which can
be readily emptied and cleaned, shall be provided and maintained in a
sanitary manner. Chemically soiled towels and linens shall be stored in
fire-retardant containers.
K. Refuse. Covered containers for hair droppings, paper and other waste
material shall be provided and maintained in a sanitary manner. Exterior
commercial refuse storage and disposal services shall be provided.
L. Toilet facilities.
(1) Adequate toilet facilities and hand wash sinks must be provided for
customers and employees. Such facilities and washbasins shall be
kept clean and in working order.
(2) Shower floors and walls shall be cleaned and disinfected at least
once every 24 hours when in operation. Adequate and conveniently
located handwashing facilities shall be provided with hot and cold
running water, a sanitary pump soap dispenser, single-use towels,
and a receptacle for used paper towels for customers and
employees.
(3) A covered refuse receptacle shall be provided in the ladies' room.
M. Work stations.
(1) Chairs in hair cutting work stations shall be at least 54 inches apart,
center to center. Those premises in continuous operation by a single
licensee prior to March 11, 2009, are exempt from this requirement.
A two-foot wide workspace shall be maintained behind each chair
for the operator. Those premises in continuous operation by a single
licensee prior to March 11, 2009, are exempt from this requirement.
§ 425-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-16
1:149
(2) A minimum one-and-one-half-foot space shall be maintained
between pedicure chairs. Those premises in continuous operation
by a single licensee prior to March 11, 2009, are exempt from this
requirement.
(3) Three-foot-wide aisles that are separate and discrete from work
areas shall be maintained throughout the establishment. No hair
dryers shall be placed in any waiting room or encroach on the
required three-foot wide aisle space. Mobile stations must be
designed to provide the same workspace and separating distances
as fixed stations. For a mobile station, it is assumed that the dryer
can be accommodated in the workspace designated for the operator.
N. Barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology or nail salon in residence.
(1) A salon located in a residence must be confined to a separate room,
separated with ceiling-high partitions and provided with a door to
be closed at all times.
(2) The area within a home operated as a salon must be equipped with
the facilities and instruments required in all such establishments.
(3) All salons operated in a residence shall comply with all applicable
local requirements for home-based businesses, including but not
limited to zoning regulations.
§ 425-17. Maintenance and operation.
A. Maintenance.
(1) The licensee of every salon shall keep it in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times.
(2) Work stations must be kept clean of filing dust, nail clippings, and
hair.
(3) Hair droppings shall not be allowed to accumulate on floors such
that an unsanitary condition is created. Hair droppings shall be
removed frequently and as soon as possible.
(4) The interior of the facility shall be maintained in good repair and in
a safe, clean, sanitary condition, free from all accumulation of dirt
and rubbish.
B. Licenses.
(1) The license issued to the salon by the Director of Health must be
posted at the entrance of the establishment.
(2) For all workers requiring a state-issued license in the performance
of their functions with the salon, the establishment must keep a copy
of each of such worker's licenses at the front desk at all times for
inspection by the Director of Health.
C. Walls, ceilings and fixtures.
(1) Ceilings shall be kept in good repair, and cracks in walls, especially
around baseboards, shall be filled in so as to prevent the harboring
and breeding of insects.
(2) Cabinets, shelves, furniture, shampoo bowls and fixtures shall be
kept clean and free of dust, dirt and hair droppings. Arms, seats and
rests of chairs shall be wiped of hair droppings after serving each
customer.
D. Sanitary services.
§ 425-16 MONROE CODE § 425-17
1:150
(1) No person infected with any infectious disease shall be serviced.
(2) A towel shall not be used for more than one person without being
properly laundered before each use.
(3) Each tanning salon shall provide to its customers paper or cloth
towels which may not be shared, for the purpose of wiping down
equipment or to be used for personal use. Cloth towels must be
washed and sanitized after each use.
(4) A sanitary paper strip or clean towel shall be placed completely
around the neck of each customer before an apron or any protective
device is fastened around the neck.
(5) A commercial laundry service shall be used for laundering if not
done on the premises. Clean towels shall be delivered in a closed
container and kept in a clean, cabinet or closet. A copy of the
laundering invoice shall be made available to the health inspector
upon request. Washing and/or drying of towels in a private home is
prohibited.
(6) A sanitizing and disinfecting agent shall be used when washing
towels and linens on the premises.
E. Sanitation of equipment and implements.
(1) Pedicure stations, foot spas, nail station tables, tanning beds, and
all other surfaces that come in contact with the customer shall be
kept clean and sanitary at all times and shall undergo cleaning and
sanitizing between each customer.
(2) Hair brushes, combs, electric clippers and all other implements used
on a customer shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times and
shall undergo thorough cleansing and sanitizing after serving each
customer or single-service disposable implements shall be used.
Each hair cutting station, nail and pedicure station shall be provided
with a container of sanitizing solution.
(3) Clean and sanitized implements shall be stored in sanitary-covered
containers which shall contain a disinfectant, or in a clean drawer.
(4) After handling a customer affected with an eruption or whose skin
is broken out or is inflamed or contains pus, the instruments shall
be effectively cleaned, washed with soap or a detergent and water,
then rinsed with water having a temperature of at least 170º F. or
allowed to remain for five minutes in alcohol (70% ethyl alcohol
or 99% isopropyl alcohol) or some other disinfectant or sanitizing
process approved in advance by the Director of Health.
(5) Shaker-top containers must be provided for dispensing lotions and
powders. All products not stored in the original container must be
clearly labeled at all stations.
(6) Single-service towels, papers, emery boards, orange sticks, buffing
blocks, waxing sticks, cosmetic sponges, and other material shall
be disposed of in the proper receptacle immediately after use on
each customer and shall not be used again. However, orange sticks,
emery boards, buffing squares, cosmetic sponges and disposable nail
bits may be kept for use on the same customer if kept in a covered
container labeled with the customer's name.
§ 425-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17
1:151
(7) All disposable materials that come into contact with blood and/or
body fluids shall be disposed of in sealable plastic bags prior to
placing in the waste receptacle.
(8) All articles that come into direct contact with the customer's skin,
nails, or hair that cannot be effectively cleaned and sanitized shall
be disposed of in a covered waste receptacle immediately after use.
However, orange sticks, emery boards, buffing squares, cosmetic
sponges and disposable nail bits may be kept for use on the same
customer if kept in a covered container labeled with the customer's
name.
F. Shaving brushes, shaving mugs, finger bowls and credo blades. The use
of nondisposable shaving brushes, shaving mugs, and all credo blades
are prohibited. The Director of Health has the authority to remove
these items from the premises. The use of finger bowls for manicuring
purposes is allowed, but the finger bowl must be properly cleaned and
sanitized after each customer. Disposable, single-use finger bowls may
be used.
G. Alum and other astringents. Alum or other material used to stop the flow
of blood shall be applied in powdered or liquid form only.
H. Neck dusters, powder puffs, makeup brushes and sponges. The use
of brush neck dusters, powder puffs, makeup brushes and sponges is
prohibited unless they are single-use disposable implements.
§ 425-18. Approved cleaning, recommended sanitizers, and
disinfection procedures.
A. Equipment and implements must be thoroughly cleaned with a detergent
(soap, trisodium phosphate, etc.) and warm water.
B. Chemicals suitable for low temperature washing (less than 158º F.) of
towels and linens shall be used. Lysol or household bleach (for whites)
shall be used to manufacturer's specifications. Color-safe bleach may not
be used.
C. Barbicide disinfectant constitutes satisfactory sanitation and
disinfection of implements. Manufacturer's specifications must be
followed. No method is considered effective without prior thorough
cleaning with detergent (soap, trisodium phosphate, etc.) and warm
water.
D. All other chemical methods of sanitizing and disinfecting must have prior
approval in writing by the Director of Health. Equipment specifications
shall accompany requests for approval.
E. Nonchemical methods of sanitizing must be approved in writing by the
Director of Health. Equipment specifications shall accompany requests
for approval.
F. Disinfection procedures must follow manufacturer instructions and be
approved by the Director of Health. All disinfectants must be EPA
registered and approved for use by the Director of Health.
§ 425-19. Food and beverages.
Food and beverages shall not be prepared, stored or sold in the licensed
premises, except with a valid food service establishment license by the
§ 425-17 MONROE CODE § 425-19
1:152
Director of Health. Coffee and tea may be prepared and kept for the
convenience of employees and patrons, but no charge is to be made to
patrons who are served. Food and nonalcoholic beverages may, however, be
brought into the licenses premises, from an approved source, for immediate
consumption and also may be dispensed by means of automatic vending
machines on the premises.
§ 425-20. Animals, pets, or live birds.
No animals, pets or live birds shall be permitted in any salon, except for
a guide or assistance dog as provided under federal law and Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 425-21. Employee break room.
An employee break room shall be provided if food and nonalcoholic
beverages are to be consumed by the employees. Those premises in
continuous operation by the same licensee prior to March 11, 2009, are
exempt from this requirement.
§ 425-22. Hygiene of operators.
A. Cleanliness of operators. The hands of the operator shall be thoroughly
washed with soap and warm water before serving each customer and
immediately after using the toilet, or after eating.
B. Health of operators.
(1) No person known to be infected with any communicable disease
in an infectious stage shall engage in barbering, hairdressing or
cosmetology, and no person so affected shall be employed as a
barber, hairdresser, cosmetician or nail technician.
(2) Operators shall not eat or drink while providing services to a
customer.
§ 425-23. Proper attire.
Operators shall wear, while attending any customer in a salon, clean,
washable garments.
Chapter 430
SCENIC ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveway construction — See Ch. 260. Highway modification — See Ch. 308.
§ 430-1. Authority; applicability.
§ 425-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-1
1:153
A. The Town Council shall designate the Planning and Zoning Commission
as the authoritative body in determining a highway or any portion of a
highway as a scenic road.
B. This chapter does not apply to private, state, or federal roads.
§ 430-2. Designation criteria.
A. Prior to designating a highway or a portion thereof as a scenic road,
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall first specifically find that the
highway or portion of the highway to be designated is at least 1/2 mile
in length or that the entire length of the highway is less than 1/4 mile
in length and at least one end of the highway abuts a highway already
designated as scenic. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also
find that at least three of the following criteria are met:
(1) The highway is unpaved;
(2) The highway is bordered by mature trees or stone walls;
(3) The traveled portion of the highway is no more than 20 feet in width;
(4) The highway offers scenic views;
(5) The highway blends naturally into the surrounding terrain; or
(6) The highway parallels or crosses over brooks, streams, lakes, or
ponds.
B. No highway or portion thereof may be designated as a scenic road by
the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to this chapter unless the
owners of a majority of the lot frontage abutting the highway or portion
thereof agree to the designation of the highway as a scenic road by
filing a written statement of approval with the Town Clerk of the Town
of Monroe, which statement of approval shall meet the requirements of
§ 430-3.
C. No highway or portion of a highway shall be designated as a scenic road
if the abutting property contains intensive commercial development or if
the highway itself has intensive vehicular traffic.
D. No road constructed as part of an approved plan of subdivision on or
after March 23, 1956, may be considered for scenic road designation.
§ 430-3. Procedure for designation.
A. Statement of approval. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
consider a highway or portion thereof for designation as a scenic road
on its own initiative. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall also
consider such designation upon submission of a petition of electors,
which petition shall have attached to it a statement of approval as
described below. Each page of any such petition shall have attached to
it a copy of the proposed ordinance designating the highway or portion
thereof as a scenic road. No ordinance designating a highway or portion
thereof shall be adopted unless the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall have received a statement of approval that meets each of the
requirements set forth below.
(1) The statement of approval shall be submitted on a form approved by
the Town Clerk and shall contain the following:
(a) The name of the highway to be designated as a scenic road, or a
general description of the portion of such highway sought to be
§ 430-1 MONROE CODE § 430-3
1:154
designated, together with a statement of the approximate total
length of the highway or the portion thereof to be designated;
(b) A description of those characteristics of the road that qualify it
for scenic road status, including but not limited to the criteria set
forth in § 430-2 satisfied by the road;
(c) The signature of the owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting
the highway or portion of the highway in question, stating that
they approve of designating the road or portion thereof as a
scenic road and indicating their address and lot frontage along
the road or portion of the road in question;
(d) The names and addresses of owners of lot frontage abutting
the highway or portion of the highway in question who did
not approve the designation, and as to such owners whom the
circulator of the statement was unable to contact, a statement
that diligent and reasonable efforts were made to contact such
owners; and
(e) The name, address and signature of the circulator of the
statement of approval, who shall be a resident of Monroe,
together with a statement by the circulator that he or she either
knows each individual who signed the statement of approval or
that the signer satisfactorily identified himself to the circulator.
(2) The original of the statement of approval shall be filed with the
Town Clerk, who shall retain one copy, forward one copy to the
Town Assessor, and forward the original to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Town Assessor shall verify the ownership and total
lot frontages of those signing the statement of approval, verify that
said total lot frontage constitutes a majority of lot frontage abutting
the highway or portion thereof to be designated as a scenic road,
and submit such verification to the Planning and Zoning Commission
within 14 days from the date the Assessor received the statement of
approval from the Town Clerk.
B. Hearing. In order to designate a highway or portion thereof a scenic
road, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, upon submission of
verification, hold a public hearing regarding the designation of such road
as a scenic road. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by sending
a copy of the notice by registered or certified mail to the owners of lots
fronting the highway or the portion of the highway to be designated as a
scenic road, or any other property owners abutting such road within 500
feet.
C. Decision. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act upon the
designation within 60 days from the date of public hearing. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall approve for designation any highway or
portion of highway that it finds meets the criteria of § 430-2 and if
the statement of approval and any petition of electors conform to the
procedural requirements of Subsection A of this section. Within 10 days
after passage, the ordinance designating a highway or portion of a
highway as a scenic road shall be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in the Town, and notice of such passage shall be sent
by certified or registered mail to the owners of lots fronting on that
§ 430-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-3
1:155
highway or portion thereof designated as a scenic road and to any other
property owners abutting such road within 500 feet. Such notice shall be
a simple statement that the highway or portion thereof was designated
as a scenic road by ordinance, together with the date of such action.
The grounds for the designation or nondesignation shall be stated in
the records of the Planning and Zoning Commission and, in the case of
designation, shall include in detail the special features that make the
highway so designated scenic.
D. Signage. Each designated scenic road may be identified by the posting
of signs at both ends.
§ 430-4. Rescission of scenic road designation.
The designation of a highway or the portion of the highway as a scenic
road may be rescinded by the Planning and Zoning Commission, using the
same procedures as those used for the designation, and provided that the
owners of a majority of lot frontage abutting the highway or a portion of
the highway concur with such rescission. No designation of a highway or a
portion of a highway as a scenic road may be rescinded, and no petition or
request for such rescission may be filed, for at least three years after the
effective date of the ordinance so designating a highway or portion of the
highway as a scenic road. No designation of a highway or the portion of the
highway as a scenic road may be rescinded unless the highway or portion
thereof meets the criteria set forth in § 430-2A regarding highway length.
§ 430-5. Alterations or improvements.
A. Preservation objective. The Town shall maintain its scenic roads in good
and sufficient repair and in passable condition. Routine maintenance
and the regulation of future alterations and improvements of designated
highways shall be carried out so as to preserve to the highest degree
possible the scenic characteristics of the highway which are indicated in
the records of the Planning and Zoning Commission as the basis for its
designation as a scenic road.
B. Routine road maintenance. Such maintenance shall include removal of
dead and seriously diseased or damaged trees and branches of trees;
trimming of the tree branches that encroach on the traveled portion
of the highway below the height needed to allow school buses and
emergency vehicles to pass; trimming or removal of brush and removal
of boulders or other obstacles that encroach on the traveled portion
of the road; necessary trimming for utility lines; trimming of brush to
enhance and protect scenic views, stone walls, mature trees and other
characteristics of the scenic road set forth in the decision designating
it a scenic road; correction of drainage problems; and graveling,
retreatment, and repair of existing roadway surfaces. Routine road
maintenance shall not require approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, except that the First Selectman shall be notified of
contemplated routine maintenance to a scenic road at least one week
before it is to commence.
C. Natural disasters. In the case of a natural disaster in which a road
becomes impassable or unsafe for public travel and access must be
§ 430-3 MONROE CODE § 430-5
1:156
provided, emergency repairs may be made as needed to restore the
highway or portion of highway to its pre-emergency condition.
D. Alterations or improvements; procedure. As used herein, the term
"alteration or improvement" to a scenic road shall include widening
of the right-of-way or of the traveled portion of the highway, paving
(including but not limited to gravel or chipped asphalt), changes of
grade, straightening, removal of stone walls and removal of mature
trees, and all other improvements except routine maintenance. The
alteration or improvement of a designated scenic road shall be
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Any proposal for
alteration or improvement, whether by public or private application,
shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission, along with a
suitable map showing in detail the proposed alteration or improvement.
If it deems necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require
the applicant to submit engineering or other technical reports
documenting the need for alteration and offering potential alternative
solutions. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the application. Within 35 days after receiving the
application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a
determination on the application. In making its determination, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall also consider the opinion of
the Town Engineer or other licensed engineer as may be retained by
the Town to render an opinion on the application. Final action on the
application shall be taken within 45 days of the public hearing.
E. Standards for alteration. No alterations or improvements to a scenic
road or portion thereof (other than routine maintenance) shall be made
unless the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that such
alterations are necessary to maintain the road in good and sufficient
repair and in reasonably safe condition for public travel. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall not grant an application to improve or alter
a scenic road or portion thereof to accommodate a proposed subdivision
or other development of land to which the scenic road would provide
access unless the Planning and Zoning Commission determines that
such alteration will not have a material adverse effect on the scenic
characteristics of the highway which formed the basis for its designation
as a scenic road, or unless the Planning and Zoning Commission, upon
the advice of the Town Attorney, determines that a refusal to permit
such alteration or improvement would result in a violation of Article I,
Section 11, of the Connecticut Constitution. In determining whether to
allow proposed improvements or alterations, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall take into account the specific safety features of the
proposed change, the overall impact of the proposed change on the
scenic road, and the public response to the proposed change. Any
decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission to alter or improve
a scenic road shall reflect the least possible damage to the scenic
character of the highway. If alterations or improvements to a scenic road
are required, then they shall conform to the following requirements:
§ 430-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-5
1:157
(1) Speed limits. Scenic values are correlated with lower speeds. The
speed limit established by the Town for a scenic road shall be
clearly posted.
(2) Curves. Scenic values are correlated with the existence of curves,
which allow a constant unfolding of new and changing views.
Curves shall not be eliminated until they are found to be a definite
hazard within the concept of the specific road.
(3) Grades. Hills and valleys are correlated with scenic values. They
shall not be destroyed by cuts and fills unless absolutely essential
for road safety.
(4) Widths. A narrow road is correlated with high scenic beauty.
Designated highways should never be widened unless the amount
of traffic, as determined by a factual study, demands it. For some
rural roads, the amount of traffic that can be handled can be
greatly increased by wide bypasses and turnouts constructed at
intervals where they do least damage to scenic and other values;
such bypasses and turnouts shall be implemented wherever
possible.
(5) Side slopes. Existing steepness of side slope is preferable to
reduction of gradient by extensive removal of soil and rock. This is
especially true where the slope is fully stabilized and where it is
rich with existing ground cover, shrubs and trees.
(6) Vistas. Vistas of different landscapes shall be preserved by suitable
vegetation management techniques.
(7) Utility lines. Where such lines are overhead, the utility corporations
shall cooperate by suitable vegetation management techniques
which preserve the wildflowers and the shrubs.
(8) Vegetation. Vegetation on the side of the road shall be managed
in such a way as to preserve wildflowers, permissible shrubs of
ornamental and wildlife values, and trees. Overarching isolated
trees, and the canopy of a closed forest, can have extremely high
scenic value.
(9) Stone walls. If stone walls or portions thereof must be removed,
they shall be rebuilt along the untraveled portion of the scenic road.
(10) Nonscenic activities and structures shall be forbidden, such as
billboards, sand, gravel and salt piles, refuse disposal, and other
unsightly situations, and compliance will be strictly enforced.
Where possible, scenic and preservation easements should be
acquired from adjacent owners to ensure the continuance of
natural relief, desirable features, and scenic and historic values in
the public interest.
F. Paving criteria. No scenic road may be paved unless the Town Council
passes a resolution to the effect that there is no reasonable alternative
to the improvement or alteration of the road other than paving. Such
resolution shall be based upon certification by the Town Engineer or
a licensed civil engineer retained by the Town Council that there is
no reasonable alternative to the improvement or alteration of the road
other than paving and that the alteration or improvement by paving
is necessary to maintain the road in good and sufficient repair and in
§ 430-5 MONROE CODE § 430-5
1:158
reasonably safe condition for travel. Any paving of a scenic road in
accordance with this subsection, or any work to be done in connection
with such paving, shall not commence before 60 days after the date of
the resolution of the Town Council in accordance with the provisions of
this subsection. Before any alteration or improvement may be made to a
road pursuant to this subsection, all other requirements and procedures
of this section must also be complied with.
G. Rights of landowners.
(1) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit a person owning
or occupying land abutting the highway or portion thereof
designated as a scenic road from:
(a) Maintaining, altering or repairing the land which abuts the road
so designated if the maintenance occurs on land not within the
right-of-way, paved or unpaved, of the scenic road; or
(b) Having access to his or her property by driveway or subdivision
road by encroachment within the rights-of-way, provided that
such encroachment is constructed so as to safeguard the
highway's scenic features as recorded by the Town Council.
(2) Nothing herein shall prohibit a landowner from permanently
removing a portion of a stone wall in order to construct or improve
a driveway or, in the case of a subdivision, to connect a subdivision
road with a designated scenic road.
§ 430-6. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.68
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or, in his
absence, by the Police Department. Violation of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $250 per day for each day the violation continues
and such other legal remedies as may be available to the Town.
Chapter 434
SCHOOL PROPERTY
§ 434-1. Purpose and applicability.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of schoolchildren as well
as for the protection of school property, the following rules of conduct shall
apply to all public school property within the Town of Monroe.
§ 434-2. Firearms and fireworks.
There shall be no carrying or shooting of any firearms, including but not
limited to rifles, handguns, bows and arrows and air guns, by anyone
other than a duly authorized law enforcement officer, nor displaying of any
fireworks unless authorized as a public display upon approval of the Board
of Education.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 430-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 434-3
1:159
§ 434-3. Golfing, model airplanes and go-carts.
There shall be no golfing, model airplane flying or go-cart or similar vehicle
driving or racing unless approved by the Board of Education.
§ 434-4. Peddling and soliciting; loitering.
A. There shall be no soliciting, selling, promoting, advertising, displaying or
distributing of pictures, printed material or articles to students that have
not received the approval of the Superintendent of Schools in or about
school property.
B. Further, no person or persons, without permission or legitimate purpose,
shall idle or loiter upon such property after they have been commanded
by any police officer or person in charge of school-owned property to quit
such property.
§ 434-5. Posting of regulations.
There shall be a copy of this chapter posted conspicuously on all public
school property.
§ 434-6. Penalties for offenses.69
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be fined
$90.
Chapter 440
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
178.
Building construction — See Ch. 232.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305.
Water — See Ch. 494.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 434-3 MONROE CODE § 434-6
1:160
ARTICLE I
Sewage Facilities
[Adopted 6-4-1975 (Ch. 89, Art. II of the 1976 Code)]
§ 440-1. Director of Health approval required.
No building for residential occupancy nor commercial buildings shall be
constructed in the Town of Monroe unless the sewage facilities in
connection with the same have been approved by the Director of Health or
an authorized agent designated by him.
§ 440-2. Notice to eliminate nuisance in existing buildings.
The owner of any building now existing in the Town of Monroe shall, upon
written notice by the Director of Health or his authorized agent, cause to
be made any repairs necessary to eliminate a sewage nuisance. This notice
shall be served by hand or by certified mail, and the sewage nuisance must
be eliminated no later than 30 days from the date of said service.
§ 440-3. Approval of sewage disposal systems.
No sewage disposal system shall be constructed, altered, repaired or rebuilt
without having the plans approved by the Director of Health or an
authorized agent designated by him. The Director of Health or his
authorized agent shall approve any such sewage facilities when such
facilities meet the requirements of the Public Health Code of the State of
Connecticut.
§ 440-4. Application for approval; fee. [Amended 9-11-1980;
1-11-198870]
All applications for approval of the sewage facilities shall be filed with
the Director of Health or an authorized agent designated by him. All
applications for approval shall be accompanied by a plan of the proposed
sewage facilities. The fee which shall accompany said application for new
construction and major repairs shall be $250, and the fee for minor repairs
or additions to existing systems shall be $150, payable to the Town of
Monroe.
§ 440-5. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 10-14-197671]
The owner of any building or parcel of land which is in violation of any
provision of this article or on which a violation occurs shall be subject to a
fine of not to exceed $250 for each and every day that such violation shall
continue.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-5
1:161

ARTICLE II
Septage Disposal Sites
[Adopted 10-14-1976 (Ch. 89, Art. I of the 1976 Code)]
§ 440-6. Applicability. [Amended 7-12-1982]
The following regulations govern the hauling and disposal of septage waste
in the Town of Monroe.
§ 440-7. Designation and regulation of sites. [Amended 7-12-1982]
A. The Town Council shall have the power to designate the site of disposal
and to regulate the means of disposal of septage waste collected within
the Town of Monroe. No septage waste collected within the Town of
Monroe shall be dumped, deposited or disposed of at any site unless
such site has been approved by the Town Council in accordance with this
article and the regulations enacted hereunder.
B. If a proposed regulation provides for the disposal of septage waste at a
location within the Town of Monroe, such sites must have the approval
of the Director of Health and the Planning and Zoning Commission. Prior
to passage of the regulation and prior to enactment of the regulation,
the Town Council must hold a public hearing concerning the suitability
of the proposed site.
C. The Town Council, by regulation, may also provide for the disposal of
septage waste at locations approved by the Town Council outside of
the Town of Monroe. The method of disposal at such sites shall be
governed by this article as well as other applicable local, state and
federal ordinances, statutes and regulations.
§ 440-8. Fine for dumping on unapproved sites.72
Any dumping of any sewage wastes on or in any unapproved site in the Town
of Monroe shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 for each day of
such dumping.
§ 440-9. Permission required to use sites; fee.
Permission to use such sites for the disposal of this class of waste materials
may be granted by the Town Council upon payment of a fee of $150. This
permission shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless
revoked at an earlier date for violation of any of the rules or regulations
contained in this article or any other rules adopted by the Town of Monroe
or State of Connecticut at any future date.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-10
1:163
§ 440-10. Fine for dumping without permit.73
Dumping without a permit shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$250 for each day of dumping.
§ 440-11. Liability for negligence.
The permittees under § 440-9 of this article agree by acceptance of a
permit to hold the Town of Monroe blameless for any damage to persons or
property caused by their negligence while using these sites.
§ 440-12. Bond.
A bond of $2,500 shall be posted by each and every permittee to reimburse
the Town of Monroe for any expense incurred in correcting a violation of
these regulations.
§ 440-13. Hours of legal use.
Except in a case of emergency, it shall be within the power of the Town
Council to designate days and hours of legal use of these sites for
convenience in controlling use. Dumping at any time other than that
indicated shall be cause for revocation of the permit. The Town Council shall
post at the sites notice of legal periods of use.
§ 440-14. Pit for disposal of waste.
It shall be required that any such disposal site contain a pit for the actual
disposal of the waste. The dimensions of the pit shall be approved by the
Director of Health, giving due consideration to drainage and groundwater
conditions.
§ 440-15. Fencing.
It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council to erect a strong fence at
least 60 inches in height attached to steel posts. A gate shall be provided
in this fence, which shall be locked at all times except those designated for
legal dumping. This fence should be removable so that it may be used for
other pits.
§ 440-16. Site inspections; closing; fine for use of closed sites.74
It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Health to inspect such sites
at frequent intervals, and he shall be empowered to close any or all of such
sites for violation of this article. Further use of any such closed site shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 for each day of continued use.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-10 MONROE CODE § 440-17
1:164
§ 440-17. Filling of pit after closing.
It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council to fill to the formerly
existing grade any pit whose further use shall be prohibited by the Director
of Health.
§ 440-18. Manner of dumping.
All dumping shall be done in a manner which prevents the soiling of the
earth around the pit used for disposal. Any such soiling shall be considered
prima facie evidence of violation of these regulations and cause for
revocation of the permit of all users during the period of legal use at the
end of which evidence of violation is found.
§ 440-19. Covering of freshly dumped material.
It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council to ensure that, by sunset
of any day during which dumping is permitted under the terms of § 440-9,
the freshly dumped material is covered by a layer of earth of a thickness
satisfactory to the Director of Health, if deemed necessary by the Director
of Health.
§ 440-20. Notice of intent to use.
Except in the case of emergency, it shall be required that all users of these
sites give notice, oral or written, to the Town Council or its designated agent
of intent to use the site during any period when the site may legally be used.
Failure to so notify the Town Council or its designated agent of intent to use
the site during any period when the site may legally be used shall result in
revocation of the permit.
§ 440-21. Interpretation; other regulations.
These regulations represent a minimum of control of use, and any other
regulations deemed necessary by the Director of Health for the general
health and safety or by the Town Council for convenience in policing such
use are hereby made a part of this article, subject to the penalty set forth in
§ 440-10 for violation of the aforesaid regulation.
§ 440-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-21
1:165

ARTICLE III
Septage Haulers
[Adopted 7-12-1982 (Ch. 89, Art. III of the 1976 Code)]
§ 440-22. Registration required. [Amended 4-13-1992]
All persons or firms engaged in the transportation and disposal of septage
waste shall register with the Town as set forth in this article.
A. The First Selectman shall administer the registration of all persons or
firms engaged in the transportation and disposal of septage collected in
the Town of Monroe.
B. Each septage hauler shall annually, on or before July 1, register with the
Town of Monroe.
C. Each septage hauler shall register each vehicle operated within the
Town of Monroe. The registration shall not be transferable from vehicle
to vehicle or firm to firm; provided, however, that the temporary transfer
of registrations in hardship situations, such as a temporary breakdown
of an individually licensed vehicle, shall be permitted.
D. All registrations shall be for a term not to exceed one year and shall be
renewable on or before the first day of July of each year. The registration
fee shall be $250 for each vehicle. Fees for newly registered vehicles
shall be prorated to the first of the month in which registered.75
E. If and when a duly registered vehicle is sold or transferred to another
septage hauler registered in the Town of Monroe during the registration
year, said vehicle shall be reregistered within seven days of such transfer
date, but no additional fee shall be required.
F. Any registration emblem issued shall be conspicuously displayed on the
left front of the body of each vehicle or container so registered, or as
may be directed.
G. Each person or firm shall prominently display, in letters at least four
inches in height, his or its name and telephone number on each vehicle
or container registered.
§ 440-23. Revocation or suspension of registration; appeals.
[Amended 4-13-1992]
A. Registration to haul septage and/or to use Town disposal facilities or
procedures is a privilege, not a right. The First Selectman, the Director
of Health or their duly designated agent has the right to inspect vehicles
registered under this article. Registrations may be revoked for a definite
period of time by the First Selectman, at his own discretion or upon
direction of the Director of Health, for any violation of this chapter.76
B. Revocation or suspension shall only become effective five calendar days
after receipt of written notice from the First Selectman.
C. If a person or firm objects to the First Selectman's action, described in
Subsection B above, he may, within five calendar days of receipt of said
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 440-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 440-23
1:167
notice, file a written request for review with the Town Council. Failure
to timely file such request for review shall make the First Selectman's
action final and binding.
D. Timely filing of such request for review shall operate as an automatic
stay of the First Selectman's action until the matter is decided by the
Town Council.
E. The Town Council shall hear and decide the matter within 30 calendar
days and submit said decision, in writing, to the person or firm. The
written decision of the Town Council shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 440-24. Administration. [Amended 4-13-1992]
A. The First Selectman shall administer the registration of any person or
firm engaged in the transportation and/or hauling of septage in the Town
of Monroe.
B. The First Selectman shall have charge of any area designated as a Town
disposal area. He shall fix the hours of operation and promulgate rules
to govern the use and the operation of any area designated as a Town
disposal area. He shall establish rules and procedures for the disposal of
septage waste outside of the Town of Monroe, if disposal outside of the
Town of Monroe is authorized and approved by the Town Council.
§ 440-23 MONROE CODE § 440-24
1:168
Chapter 447
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 447-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works or, in his absence, his duly
designated and acting representative.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between curblines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 447-2. Snow and ice on sidewalks.
A. Every person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate
or other entity owning any building or lot of land within the Town
fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk shall remove and clear away,
or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from so much of
said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building or lot of land.
B. Except as provided in Subsection C hereof, snow and ice shall be
removed from all sidewalks within the Town within four hours after the
cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain, if in the daytime, and
if in the nighttime, then before 10:00 in the morning of the succeeding
day.
C. However, in the event that snow or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard
that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk,
the person or entity charged with its removal shall, within the time
mentioned in Subsection B hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive
to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe and
shall then, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause said sidewalk to
be thoroughly cleaned.
D. The provisions of § 7-163a, Connecticut General Statutes, are hereby
adopted. Section 7-163a, Connecticut General Statutes, makes the
owner of the property abutting a public sidewalk liable for injuries to
persons or property caused by the presence of ice or snow on a public
sidewalk.
E. In case of any failure or neglect to comply with the provisions of
Subsection B and C, the Director shall have removed such snow or ice,
or properly cover such sidewalk with sand or other suitable substance,
and the expense thereof shall be collectable from the person so failing or
neglecting, in an action of debt brought in the name of the Town.
§ 440-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-3
1:169
§ 447-3. Removal of vehicles from roadways.
A. No person or entity shall allow any vehicle used or owned by him or it
or registered in his or its name to remain parked on a public highway
during or after a snowstorm in such a manner as to interfere with the
work of removing or plowing snow or removing ice or in such a manner
as to add to the hazard of driving on such highway.
B. In the event that a vehicle must be abandoned on the roadway due
to circumstances beyond the control of the user or owner, such user/
owner shall notify the Police Department within two hours of such
abandonment. In the event that the user or owner of any such vehicle
provides the notice called for by this subsection, such vehicle shall
not be subject to impoundment as would otherwise be provided for in
Subsection C.
C. Any vehicle remaining parked on a roadway in violation of Subsection
A hereof may be impounded by removing, towing or conveying by or at
the direction of the Director by means of towing the same to any Town
property or outdoor parking area or to a commercial place as described
in Subsection D.
D. The Board of Police Commissioners shall designate one or more suitable
places for the impounding of motor vehicles. Impounded motor vehicles
shall be repossessed only upon payment of a towing charge and a
storage charge, said charges to be set by the Board of Police
Commissioners.77
§ 447-4. Deposit of snow and ice in roadways.
It is unlawful for property owners or any other person to deposit snow or ice
in the roadways in other than incidental amounts which would not add to
the hazard of driving on such a roadway. It shall be the duty of the property
owner to remove such deposits within two hours' notice of a violation.
§ 447-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that all provisions of §§ 447-2
and 447-4 are duly enforced. He shall report the names and addresses of all
violators, together with the time and nature of the offense, to the Director,
who shall cause such walks or roadways to be cleaned and the cost thereof
charged to and liened against the violator.
§ 447-6. Penalties for offenses.78
Any person, partnership, corporation, joint-stock company, syndicate or
other entity who or which violates any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction, cited therefor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $90 in addition to any costs
associated with § 447-5 and 447-3D. Each day such violation is committed
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 447-3 MONROE CODE § 447-6
1:170
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
Chapter 452
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 305.
Littering — See Ch. 349.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 405.
§ 447-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 447-6
1:171

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 1-27-1986 (Ch. 63 of the 1976 Code)]
§ 452-1. Findings and declaration of policy.
The accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of refuse must be
controlled by the Town for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare of its residents. It is consequently found and declared that:
A. The Town is authorized by law to regulate the disposal of refuse
generated within its boundaries and to license refuse collectors.
B. The Town hereby designates the Trumbull Transfer Station as the
primary area where refuse generated within the Town's boundaries
shall be delivered and shall give notice thereof to refuse haulers doing
business in the Town.
C. The Town hereby also designates the Garder Road landfill as the area
where nonprocessible solid waste can be delivered as per regulations
authorized by § 452-7C of this article.
D. The Town has executed the municipal contract requiring it to cause all
processible solid waste generated within its boundaries to be delivered
to the Bridgeport system.
E. The public health, safety and welfare of the Town will be served by
requiring the delivery of processible solid waste to the transfer station
for processing by the Bridgeport system into products which have an
economic value.
§ 452-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Connecticut Resources Recovery Authority established
pursuant to Chapter 446E of the Connecticut General Statutes, as
amended.79
BRIDGEPORT SYSTEM — The system for the processing of solid waste and
the recovery of products therefrom constructed by the Authority pursuant
to the municipal contract.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE — Waste from the preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, condemned food products and all refuse from the
handling, storage, preparation and sale of produce originating primarily in
commercial kitchens, stores, restaurants, food markets and factories.
DIRECTOR OF HEALTH — The Director of Health of the Town of Monroe.80
DISPOSAL CHARGE — That amount of money to be charged for each
ton of refuse delivered to the Bridgeport system or other disposal site as
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 452-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-2
1:173
established by the procedures authorized in the municipal contract as well
as this article.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Solid and liquid wastes in the following
classifications: pathological, biological, cesspool or other human wastes,
human and animal remains, and radioactive, toxic and other hazardous
wastes which according to federal, state or local rules or regulations from
time to time in effect require special handling in their collection, treatment
or disposal, including those regulated under 42 U.S.C. §§ 6921 through 6925
and regulations thereunder adopted by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
of 1976, 90 Stat. 2806, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, such as cleaning fluids, crankcase
oils, cutting oils, paints, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs, fine powdery earth
used to filter cleaning fluid and refuse of similar nature.
HOUSEHOLD REFUSE — Includes waste from the preparation, cooking and
consumption of products used primarily in private homes.
INDUSTRIAL REFUSE — Includes putrescible and nonputrescible matter
from the manufacture, fabrication or processing of any product.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT — The Municipal Solid Waste Management
Services Contract between the Town and the Authority dated as of August
30, 1985.
NONPROCESSIBLE SOLID WASTE — That refuse not acceptable to or
capable of processing by the Bridgeport system.
PROCESSIBLE SOLID WASTE — That refuse acceptable to the Bridgeport
system pursuant to the municipal contract.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
household garbage, rubbish, ashes, bulky wastes and solid commercial and
industrial refuse. It shall not include hazardous wastes.
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Includes any person, firm or corporation engaged
in the business of collecting and transporting commercial, household or
industrial refuse for hire within the Town of Monroe.
TOWN — The Town of Monroe.
TRANSFER STATION — That facility constructed and operated by the
Authority as part of the Bridgeport system and located at Spring Hill Road,
Trumbull, Connecticut.
§ 452-3. License and registration; fees; transferability. [Amended
4-13-1992]
A. Each refuse collector shall annually, on or before January 1, obtain a
license to engage in the business of refuse collection in the Town of
Monroe.
B. Each licensed refuse collector shall obtain a separate registration for
each vehicle he operates within the Town of Monroe. When a vehicle is
employed to transport more than one container, each container instead
of the vehicle shall require a registration. Registrations shall not be
transferable from vehicle to vehicle or container to container; provided,
§ 452-2 MONROE CODE § 452-3
1:174
however, that the First Selectman may allow temporary transfer of
registrations in hardship situations, such as a temporary breakdown of
an individually licensed vehicle.
C. All registrations shall be issued for the term not to exceed one year
and shall be renewable on or before the first day of January of each
year. The registration fee shall be $100 for each vehicle and/or container
with a capacity of 10 or more cubic yards and $50 for each vehicle and/
or container of a capacity of less than 10 cubic yards. Fees for newly
registered vehicles or containers shall be prorated to the first of the
month in which registered.
D. If and when a duly registered vehicle is sold or transferred to another
refuse collector licensed in the Town of Monroe during the registration
year, inspection of said vehicle may be required within seven days of
such transfer date but no additional fee shall be required.
E. The registration issued shall be conspicuously displayed on the left front
of the body of each vehicle or container so licensed, or as may be
directed.
F. Each licensee shall prominently display, in letters at least four inches
in height, his name and telephone number on each vehicle or container
registered, which shall be permanently part of the vehicle or container
at the time of the inspection.
G. When any licensee shall sell or transfer all or part of his route to another
refuse collector who is presently licensed to collect refuse in Monroe, he
shall forthwith notify the First Selectman within seven days, in writing,
as to the date of the sale or transfer and the name and address of the
transferee.
H. Licenses are not transferable. When any licensee shall sell or transfer
all or part of his route to any refuse collector not licensed in Monroe, he
shall first notify the First Selectman, in writing, of his intent to sell, and
the transferee shall, at the same time, make application for a license in
Monroe.
I. Upon request of the Town, the refuse collector must, within 10 days of
such request:
(1) Furnish the geographic routes and/or a list of customers within the
Town of Monroe that such refuse collector services and/or intends to
service.
(2) Submit each vehicle and/or each container for which such refuse
collector seeks a license for the inspection and approval of the
Director of Health or his duly appointed agent.81
J. As a prerequisite to the issuance or renewal of any license, the refuse
collector must agree, in writing, to abide by all provisions of this article,
including the disposal charges and all amendments thereto.
§ 452-4. Revocation or suspension of license or registration;
appeals. [Amended 4-13-1992]
A. A license to engage in refuse collection and to use the Trumbull Transfer
Station or other Town disposal facilities is a privilege, not a right.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 452-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-4
1:175
The First Selectman or the Director of Health or their duly designated
agents have the right to inspect vehicles licensed hereunder at any
time. Licenses and/or registrations may be revoked or suspended for a
definite period of time by the First Selectman or his designee in his own
discretion or upon direction of the Director of Health for any violation of
this article.82
B. Revocation or suspension shall only become effective five calendar days
after receipt of written notice from the First Selectman.
C. If a refuse collector objects to an action authorized in Subsection B
above to revoke or suspend his license or registration, he may, within
five calendar days of receipt of said notice, file a written request for
review with the Chairman of the Town Council. Failure to timely file
such request for review shall make the action final and binding upon the
collector.
D. Timely filing of such request for review shall operate as an automatic
stay of the action authorized in Subsection B above.
E. The Chairman of the Town Council shall schedule forthwith a special
hearing before the Town Council and then within 10 days the Town
Council shall decide the matter.
F. Whenever a collector's license or registration is revoked or suspended,
he shall furnish the First Selectman within 24 hours the names and
addresses of his customers to ensure continuity of service.
§ 452-5. Rates and fees. [Amended 4-13-1992]
A. All rates and pickup service fees charged by the collector shall be
negotiated between the customer and refuse collector.
B. Fee schedules for normal service will be filed at the time of license
application with the First Selectman and thereafter in December of each
year.
C. Changes in fee schedules for normal service must be filed with the First
Selectman and will become effective no sooner than 10 days after such
filing.
§ 452-6. Disposal charge.
A. A disposal charge shall be paid by refuse collectors and/or private
individuals for all refuse delivered to the Bridgeport system or other site
as established under this article.
B. The amount, method of billing and collection procedures of a disposal
charge shall be established by the Town Council by resolution.
§ 452-7. Administration; promulgation of regulations. [Amended
4-13-1992]
A. The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the First
Selectman or his designee.
B. The First Selectman shall have charge of any area, other than the
Bridgeport system, designated as a Town disposal area and shall
promulgate rules and regulations governing the use of such area.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 452-4 MONROE CODE § 452-7
1:176
C. The First Selectman may promulgate additional rules on all collection
and disposal procedures from time to time as he deems proper, but such
rules shall not be inconsistent with this article.
§ 452-8. Responsibilities of collectors. [Amended 1-27-1992;
4-13-1992]
A. It shall be unlawful for refuse collectors to transport into any area
designated as a Town disposal area any refuse from any place beyond
the limits of the Town of Monroe.
B. It shall be unlawful for any refuse collector to collect or transport any
refuse in the Town of Monroe without first having obtained a license
from the Town and a registration for each vehicle and/or container.
C. All vehicles registered to collect and transport shall be of a watertight
construction and shall be maintained free of obnoxious odors and
accumulated refuse. Any such vehicle with a capacity in excess of 10
cubic yards shall be of a closed construction. A container utilized
primarily for nonliquid refuse need not be of watertight construction but
shall be completely enclosed. If any such vehicle shall have a capacity
of less than 10 cubic yards it may have an open top, provided that it is
covered when in motion to prevent the escape of refuse.
D. A refuse collector may refuse to continue to provide collection service
to any customer if said customer is more than 30 days delinquent in the
payment of his fee after billing; provided, however, that if the delinquent
customer shall discharge his delinquency, the refuse contractor shall be
required to immediately restore collection services to him.
E. Refuse collectors are hereby made jointly responsible for providing
collection service to any resident of the Town of Monroe. If any resident
of the Town of Monroe shall be refused collection services or is
dissatisfied with collection service for cause, he may make application to
the First Selectman, who shall have the right to direct said collector to
provide service or who shall have the right to designate another licensed
refuse collector to provide refuse collection service, and the collector so
selected shall comply with said First Selectman's designation.
F. In the event that refuse collection service is not provided, the First
Selectman shall designate a licensed refuse collector or collectors to
provide refuse collection service in the geographical area affected, and
such collector or collectors shall comply with said First Selectman's
designation.
G. Refuse collectors shall leave their customers' containers in a neat,
upright position, with lids replaced and off the road.
H. Refuse collectors shall clean up refuse that may have spilled when
carrying or transferring refuse.
I. It shall be unlawful for collectors to collect refuse between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 452-9. Storage and disposal of refuse. [Amended 4-13-1992]
A. It shall be unlawful for a refuse collector, resident or nonresident to
transport into any area designated as a Town disposal area refuse from
any place beyond the limits of the Town of Monroe.
§ 452-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-9
1:177
B. The standard container for commercial refuse shall be a watertight,
verminproof galvanized or plastic receptacle, with a tight lid and with a
capacity of not over 30 gallons, except that commercial establishments
may provide for a large covered container designated to be emptied into
a refuse truck.
C. The standard container for residential refuse shall be either a twenty- or
thirty-gallon container.
D. Customers shall ensure a safe and clear passage to the containers.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place
explosives or similarly dangerous substances into any refuse container
or to transport any such substance to the Town disposal area.
F. No person shall throw or deposit refuse in or about any building or
private property or upon any street or public place or into any swamp,
lowland or watercourse within the boundaries of the Town of Monroe.
G. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the First Selectman
may, for cause, refuse to a collector or resident the privilege of using a
Town disposal area.
§ 452-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall be fined not more than
$100 for each offense.
§ 452-9 MONROE CODE § 452-10
1:178
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 9-10-1990 (Ch. 80A of the 1976 Code)]
§ 452-11. Program established.
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-241 et seq., as amended,
persons generating solid waste must begin separating certain items for
recycling from other solid wastes for disposal. The Town of Monroe has
become a party to an intercommunity agreement establishing the
Southwest Connecticut Regional Recycling Operating Committee
(SWEROC) through which regional solid waste recycling services will be
provided. This article establishes the program (the "recycling program")
that shall govern the separation, recovery, collection, removal, storage and
disposition of recyclable materials within the Town of Monroe.
§ 452-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GENERATOR — All individuals, households, firms, partnerships,
corporations, associations, organizations, syndicates, trusts, companies,
agencies, businesses, industries, churches, government offices and
facilities, political or administrative subdivisions of the State of
Connecticut, schools, multiple-unit dwelling complexes and social clubs
which generate recyclable materials within the Town of Monroe.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, political subdivision or any other
legal entity of any kind.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials delineated in § 22a-214b-2 of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, as amended, and such other
materials as may be designated for inclusion in the recycling program by
the Town of Monroe from time to time.
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded materials, including without
limitation solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials.
TRANSPORTER — Any person authorized by the Town of Monroe to collect
and transport solid waste or recyclable materials.
§ 452-13. Administration and enforcement.
A. The First Selectman of the Town of Monroe shall be responsible for
the development, implementation, administration and enforcement of
the recycling program in accordance with the provisions of this article,
which shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The coordination of the recycling program with state and federal
solid waste management and recycling programs and SWEROC.
(2) The development of public education programs concerning solid
waste management and recycling.
§ 452-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-13
1:179
(3) Encouraging, organizing and coordinating voluntary citizen and
business organizations' solid waste management and recycling
campaigns.
(4) Investigating the availability of public and private sources of funding
for such programs.
(5) Reviewing available information on solid waste management and
recycling.
B. The First Selectman may designate a qualified person to act as a
recycling coordinator to administer and coordinate the recycling
program in accordance with this article.
C. The First Selectman shall develop and enforce such procedures as are
necessary to accomplish the objectives of the recycling program and
to ensure compliance by generators and transporters with Connecticut
General Statutes § 22a-241 et seq., as amended, and any other
municipal, state or federal ordinances, laws or regulations affecting the
recycling program.
D. The First Selectman is authorized to consider present and future
marketing conditions, availability of appropriate containers,
transportation vehicles and personnel and other equipment and such
other factors as in his or her opinion may bear on the effective and
efficient application of this article in discharging his or her duties.
§ 452-14. Obligations of generators.
A. Each generator shall separate recyclable materials from the solid waste
generated by him, her or it and store such recyclable materials for
collection and recycling pursuant to this article. Each generator shall
place recyclable materials for collection by transporters at the time and
in the manner designated by the First Selectman from time to time.
B. No permit, license or other authorization for any public event on public
or private property shall be issued by the Town of Monroe unless it
contains a requirement that recyclable materials be separated from the
solid waste generated at such event and stored and disposed of in
accordance with this article.
C. No generator shall allow recyclable materials within his, her or its
control to become a nuisance or hazard to public health, safety or
welfare. A generator who fails to observe the requirements of this
subsection shall defend and hold the Town of Monroe harmless and
indemnified from and against any and all claims, injuries, damages and/
or liabilities arising out of such nuisance or hazard.
§ 452-15. Collection of recyclables. [Amended 5-6-1992]
A. The Town of Monroe shall arrange for the collection of recyclable
materials separated by generators and designated and delivered for
collection as required hereunder.
B. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person, directly or indirectly, to
collect, remove or dispose of recyclable materials. Recyclable materials
designated and delivered by a generator for collection by a transporter
shall become the property of the Town of Monroe upon pickup by a
transporter.
§ 452-13 MONROE CODE § 452-15
1:180
C. The First Selectman may establish such procedures for the placement
and storage of recyclable materials pending collection by transporters as
he or she shall determine are reasonably necessary to assure the orderly
administration of the recycling program.
D. No transporter shall be required to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains recyclable materials.
E. All vehicles used by transporters of solid waste and recyclable materials
shall be licensed and inspected by the Town of Monroe.
F. Transporter requirements.
(1) All transporters shall:
(a) Notify the First Selectman, or his or her designee, of each
violation by a generator of any provision of this article of any
procedures established in connection herewith;
(b) Comply with all rules, regulations and ordinances and such other
procedures as may be established by the First Selectman to
ensure compliance with the recycling program;
(c) Use such containers and vehicles as necessary to prevent the
escape of offensive odors and recyclable materials from being
blown, dropped, spilled or leaked; and
(d) Register with the Town of Monroe pursuant to § 452-3 of Article
I of this chapter, as amended, and Connecticut General Statutes
§ 22a-220a(d), as amended.
(2) The requirements of this Subsection F shall be in addition to and
not in lieu of any other requirements presently or hereafter imposed
upon transporters by the Town of Monroe.
G. Any transporter doing business in the Town of Monroe who violates
any section hereof or any procedure adopted by the First Selectman in
connection herewith may, upon due notice with an opportunity to be
heard, have its privilege to operate within the Town of Monroe, including
without limitation any license or permit issued to such transporter,
terminated and revoked and a fine imposed, not to exceed $100 for each
violation, as determined by the First Selectman.
§ 452-16. Penalties for offenses.
A. In the event that generators fail to separate recyclable materials from
solid waste, as required under § 452-14A, the following penalties may be
enforced:
(1) Upon the first violation of § 452-14A:
(a) The transporter shall provide the generator with a written
warning notice or tag which shall state that failure to separate
recyclable materials from solid waste is a violation of
Connecticut General Statutes § 22a-241b(c), as amended, and
this article;
(b) The transporter will not be required to collect the unseparated
solid waste; and
(c) The transporter shall notify the First Selectman, or his or her
designee, of such violation.
(2) Upon the second violation of § 452-14A:
(a) The transporter shall not collect the unseparated solid waste;
§ 452-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-16
1:181
(b) The transporter shall provide the generator with a written
warning that any further violation may result in noncollection of
solid waste and/or a monetary fine; and
(c) The transporter shall notify the First Selectman pursuant to
§ 452-15F(1)(a) hereof.
(3) Upon notification of more than two violations of § 452-14A within
one calendar year, the person or persons who violate any provision
of this article may be fined up to $100, as determined by the First
Selectman, for each such violation.
B. Each and every violation of § 452-15B shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation of this article and shall result in a fine of not more than
$100, as determined by the First Selectman, for each such offense. In
addition to any fine, the offender, at the option of the First Selectman,
may be required to make restitution to the Town of Monroe for the value
of any recyclable materials illegally removed.
C. Nothing in this article shall deny the right of any person to give or sell
the recyclable material, including deposit beverage containers, to any
other person.
§ 452-17. Volunteer collectors.
The First Selectman may, in his or her discretion, issue permits to any
person or persons to collect recyclable materials, provided that such
persons file a report with the First Selectman detailing the types and
amounts of recyclable materials collected. In exercising his or her
discretion under this section, the First Selectman shall consider the effect
of volunteer activities on the objectives and operations of the recycling
program and the responsibilities of the Town of Monroe under SWEROC,
including whether such volunteer activity would significantly diminish the
quantity of recyclable materials which the Town of Monroe must deliver to
any regional recycling center under SWEROC.
§ 452-18. Effective date; notice of program.
A. The effective date of this article shall be October 15, 1990.
B. Notice of the commencement of the program shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Monroe at least 30
days prior to such effective date.
§ 452-16 MONROE CODE § 452-18
1:182
Chapter 462
STREET NUMBERS
§ 452-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 452-18
1:183

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 462-1. Authority and purpose.
This chapter hereby establishes a formal program of assignment of street
numbers (the "program") as authorized by § 7-148(c)(6)(C)(i) of the
Connecticut General Statutes. The purpose of the program is to devise a
systematic method of assigning numbers to real property in the Town of
Monroe and to devise, administer, implement and enforce a program of
visual identification of assigned street numbers in order to facilitate and
ensure the response of emergency and other public services to such real
properties.
§ 462-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A structure on a lot intended for human occupancy. A building
may have single or multiple occupancies.
LOT — All contiguous land in one ownership, as evidenced by a deed or
deeds recorded in the land records of the Town of Monroe. For the purposes
of this chapter, "lot" shall also mean "parcel."
UNIT — A self-contained area of occupancy within a building. A unit may be
residentially, commercially or industrially used and may consist of either an
owned or leased area.
§ 462-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-2
1:185

ARTICLE II
Numbering Program
§ 462-3. Duties of Assessor.
The Assessor shall devise, administer, implement and enforce the program
and shall have the authority to assign street numbers for all lots, buildings
and units within the Town. The Assessor may consult with the Planning and
Zoning Department and the Fire Marshal in carrying out such assignment.
§ 462-4. Records; issuance of numbers; existing numbers.
A. Records. The Assessor shall maintain and be the office of record of all
street numbers assigned pursuant to the program.
B. Issuance of numbers. Any person applying for a building permit for new
construction on a lot or parcel of land must first obtain from the Assessor
a street number for each lot or parcel of land for which a permit has
been applied, which assigned street number, or numbers as the case may
be, shall appear on all applications and documentation relating to such
construction.
C. Existing numbers. Street numbers existing in the records of the Assessor
upon the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall
continue to be the street number of record for each such lot, building or
unit unless otherwise revised by the Assessor.
§ 462-5. Program policy.
The Assessor, within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter, shall issue a written program policy for the assignment of
street numbers. Said policy shall take into account consecutive numbering
for single building/single lot development and special numbering needs
necessitated by multiunit or unique development patterns. The Assessor
shall periodically review the policy for revision necessitated by community
needs or changing methods of development.
§ 462-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-5
1:187

ARTICLE III
Identification and Enforcement
§ 462-6. Identification and display required.
The owner of each lot upon which a building or unit is located shall
permanently affix and display on each building and/or unit the street
number which has been assigned by the Assessor, in the manner specified
in § 462-7.
§ 462-7. Specifications.
A. Design. The assigned street number shall be displayed on all buildings
or units by numerals no less than three inches in height. Written, printed
or scripted words shall not be used as the required display.
B. Color. The color of the numerals shall be in sharp contrast to their
background, so as to be plainly visible and legible from the center line of
the street during daylight hours.
C. Location of number display. The assigned street number shall be
displayed on or near the front entrance of the building or unit. The front
of the building or unit shall be that side facing the street for which a
number has been assigned to that building or unit. Where a building
or unit is set back more than 60 feet from the edge of the street or
the assigned street number or numbers are not clearly visible from
the edge of the street, the number shall additionally be displayed on a
freestanding sign or mailbox. Such additional display shall be located
and shall comply with all specifications enumerated in this section,
where applicable, and shall be near the main entrance of the property in
one of the following:
(1) A freestanding sign set back no more than 25 feet from the edge of
the street; or
(2) A mailbox located at the edge of the street. The number display shall
appear on both sides of the mailbox unless the mailbox is one of a
group serving multiple buildings or units, in which case the number
display shall appear on the front of each mailbox.
D. Obstruction. The assigned street number shall be displayed so that its
view from the street is not wholly or significantly obstructed by the
mailbox flag, trees, shrubbery, porches, building architecture or other
physical impediments.
§ 462-8. Display of unassigned numbers.
The display of any street number other than that assigned by the Assessor
is expressly prohibited.
§ 462-9. Maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of the lot, building or unit owner, or the lessee,
where applicable, to maintain at all times said number display as required
by and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 462-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-10
1:189
§ 462-10. Building inspection; certifications.
A. New construction. All lots for which new construction has been
approved, as evidenced by issuance of a building permit, shall display
their assigned street numbers in accordance with the provisions of
§ 462-7 prior to the performance of any construction inspection.
B. Completed construction. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
the assigned street number is permanently displayed in accordance with
the provisions of § 462-7.
§ 462-11. Noncompliance; enforcement.
A. Noncompliance deemed a violation. The owner or owners, jointly and
severally, of each lot, building or unit failing to display an assigned
street number as prescribed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to be in violation thereof.
B. Determination and warning. Upon the determination of any such
violation, the Fire Marshal's office shall issue a warning of violation,
which warning shall provide a thirty-day period from the date of issuance
in which to correct such violation.
C. Summons. Upon failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within the thirty-day warning period, the Fire Marshal's office shall issue
a citation for violation of this chapter.
D. Continuing violation. Each day of violation beyond the thirty-day warning
period shall be deemed a separate violation subject to the issue of a new
summons.
§ 462-12. Penalties for offenses.83
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of $250 per violation. The amount of such fine shall be payable to the
Town of Monroe.
§ 462-13. Exemptions.
The owners of all existing lots, buildings or units in the Town of Monroe
shall be exempt from violating the provisions of this chapter for a period
of 60 days from the effective date of this chapter in order to assure a
reasonable period for compliance.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 462-10 MONROE CODE § 462-13
1:190
Chapter 470
TAXATION
§ 462-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-13
1:191

ARTICLE I
Relief for Elderly and Permanently Disabled
[Adopted 6-12-1980 (Ch. 97, Art. I of the 1976 Code); amended
4-9-1990; 5-1-2000; 6-9-2003; 12-10-2007]
§ 470-1. Legislative authority.
The Town of Monroe, acting herein by its legislative body upon
recommendation of the Board of Finance, hereby enacts tax relief for the
elderly and permanently disabled pursuant to § 12-129n of the Connecticut
General Statutes for eligible residents of the Town of Monroe, commencing
July 1, 1980, and each fiscal year thereafter.
§ 470-2. Applicability.
Any person who owns real property in the Town of Monroe and who is
liable for the payment of real property taxes thereon and who meets the
requirements of this article shall be entitled to tax relief hereunder. A
person is defined, for purposes of this article, as limited to an individual
person and does not include: a firm, corporation, association, partnership,
company, organization, institution, public or municipal body, or other legal
entity of any kind including municipal corporations, government agencies
or subdivisions thereof, including the plural as well as the singular. Said
tax relief shall apply only to a principal residence, including a dwelling and
dwelling lot, pursuant to § 12-129n of the Connecticut General Statutes and
this article.
§ 470-3. Eligibility requirements.
A. An applicant for tax relief or his or her spouse living with said applicant
must be 65 years of age or over on or before December 31 of the year
preceding the year of application for relief, or 60 years of age or over
and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer who has qualified pursuant to this
article at the time of his or her death, or said applicant must be under
age 65 and eligible in accordance with applicable federal regulations
to receive permanent total disability benefits under social security, or
have not been engaged in employment covered by social security and
accordingly have not qualified for benefits thereunder but have become
qualified for permanent total disability benefits under any federal, state
or local government retirement or disability plan, including the Railroad
Retirement Act and any government-related teachers' retirement plan,
in which requirements with respect to qualifications for such permanent
total disability are comparable to such requirements under social
security.
B. An applicant must have been a taxpayer of the Town of Monroe for
at least one year immediately preceding the receipt of tax relief under
this article. The real property for which application for tax relief may
be made must be the legal domicile and principal residence of such
applicant, and said property must be occupied for more than 183 days of
each fiscal year as a residence by such applicant.
§ 470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-3
1:193
C. Any application under this article shall be subordinate to any other tax
relief and exemption available to the applicant pursuant to state statutes
under which the Town of Monroe is eligible for reimbursement from the
State of Connecticut.
D. An applicant must meet the income criteria of § 470-5E of this article.
For the purposes of this article, "qualified income" shall be determined
in the same manner as provided under the State Elderly and Totally
Disabled Tax Relief Program and as established by the Office of Policy
and Management pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes, and for
married or civil union applicants, this criterion shall apply to joint or
combined income.
E. No such taxpayers or their spouses shall be eligible for any benefit under
this article if they are in arrears on any taxes owed the Town, including
but not limited to motor vehicle and personal property taxes.
§ 470-4. Application requirements.
In order to obtain tax relief on real property taxes as herein provided,
an applicant must file an application for tax relief with the Tax Assessor
of the Town of Monroe, who shall process and make a decision on the
application. Said application shall be filed at any time after February 1
but not later than May 15 to obtain tax relief for real property tax bills
coming due and payable for the two years commencing July 1 of the year
of application, with filing of subsequent applications for tax relief required
biennially thereafter, except for applications for tax deferral, which shall
be made annually. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, an applicant
receiving one kind of tax relief pursuant to this article may elect to apply
for a different kind hereunder in any year. Applications shall be in a form
approved and acceptable to the Tax Assessor of the Town of Monroe. A
statement of income shall be required which shall include copies of prior
year federal income tax returns. Any falsification of information required in
any such application shall result in a denial or revocation of tax relief with
respect to such applicant and/or repayment and recapture by the Town of
Monroe of any tax relief granted the applicant pursuant thereto.
§ 470-5. Determination of tax relief.
A. The total of all tax relief granted under the provisions of this article shall not, in
any fiscal (taxable) year, exceed 2% of the total real property tax assessed on all
real estate in the Town of Monroe in the preceding fiscal year. In any year where
total benefits exceed 2%, benefits will be prorated to bring the total down to
2%. If the total of all tax relief in any fiscal year exceeds 1.85% of the total real
property tax assessed on all real estate in the Town of Monroe, there shall be an
automatic review of the program. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the program
shall be reviewed every two years.
B. Tax relief under this article that is in addition to any tax credit provided under
the State Elderly and Totally Disabled Tax Relief Program may be in the nature
of either (a) an incremental tax credit, (b) a tax deferral, or (c) a tax freeze, but
not more than one additional relief option may be provided in the same year. An
applicant may seek to freeze a tax credit obtained the preceding year until the
Grand List of 2007. No application for a tax freeze will be accepted on the Grand
§ 470-3 MONROE CODE § 470-5
1:194
List of 2007 or any year following. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing
contained herein shall abrogate any tax freeze granted prior to the Grand List
of 2007 provided that the applicant otherwise meets eligibility requirements.
C. Tax relief for other persons.
(1) Where title to real property is recorded in the name of an applicant
hereunder and any person or persons other than a spouse living with the
applicant, such tax relief as may be granted under this article shall be
prorated to allow tax relief equivalent to only the fractional share in the
property of such applicant and spouse, and such other person or persons, if
not independently eligible, shall not receive any tax relief hereunder.
(2) Applicants who are not the record owners of property but have a deeded
life use to their residence which requires the applicant to pay the property
taxes may qualify for a benefit under this program, provided that the record
owner consents to the requested tax deferral and lien upon the property and
that applicants comply with all other requirements.
D. Any person granted tax relief pursuant to this article who sells the property
on which tax relief is granted or otherwise becomes ineligible for tax relief
hereunder shall not be allowed any tax relief respecting said property following
the date of sale or event causing ineligibility, and the ineligible taxpayer or
the purchaser, his heirs, successors or assigns, as the case may be, shall pay
real estate taxes to the Town of Monroe based upon the property's normal full
assessment value, or any lesser assessment allowed by law, from such date. In
the case of a sale, § 12-81a of the Connecticut General Statutes shall apply.
E. Income criteria.
(1) In the case of an application for a tax credit under the State Elderly and
Totally Disabled Tax Relief Program, qualifying incomes and corresponding tax
credits shall be in the same amounts as qualifying incomes and corresponding
tax reductions established by the Office of Policy and Management pursuant
to Connecticut General Statutes § 12-170aa et seq., as amended. Tax credits
granted pursuant to this article shall be equally divided between and credited
to each payment period.
(2) In the case of an application for a tax credit that is in addition to any tax credit
provided under the State Elderly and Totally Disabled Tax Relief Program,
qualifying incomes and corresponding tax reductions shall be listed as per the
table below:
Income Range
Tax Reduction as a
Percentage of
Property Tax
Maximum Tax
Reduction Per Year
$0 to $23,600 15% $1,500
$23,601 to $32,700 13% $1,300
$32,701 to $47,376 11% $1,100
$47,377 to $55,850 9% $900
$55,851 to $60,000 6% $600
§ 470-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-5
1:195
NOTE:
The above table shall become effective on the Grand List of October 2016. Tax
credits granted pursuant to this article shall be equally divided between and
credited to each payment period.
(3) In the case of an application for a tax freeze, the qualifying incomes shall be less
than or equal to the highest income level per category of taxpayer that would
qualify for tax relief pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes § 12-170aa et
seq., as amended. Effective on the Grand List of October 1, 1989, any applicant
granted a tax freeze under this article shall be entitled to pay his or her taxes
in the same amount due the immediately preceding year, or any current lesser
amount properly billed, with the exception that any revaluation tax credit will
not be used in the determination of the base year tax. Effective on the Grand
List of October 2007, no further applications for a tax freeze will be accepted.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing contained herein shall abrogate any
tax freeze granted prior to the Grand List of 2007 provided that the applicant
otherwise meets eligibility requirements.
(4) In the case of an application for a tax deferral, the qualifying incomes shall be
less than or equal to $60,000.
F. No tax relief hereunder, together with any relief received by any such applicant
under the provisions of other applicable real property tax relief benefits
provided by law, shall exceed in the aggregate 75% of the tax that would, except
for all of said relief, be laid against the applicant.
§ 470-6. Senior citizen and permanently disabled tax deferral;
appeals.
A. Tax deferral.
(1) Effective on the Grand List of October 1, 2016, any person meeting
the eligibility requirements under this article and who does not
obtain deferred collection status pursuant to § 12-174 of the
Connecticut General Statutes may file an application for tax deferral
as provided within this article.
(2) A person may apply to the Tax Assessor for deferral of up to 75% of
their real property taxes as provided within this article. At the time
of each application for a deferral, the total of:
(a) All previously granted tax deferrals and associated accumulated
interest; and
(b) The deferral amount being currently requested for the upcoming
fiscal year, cannot exceed 70% of the assessed value of the
property.
(3) Deferrals shall not be considered/granted for any taxes due as a
result of the issuance of a Certificate of Correction under
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-60 for prior tax years.
(4) In the event that an application for tax deferral is approved in
accordance with this article, the Tax Assessor shall inform the Tax
Collector in writing as to such approval and the amount of the
deferral. The taxpayer, as a condition precedent to receiving the
tax deferral benefit, shall execute a written agreement with the Tax
Collector, in a standard form as authorized by the Town Council,
§ 470-5 MONROE CODE § 470-6
1:196
providing for reimbursement of the deferred taxes, interest, and any
lien fees. The Tax Collector shall apply the amount of the approved
deferral equally over all installment payments.
(5) This written agreement shall be based on the condition that the
taxpayer is in compliance with the provisions of § 470-3E. Further,
the Tax Collector may use all legal remedies including a tax
foreclosure if the taxpayer is delinquent on that portion of the tax
that has not been deferred.
(6) For taxes deferred pursuant to this article as applied to the Grand
List of October 1, 2016, and for taxes otherwise payable during
the fiscal year starting July 1, 2017, the deferred amount shall be
subject to an interest equal to 3% per annum, accrued monthly and
compounded annually until fully paid as set forth in this article. For
taxes deferred in all subsequent years, the Board of Finance shall
make a recommendation to the Town Council in December in regards
to setting the interest rate for the upcoming fiscal year. The Town
Council shall act upon such recommendation and set such rate no
later than the 31st of January. If no action is taken by January 31,
the interest rate in effect for the current fiscal year shall become the
rate for the following fiscal year.
(7) The Tax Collector shall cause the principal amount of such tax
deferral benefit, excluding interest, to be recorded on July 1 in the
land records of the Town and shall constitute a lien on the property
as provided by Connecticut General Statutes § 12-129n, and payable
as set forth herein. Such lien shall have priority as provided by
Connecticut General Statutes, including but not limited to a priority
in the settlement of such person's estate as set forth or as provided
in § 12-122(f).
(8) The Tax Collector shall keep a record of all liens continued in
accordance with this article so that they may be distinguished from
other liens normally filed under Connecticut General Statutes
§ 12-175. Assignment of any liens established pursuant to this article
shall not be permitted unless granted by resolution of the Monroe
Town Council and the Monroe Board of Finance, as provided under
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-195h.
(9) All taxes deferred under this article shall be due and payable,
together with accumulated interest thereon and any lien fees, at
such time as the real property in question is transferred, assigned,
granted, sold or otherwise conveyed, whether or not for value,
whether in whole or in part, or title is transferred or upon the death
of such taxpayer (unless a spouse qualified under this article hereof
survives), whichever event occurs first. Such payment shall be due,
payable and collectable as a single installment within 90 days as
property taxes.
B. Applicants who are aggrieved by decisions of the Tax Assessor pursuant
to this article shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Assessment
Appeals. Applicants who are aggrieved by decisions of the Tax Collector
pursuant to this article shall have such rights as are provided by
§ 470-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-6
1:197
§§ 12-129, 12-154 and 12-170 of the Connecticut General Statutes or as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 470-6 MONROE CODE § 470-6
1:198
ARTICLE II
Solar Heating Exemption
[Adopted 9-10-1981 (Ch. 97, Art. II of the 1976 Code)]
§ 470-7. Authorization for exemption. [Amended 10-25-1982]
The Town of Monroe hereby authorizes a property tax exemption for solar
energy systems as set forth in § 12-81(56), (57), (62) and (63) of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 470-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-7
1:199

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Ambulance-Type Vehicles
[Adopted 10-11-1988 (Ch. 97, Art. III of the 1976 Code)]
§ 470-8. Grant of exemption; exceptions.
The Town of Monroe hereby authorizes, as set forth in § 12-81c of the
Connecticut General Statutes, a personal property taxation exemption for
any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose
of transporting any medically incapacitated individual. Any such vehicle
used to transport any such individual for payment shall not receive such
exemption.
§ 470-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-8
1:201

ARTICLE IV
Tax Abatement Program
[Adopted 11-27-1995 (Ch. 97, Art. IV of the 1976 Code)]
§ 470-9. Purpose.
A. The purpose of the ordinance codified in this article is to establish a tax
abatement program for the Town pursuant to which the Town, acting by
the Town Council, may consider and act upon a request by a party who:
(1) Owns or proposes to acquire an interest in real property within the
Town; or
(2) Has or proposes to acquire a leasehold interest in real property
within the Town (an "eligible party") for a tax abatement as
authorized by and in accordance with the provisions of § 12-65b(a) et
seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
B. A tax abatement may be considered by the Town Council in the following
cases:
(1) Projects for the construction of new commercial/industrial/office
facilities; and
(2) Renovation or improvement to existing commercial/industrial/office
facilities where the project will result in an increase in the assessed
value of the property (an "eligible project").
C. No tax abatement shall be considered or granted with respect to the
purchase of an existing building or parcel of real property.
§ 470-10. Procedures.
A. Any eligible party proposing an eligible project may apply to the Town for
a tax abatement pursuant to this article. Applications may be submitted
to the First Selectman pursuant to such application forms and
procedures as are determined by the First Selectman. The application
shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the eligible party, including, without
limitation, the owners or principals of any entity which is an
applicant.
(2) A description of the eligible project, including surveys, plans and
specifications thereof.
(3) Evidence of the applicant's qualifications to complete the eligible
project and proof of the eligible party's financial responsibility to see
the project to completion.
(4) Such other information as the First Selectman shall deem necessary
or appropriate, including, without limitation, any information
requested to be included in the application by the Tax Abatement
Review Committee.
B. Upon receipt of a completed application, including all required
information, the First Selectman shall forthwith refer the application to
the Tax Abatement Review Committee.
§ 470-11. Tax Abatement Review Committee. [Amended 6-20-1996]
§ 470-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-11
1:203
A. The Tax Abatement Review Committee (the "Review Committee") shall
be established by the Town Council and shall consist of five members
designated as follows:
(1) The First Selectman.
(2) The Chairman of the Monroe Economic Development Commission.
(3) The members of the Monroe Town Council Legislative and
Administrative Committee.
B. The Director of Finance and the Tax Assessor of the Town shall be ex
officio members of the Review Committee.
C. The Review Committee shall consider and review each application for a
tax abatement referred to it hereunder. Such review and consideration
shall include, without limitation, the following:
(1) The Review Committee may, but shall not be required to, hold a
public hearing with respect to any such application.
(2) The Review Committee shall investigate and determine that the
applicant is an eligible party and that the application relates to an
eligible project.
(3) The Committee shall investigate and determine the public benefits
resulting from the project, including, without limitation, job
generation, increase in the Grand List, etc.
D. Upon completion of its review of each application, the Review
Committee shall forthwith prepare and deliver to the Town Council its
report (the "Review Committee report"). The Review Committee report
shall set forth the findings and recommendations of the Review
Committee, consistent with the Connecticut General Statutes, together
with supporting reasons.
E. The Review Committee may establish policies and procedures to carry
out its duties hereunder, including processing and reviewing
applications.
§ 470-12. Town Council action.
The Town Council shall consider and act upon each application for tax
abatement hereunder submitted to it by the Review Committee. The Town
Council shall consider the Review Committee report and such other
information as the Town Council shall deem appropriate. The Town Council
shall be required to hold a public hearing on any such application. After
consideration, the Town Council may:
A. Deny the application; or
B. Approve the application with or without conditions as it shall deem
appropriate and set forth the amount of tax abatement and the
conditions thereof.
§ 470-11 MONROE CODE § 470-12
1:204
ARTICLE V
Abatement For Emergency Medical Services Personnel
[Adopted 3-25-2002]
§ 470-13. Abatement authorized.84
Each volunteer EMS personnel of the Town of Monroe who has served
as a volunteer for the Town of Monroe and who meets the requirements
for active membership as established by the Monroe Emergency Medical
Services Commission shall have any real and/or motor vehicle property
taxes owed to the Town of Monroe by such EMS personnel abated in an
amount equal to the lesser of the total amount of real and/or motor vehicle
property taxes owed to the Town of Monroe for such fiscal year, as follows:
A. For the first two years of active service: $500.
B. For the third and fourth years of active service: $750.
C. For five years of service or more: $1,000.
§ 470-14. Eligibility.
A. To be eligible for the tax abatement pursuant to this article for any fiscal
year, an eligible EMS volunteer shall, on or before April 30, prior to
such fiscal year, present a written statement certified to by the Chairman
of the EMS Commission, which statement shall include the name and
address of said volunteer, the number of monthly and yearly hours
required for consideration as an active member, any other requirements
for active membership established by the EMS Commission, whether
said person has met those requirements for the past calendar year, and
the total number of years in which said volunteer met the requirements
for active duty for the Town of Monroe.
B. Each EMS volunteer of the Town of Monroe who has served as a
volunteer for the Town of Monroe and who meets the requirements
for veteran or life membership as established by the Monroe EMS
Commission but who is not concurrently an active member as defined
in Subsection A shall have any real and/or motor vehicle property taxes
owed to the Town of Monroe by such EMS volunteer abated in the
amount of $150 for veteran members and $300 for life members,
provided that said amount does not exceed the total amount of real
and/or motor vehicle property taxes owed to the Town of Monroe for
such fiscal year, after any and all other applicable abatements and/or
tax relief benefits. In no event shall any EMS volunteer be deemed a
life member by his/her respective department unless he/she has served
at least 25 years as an EMS volunteer in the Town of Monroe, nor
shall an EMS volunteer be deemed a veteran member unless he/she has
served at least 15 years as an EMS volunteer in the Town of Monroe.
If an EMS volunteer is both a veteran or life member and an active
member simultaneously, the active member benefit shall apply. [Added
2-28-2011]
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 470-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-15
1:205
§ 470-15. Application of abatement. [Amended 6-14-2007]
A. The tax abatement under this article shall be applied first against any
real property taxes owing to the Town of Monroe and then against
motor vehicle taxes owing to the Town of Monroe. In no event will the
tax abatement, in combination with other tax benefits for which the
volunteer may be eligible, exceed the volunteer's total tax obligation to
the Town of Monroe.
B. If the eligible EMS volunteer resides in a town or municipality other than
Monroe, he/she is still eligible to receive the tax credit, which shall be
issued by the Town of Monroe in check form, payable to the town or
municipality in which the EMS volunteer resides, solely for the purposes
of tax abatement. The tax abatement under this article shall be applied
first against any real property taxes owing to said town or municipality
and then against motor vehicle taxes owing to said town or municipality.
In no event will the tax abatement, in combination with other tax benefits
for which the volunteer may be eligible, exceed the volunteer's total tax
obligation to said town or municipality. Proof of taxes due and payable to
said town or municipality may be required by the Town of Monroe before
a check is issued.
§ 470-16. Records. [Amended 6-14-2007]
The Finance Department of the Town of Monroe shall maintain a record of
all taxes abated in accordance with this article.
§ 470-17. Applicability. [Amended 6-14-2007]
The tax abatement under this article shall be applicable for any real
property or motor vehicle of volunteer EMS personnel eligible for such
abatement, whether such property is owned individually, jointly, or as tenant
in common with one or more other persons. Moreover, it shall also be
applicable to any taxes incurred by EMS volunteers as a result of the lease
of a motor vehicle.
§ 470-18. When effective.
This article shall take effect and shall be applicable to taxes owing
beginning with taxes on the Grand List of October 1, 2001, after publication
in accordance with Chapter II, § 6 of the Town Charter.
§ 470-15 MONROE CODE § 470-18
1:206
ARTICLE VI
Abatement for Volunteer Firefighters
[Adopted 1-13-2003]
§ 470-19. Abatement authorized.
A. Each volunteer firefighter of the Monroe, Stepney, and Stevenson Fire
Departments (hereinafter collectively referred to as "firefighters" or
"volunteer firefighter personnel") of the Town of Monroe who has served
as a volunteer for the Town of Monroe and who meets the requirements
for active membership as set forth below in Subsection B shall have any
real and/or motor vehicle property taxes owed to the Town of Monroe
by such firefighter abated in an amount equal to the lesser of the
total amount of real and/or motor vehicle property taxes owed to the
Town of Monroe for such fiscal year, after any and all other applicable
abatements and/or tax relief benefits, as follows: [Amended
8-24-2009]
(1) For the first two years of active service: $500.
(2) For the third, fourth and fifth years of active service: $750.
(3) For more than five years of service: $1,000.
B. A firefighter shall be considered an active member if he or she:
(1) Attends six monthly business meetings;
(2) Attends 12 training drills;
(3) Responds to 15% of the alarms of his/her company; and
(4) Meets the physical examination, CPR training and bloodborne
pathogen training requirements for his/her company.
C. Each volunteer firefighter of the Monroe, Stepney, and Stevenson Fire
Departments (hereinafter collectively referred to as "volunteer
firefighters" or "volunteer firefighter personnel") of the Town of Monroe
who has served as a volunteer for the Town of Monroe and who meets the
requirements for veteran or life membership as established by the Chiefs
of the Monroe, Stepney, and Stevenson Fire Departments but who is not
concurrently an active member as defined in Subsection B shall have any
real and/or motor vehicle property taxes owed to the Town of Monroe
by such firefighter abated in the amount of $150 for veteran members
and $300 for life members, provided that said amount does not exceed
the total amount of real and/or motor vehicle property taxes owed to the
Town of Monroe for such fiscal year, after any and all other applicable
abatements and/or tax relief benefits. In no event shall any firefighter be
deemed a life member by his/her respective department unless he/she
has served at least 25 years as a firefighter in the Town of Monroe, nor
shall a firefighter be deemed a veteran member unless he/she has served
at least 15 years as a firefighter in the Town of Monroe. If a firefighter is
both a veteran or life member and an active member simultaneously, the
active member benefit shall apply.85
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 470-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-20
1:207
§ 470-20. Eligibility.
To be eligible for the tax abatement pursuant to this article for any fiscal
year, an eligible volunteer firefighter shall on or before April 30 prior to
such fiscal year present to the Tax Assessor a written statement certified to
by the Chief of his/her department, which statement shall include the name
and address of said volunteer, the requirements for active membership
established by those departments, and whether said person has met those
requirements for the past calendar year, and the total number of years in
which said volunteer met the requirements for active status for the Town
of Monroe. An eligible volunteer firefighter who has attained life or veteran
status shall present to the Tax Assessor a written statement from the Chief
of his/her department certifying the name and address of said volunteer and
his/her status as such a life or veteran member of the department.
§ 470-21. Application of abatement.
A. The tax abatement under this article shall be applied first against any
real property taxes owing to the Town of Monroe and then against
motor vehicle taxes owing to the Town of Monroe. In no event will the
tax abatement, in combination with other tax benefits for which the
volunteer may be eligible, exceed the volunteer's total tax obligation to
the Town of Monroe.
B. If the eligible firefighter resides in a town or municipality other than
Monroe, he/she is still eligible to receive the tax credit, which shall be
issued by the Town of Monroe in check form, payable to the town or
municipality in which the firefighter resides, solely for the purposes of
tax abatement. The tax abatement under this article shall be applied first
against any real property taxes owing to said town or municipality and
then against motor vehicle taxes owing to said town or municipality. In
no event will the tax abatement, in combination with other tax benefits
for which the firefighter may be eligible, exceed his/her total tax
obligation to said town or municipality. Proof of taxes due and payable to
said town or municipality may be required by the Town of Monroe before
a check is issued. [Amended 6-14-2007]
§ 470-22. Records.
The Finance Department of the Town of Monroe shall maintain a record of
all taxes abated in accordance with this article.
§ 470-23. Applicability.
The tax abatement under this article shall be applicable for any real
property or motor vehicle of volunteer firefighter personnel eligible for
such abatement, whether such property is owned individually, jointly, or as
tenant in common with one or more other persons. Moreover, it shall also
be applicable to any taxes incurred by volunteer firefighters as a result of
the lease of a motor vehicle.
§ 470-20 MONROE CODE § 470-24
1:208
§ 470-24. When effective.
This article shall take effect and shall be applicable to taxes owing
beginning with taxes on the Grand List of October 1, 2002, after publication
in accordance with Chapter II, § 6 of the Town Charter.
§ 470-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-24
1:209

ARTICLE VII
Relief for Veterans and Surviving Spouses
[Adopted 1-13-2003]
§ 470-25. Additional exemption for veteran.
Any veteran eligible for a property tax exemption under Connecticut
General Statutes § 12-81(19) shall be entitled to an additional property
tax exemption applicable to the assessed value of his/her property in the
amount of $5,000, provided that said veteran's qualifying income does not
exceed the applicable amount under § 12-81l of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
§ 470-26. Additional exemption for surviving spouse.
Any veteran's surviving spouse eligible for a property tax exemption under
Connecticut General Statutes § 12-81(22) shall be entitled to an additional
property tax exemption applicable to the assessed value of his/her property
in the amount of $5,000, provided that said surviving spouse's qualifying
income does not exceed the applicable amount under § 12-81l of the
Connecticut General Statutes.
§ 470-27. Application for additional exemption.
Any such veteran or spouse submitting a claim for such additional
exemption shall be required to file an application, on a form prepared for
such purpose by the Assessor, not later than the assessment date with
respect to which such additional exemption is claimed, provided that when
an applicant has filed for such exemption and received approval for the first
time, such applicant shall be required to file for such exemption biennially
thereafter, subject to the provisions of § 470-28. Each such application shall
include a copy of such veteran's or spouse's federal income tax return or, in
the event that such a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as
may be required by the Assessor for the tax year of such veteran or spouse
ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to which such
additional exemption is claimed.
§ 470-28. Continuation of exemption.
Any person who has submitted application and been approved in any year
for the additional exemption under § 470-25 or 470-26 shall, in the year
immediately following approval, be presumed to be qualified for such
exemption. During the year immediately following such approval, the
Assessor shall notify, in writing, each person presumed to be qualified
pursuant to this section. If any such person has qualifying income in excess
of the maximum allowed under said § 470-25 or 470-26, such person shall
notify the Assessor on or before the next filing date for such exemption
and shall be denied such exemption for the assessment year immediately
following and for any subsequent year until such person has reapplied
and again qualified for such exemption. Any person who fails to notify the
§ 470-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-28
1:211
Assessor of such disqualification shall make payment to the municipality in
the amount of property tax loss related to the exemption improperly taken.
§ 470-29. When effective.
This article shall take effect and shall be applicable to taxes owing
beginning with taxes on the Grand List of October 1, 2002, after publication
in accordance with Chapter II, § 6 of the Town Charter.
§ 470-28 MONROE CODE § 470-29
1:212
ARTICLE VIII
Commercial Tax Abatement
[Adopted 12-4-2008]
§ 470-30. Purpose.
In an effort to attract, retain and expand businesses, the Town of Monroe
has adopted this tax incentive policy in accordance with Connecticut
General Statutes § 12-65b. This policy establishes a tax incentive program
for the Town and allows the Town to enter into written agreements with
the owners and/or lessees of certain real and/or personal property located
within the Town of Monroe in order to fix tax assessments of real and/or
personal property in the manner set forth by this policy.
§ 470-31. Eligibility.
A. In accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes
§ 12-65b, the Town Council may enter into written tax agreements with
owners and/or lessees of real and/or personal property.
B. Only legally existing uses, businesses relocating to the Town, new
business development and business expansion in a commercial or
industrial zone for such purposes by the Planning and Zoning
Commission are eligible to participate in a tax incentive program under
this policy. Home occupations (as defined by the Monroe Zoning
Regulations) and all other land uses are not eligible to participate in a
tax incentive program under this policy.
C. Application for tax abatement must be made within six months of receipt
of Town of Monroe certificate of occupancy or use of building.
D. Consideration may be given to those applicants who incorporate
environmentally friendly ("green") improvements.
E. Any applicant who is delinquent in any taxes, interest or liens that are
due to the Town shall be ineligible to enter into any such tax agreement
under this policy until such delinquencies or liens are remedied.
§ 470-32. Abatement schedule.
A. The Town Council may enter into a tax agreement with any party owning
or proposing to acquire an interest in real and/or personal property in the
Town of Monroe fixing the assessment of the real and/or personal property
which is the subject of the agreement and all improvements thereon or
therein and to be constructed thereon or therein, subject to the cost of the
project improvements exceeding the following thresholds:
§ 470-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-32
1:213
Tax Abatement Schedule under C.G.S. § 12-65b
Cost of
Improvements Abatement
Term
(years)
$10 million+ Up to 50% of increased
assessment
Up to 7
$5 million+ Up to 30% of increased
assessment
Up to 7
$3 million+ Up to 20% of increased
assessment
5 to 7
$500,000+ Up to 30% of increased
assessment
Up to 3
$100,000+ Up to 20% of increased
assessment
Up to 3
$25,000+ Up to 50% of increased
assessment
Up to 3
B. This table lists the minimum value of an improvement that qualifies a
project for abatement, the maximum abatement amount and the maximum
abatement period. The Town Council shall determine the specific abatement
for each project based upon the benefits to the Town.
§ 470-33. General requirements.
A. The Town Council may enter into a tax agreement under this policy only
if the agreement will:
(1) Cause a business to locate in the Town;
(2) Cause a business to replace, construct, expand or remodel existing
buildings;
(3) Cause a business to construct new buildings;
(4) Cause an increase in employment opportunities; or
(5) Preserve existing employment opportunities.
B. If the applicant is a tenant or if an owner is applying on behalf of
a tenant, tax benefits shall be reflected in the lease and shall be so
demonstrated to the Town.
§ 470-34. Application procedure.
Any eligible owner and/or lessee may apply under this policy in writing to
the Economic Development Coordinator on application forms provided by
the Economic Development Office. The applicant shall provide all required
information in sufficient detail to allow the Town to determine costs and
benefits associated with the implementation of a requested tax agreement.
A. Upon receipt of the completed application, the Economic Development
Coordinator shall refer the application to the Tax Incentive Program
Review Committee members as follows: the First Selectman, Finance
Director, Assessor, and Economic Development Commission designee.
Each application shall be reviewed for appropriateness. After thorough
§ 470-32 MONROE CODE § 470-34
1:214
review and within 30 days of receipt of the application, the
recommendation, along with a written analysis, shall be referred to the
Town Council and its Legislative and Administrative Committee.
B. The Town Council, in its sole discretion and after having held at least one
public hearing, shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions
or deny the application within 60 days from the date of the first regularly
scheduled meeting at which the referral appears on the Council's
agenda. Granting of the tax abatement shall be subject to a majority
vote of the Town Council. The Council's decision shall be based upon
the Connecticut General Statutes, the information provided in the
application package and the recommendation from the Tax Incentive
Program Review Committee.
§ 470-35. Agreement.
A. Pursuant to the Council's decision the Town will enter into a written
agreement with the owner or lessee of real and/or personal property
fixing the assessment of the real and/or personal property for the terms
of the agreement.
B. After approval of any such tax agreement, construction or acquisition
shall commence within 12 months and shall be completed within 24
months unless the projected time frame to complete the project is stated
to be more than 24 months at the time of application. In the event that
construction is not commenced and/or completed within the specified
time frame, then any agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall
immediately terminate and the full amount of the tax (including accrued
interest) that would otherwise be due shall immediately become due and
payable, unless alternative arrangements are authorized by the Town
Council.
C. If an applicant fails to comply with the payment of taxes upon the
due date required, then any agreement entered into pursuant to this
program shall immediately terminate and the full amount of the tax,
including accrued interest that would otherwise be due, shall
immediately become due and payable.
D. Any person or firm in violation of any Town of Monroe permit is subject
to termination of abatement.
E. All agreements shall contain a provision that any applicant granted a tax
abatement shall repay the Town of Monroe the dollar amount abated,
plus interest, if the business leaves Monroe before the time taxes are
abated.
F. Any tax assessed and levied upon motor vehicles shall not be subject to
any such agreement pursuant to this program and shall remain due and
owing.
§ 470-36. Transferability.
Any tax agreement entered into pursuant to this policy shall not be subject
to assignment, transfer or sale.
§ 470-37. Town Council authority.
§ 470-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-37
1:215
A. Nothing in this policy shall require the Town Council to enter into a tax
agreement.
B. Any changes to the Town of Monroe tax abatement application are
subject to Town Council approval.
§ 470-38. Policy not retroactive.
This policy shall not be retroactive.
§ 470-37 MONROE CODE § 470-38
1:216
ARTICLE IX
Abatement for Surviving Spouses of Police Officers and Firefighters
[Adopted 7-25-201186]
§ 470-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE DUTIES — Duties performed while at fires, while answering alarms
of fires, while answering calls for mutual aid assistance, while returning
from calls for mutual aid assistance, while directly returning from fires,
while at tests or trials of any apparatus or equipment normally used by
the fire department, while going to or returning directly from such tests or
trials, while instructing or being instructed in fire duties, and any other duty
ordered to be performed by a superior or commanding officer in the fire
department.
FIREFIGHTER — Any person who is a duly designated a member of one of
the Town of Monroe volunteer fire departments.
POLICE DUTIES — Any action which an officer is obligated or authorized
by law, rule, regulation, or written condition of employment of service to
perform during regularly scheduled hours, or other hours that qualify, for
compensation from the Police Department.
POLICE OFFICER — A duly sworn member of the Town of Monroe Police
Department.
SURVIVING SPOUSE OR PARTNER IN A CIVIL UNION (hereafter referred
to as "spouse") — The person who was a resident of the Town and married
to the police officer or firefighter at the time of the police officer's or
firefighter's death.
§ 470-40. Abatement granted; terms and conditions.
A. In accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, § 12-81x, there is
hereby established, effective for the Grand List of October 1, 2010, an
abatement of 100% of municipal real property taxes due with respect to
real property owned by the surviving spouse of a police officer who has
died as a result of the performance of police duties or a firefighter who
has died as a result of the performance of fire duties.
B. The tax abatement will remain in effect so long as the surviving spouse
occupies the residence as his or her primary residence or until the
spouse conveys his or her fee interest in the subject residence. If the
spouse subsequently purchases another residence in the Town, and all
qualifying criteria remain, then the tax abatement shall apply to the new
residence.
C. Upon the death of any person entitled to tax relief pursuant to this
article, the tax relief hereunder shall end the following June 30.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 8-25-2011.
§ 470-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-40
1:217
D. If any person who is entitled to a tax abatement hereunder conveys his
or her fee title in the property with respect to which the tax abatement
hereunder has been granted, the tax relief shall be suspended as of
the date of conveyance, and the nonqualifying grantee of such property
shall pay the Town a prorated share of taxes thereby due and owing as
provided by Connecticut General Statutes, § 12-81a.
E. The property tax relief provided for in this article shall, in any case
where title to real property is recorded in the name of the qualifying
surviving spouse and any other person or persons, be prorated to reflect
the fractional portion of such qualifying spouse, or, if such property is a
multiple-family or multiple-use dwelling, such relief shall be prorated to
reflect the fractional portion of such property occupied by the qualifying
spouse. A spouse desiring such abatement shall submit an application to
the Assessor requesting a determination as to whether such abatement
is permitted.
§ 470-41. Duties of Tax Collector and Assessor.
A. The Tax Collector and Assessor shall prescribe, with regard to their
respective duties under this article, such forms and procedures as may
be necessary to implement this article. The Assessor, in addition, shall
take such steps necessary to satisfactorily establish the facts as to the
qualifying surviving spouse's interest in the property by requesting such
documents as the Assessor deems necessary.
B. The Tax Collector of the Town shall maintain a record of all taxes abated
in accordance with this article. Upon the request of the Town Council,
the Tax Collector shall detail the sum of the total monies abated as a
result of this article.
§ 470-42. Word usage.
When the context of this article so requires, the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa, and the singular shall
include the plural, and the plural, the singular.
§ 470-43. Cessation of abatement.
If such surviving spouse remarries or enters into another civil union, the
abatement shall cease commencing with taxes on the grand list next
following date of such remarriage or civil union.
§ 470-44. Applicability; power of Town Council to revoke.
A. This chapter expressly does not apply to heart and hypertension disease
or other diseases or occupational conditions that are progressive in
nature. Rather, to be eligible for benefits under this chapter there must
occur some precipitating work incident that results in a myocardial
infarction or other physical injury on the work site itself that is the direct
and sole causation of death.
B. Further, the work site expressly does not include portal-to-portal
transportation, that is, from residence to or from the work site, with the
§ 470-40 MONROE CODE § 470-44
1:218
exception of the Monroe volunteer fire departments responding to a fire
call.
C. Finally, it is expressly understood that the Town Council will monitor the
financial impact of this article and expressly reserves the right to revoke
this article.
§ 470-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 470-44
1:219
Chapter 478
TOWN PROPERTY
§ 478-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPERTY — All property, real and personal, owned or leased by the Town
of Monroe, or property in which the Town of Monroe has otherwise acquired
an interest.
§ 478-2. Acquisition of property.
No property shall be acquired by the Town of Monroe or by any board,
commission or agency thereof by gift or devise except with the approval of
the Town Council. When the Council accepts property which has been given
to the Town for any purpose, proper acknowledgement of the gift shall be
made by the Chairman of the Town Council to the donor.
§ 478-3. General supervision; specific jurisdiction. [Amended
4-13-1992]
All Town property shall be under the general direction and supervision of
the First Selectman to coordinate programs and to promote the general
policies and interests of the Town. However, all commissions, boards and
agencies established in the Town of Monroe shall have, as to such Town
property, all of the powers, possess all the rights and perform and be
subject to all of the duties wherever enumerated in the General Statutes
of the State of Connecticut or in the Charter or ordinances of the Town of
Monroe and in any future amendments of such stated sources of power and
duties. Nothing herein shall prevent the First Selectman from delegating
the aforesaid general direction and supervision to a specific commission,
board or agency.
§ 478-4. Regulations. [Amended 4-13-199287]
Whenever any Town property or portion thereof is under the immediate
jurisdiction of any board or commission or agency charged with the
responsibility for the preservation and protection or use of such Town
property, such board or commission or agency shall make regulations to
render effective the policy of the Town as declared in § 478-6 hereinafter
and to provide for the maintenance of order on and the safeguarding and
use of such property, subject to the general direction and supervision of the
Director of the Public Works. All such regulations shall be submitted to the
Town Council, and those approved by the Council shall be effective 10 days
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 470-44 MONROE CODE § 478-4
1:220
after they are published in a newspaper having circulation in the Town of
Monroe.
§ 478-5. Inventory account. [Amended 4-13-1992]
The First Selectman shall establish and keep an inventory account and
shall annually, not later than the first Monday in March, transmit to the
Town Council a detailed inventory, as of January 31, of all property, real or
personal, owned by or leased to the Town of Monroe or in which the Town
has otherwise acquired an interest. Said inventory shall show the name
of the department, board, commission or agency having custody of such
property.
§ 478-6. Open space land. [Amended 4-13-1992]
A. Policy of the Town. It is the policy of the Town of Monroe as declared
hereby that control of the local environment is best achieved as a
function of Town government and that the focus for environmental
control is open space and that there shall be, consistent with
comprehensive planning, an adequate open space acquisition and
development program for the Town and that open space programming
shall be concerned with all facilities used to meet outdoor recreation,
park, scenic, conservation, historic preservation and other open space
objectives and needs of the Town.
B. Federal and state laws. All of the current provisions of §§ 7-131a through
7-131l of the Connecticut General Statutes and all of the current
provisions of the Open Space Land Program under the Housing and
Urban Development Act of 1965 by the Congress of the United States
and the Land and Water Conservation Act of 1965 by the Congress of
the United States, and the provisions in any future amendments of such
statutes and acts or in any future similar plans designed to replace such
statutes and acts, are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if
set forth herein at length. Although the Town of Monroe may acquire
open space land by condemnation as well as by other methods under
§ 7-131b, it shall make every reasonable effort to acquire each property
by negotiated purchase before instituting condemnation proceedings
against the owner of the property. "Every reasonable effort to acquire
each property by negotiated purchase" means that the Town, directly
or through its real estate agent, shall make a diligent, conscientious
effort to induce the owner to accept a fair and proper price for his
property, and if that effort is unsuccessful, the Town shall make a final
offer to the owner in writing. The final offer shall include an invitation to
discuss the acquisition of his property with the Town, afford a reasonable
period of time for the owner to accept or reject the invitation and
include a notification of the date on which the Town intends to institute
condemnation proceedings if agreement cannot be reached on the
purchase of the property within the time specified.88
C. Applications for grants-in-aid. The Town Council of Monroe shall retain
the authority unto itself to make any and all applications and sign
88.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 270, Eminent Domain.
§ 478-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-6
1:221
all documents necessary to obtain grants-in-aid under the open space
acquisition and development program.
D. Treasurer to receive funds. The Treasurer of the Town of Monroe is
directed to receive all funds granted pursuant to the aforesaid
applications and to hold the same separate from all other funds of the
Town.
E. Disbursement of funds. Such funds shall be disbursed by said Treasurer,
upon voucher of the First Selectman, under the direction of and subject
to any regulations of the Town Council as to the use of such funds.
F. Action by Chairman of Town Council. The Chairman of the Town Council
is authorized to act in the absence or inability to act of either the First
Selectman or the Treasurer but not in the event of the absence or
inability of both the First Selectman and the Treasurer.
G. Advisory commission. The Chairman of the Town Council may designate
and establish such advisory commission or commissions as may be
required as a condition of eligibility for benefits under any federal or
state law, as a consultant for any commission, board or agency of the
Town in carrying out the purposes of said law. The Chairman of the
Council shall designate the chairman of any such commission, and each
member of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the Chairman
of the Council. Members shall receive no compensation but shall receive
necessary expenses when engaged in commission matters.89
§ 478-7. Prohibited acts.
Any person who commits any of the following acts shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor:
A. Trespass on any property of the Town of Monroe contrary to the rules
and regulations established for the public use of that property.
B. Injury or destruction of such property or causing or contributing to the
injury or destruction of said property.
§ 478-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-24-198590]
Each violation of any of the foregoing provisions of § 478-7 shall be deemed
a separate offense. Any person guilty of such violation shall be fined not
more than $200 or imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each
offense. However, any person who wantonly, willfully or maliciously violates
any provision of § 478-7 shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not
more than six months, or both, for each violation committed in such manner.
As an additional penalty for any violation of the foregoing provisions of said
section which results in injury to or destruction of property of the Town
of Monroe, judgment with costs shall be entered for the Town of Monroe
and against the guilty party or parties at the time of the disposition of the
89.Editor's Note: Original § 98-7, Smoking in public buildings, which immediately followed
this section, as added 6-24-1985 and amended 4-13-1992, was deleted at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II). See now § 19a-342 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 478-6 MONROE CODE § 478-8
1:222
criminal offense for the sum of money necessary to repair or replace said
injured or destroyed property.
Chapter 494
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Pollution Control Authority — See Ch.
178.
§ 478-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-8
1:223

ARTICLE I
Extension of Water Mains
[Adopted 8-23-2004]
§ 494-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority of § 7-137c of the Connecticut General Statutes,
the Town Council hereby adopts an ordinance governing the extension of
existing water mains within the Town of Monroe.
§ 494-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedure for obtaining the
extension of existing water mains requested by the Town of Monroe to areas
of the Town not served by public water, so-called, and for determining and
assessing the cost of such extensions.
§ 494-3. Approval required.
No action shall be taken by the Town of Monroe to obtain the extensions
of a water main at Town expense without the prior approval of the Town
Council, Board of Finance and Town Meeting.
§ 494-4. Cost determination.
Following approval of any water main extension, the Town Council shall
determine the cost of such extension, including but not limited to the cost
of materials, installation, service connections, curb, sidewalk and highway
repairs; the cost of installation of gate valves and shutoffs; any
compensation, fees, charges and expenses of any attorney, engineer,
surveyor, superintendent or inspector employed by the Town; the cost of
any property purchased or acquired as the Town Council shall determine
is required for such extension; the costs of preparing maps, plans, and
specifications; and the cost of printing, publishing or serving
advertisements or notices and interest on bonds or notes issued to cover
such costs, fees, charges and expenses.
§ 494-5. Proportional shares; method of assessment.
Each owner of real property abutting the water main extension shall
reimburse the Town of Monroe his proportionate share of the total cost of
the main extension as determined by the Town Council. The proportionate
share shall be determined by dividing the total cost of the main extension
by the number of lots of real property abutting the main extension, subject
to the provisions of § 494-8 hereinafter set forth. The assessment of the
proportionate share of the cost of the water main extension of any property
owner who elects not to obtain water service from the water main extension
shall be deferred until the sooner of such time as water service for the
property is obtained from the water main extension or as the property is
sold, subject to the provisions of § 494-9 hereinafter set forth.
§ 494-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 494-6
1:225
§ 494-6. Public hearing.
Prior to assessing each property owner with his proportionate share of the
total cost of the water main extension, the Town Council shall conduct a
public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper
having general circulation in the Town of Monroe at least 10 days prior to
the date of such hearing, and a notice of such hearing containing the time,
place and date of such hearing signed by the Monroe Town Clerk shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to each property owner proposed to be assessed
at his mailing address, as determined from the records of the Monroe Tax
Assessor, at least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing.
§ 494-7. Notice of assessment; certificate of lien.
Following determination of the amount of each assessment to be levied,
the Monroe Tax Collector, at the direction of the Town Council, shall file
on the Monroe Land Records a notice of each assessment in the form of a
certificate of lien describing the property assessed, setting forth the amount
of the assessment and date thereof. The Tax Collector on the date of such
filing shall mail, postage prepaid, a copy of such notice of assessment/
certificate of lien to each property owner assessed at his mailing address
determined from the records of the Monroe Tax Assessor.
§ 494-8. Deferred assessment.
In the case of any land zoned residential or classified pursuant to §§ 12-107a
to 12-107e of the Connecticut General Statutes, inclusive, as farm land,
forest land or open space land on the last-completed Grand List of the Town
of Monroe which exceeds by more than 100% the size of the smallest lot
permitted in the lowest-density residential zone allowed under the Monroe
Zoning Regulations, assessment of such classified or excess land shall
be deferred until such classified or excess land shall be built upon or a
building permit issued therefor or until approval of a subdivision plan of
such classified or excess land by the Monroe Town Planning and Zoning
Commission, whichever event occurs first, at which time the assessment
shall be made. In calculating the proportionate shares provided for in
§ 494-5, the Town Council shall consider any assessments required to be
deferred and shall apportion the undeferred portion of the costs of any main
extension in an equitable manner. In the that event any assessments must
be deferred, the Town Council shall place a caveat on the Monroe Land
Records serving to give notice of such deferred assessment.
§ 494-9. Payment; foreclosure for nonpayment.
Assessments shall be payable in the manner and upon such terms as the
Town Council shall prescribe and may be foreclosed for nonpayment in the
manner provided by law for the foreclosure of tax liens. Assessments shall
be payable in full at the time of a sale of the assessed real property unless
the sale is an exempt transaction pursuant to § 12-498 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
§ 494-6 MONROE CODE § 494-10
1:226
§ 494-10. Appeal.
Within 60 days of the date of any assessment made pursuant to this article,
the owner of any real property so assessed may appeal to the Superior
Court for the judicial district in which such property is situated pursuant to
the provisions of § 7-137c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
§ 494-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 494-10
1:227
Chapter 505
ZONING PENALTIES
§ 505-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the authority of § 8-12a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
Town Council hereby adopts a chapter establishing penalties for violations
of zoning regulations.
§ 505-2. Authority of Zoning Enforcement Officer; procedure for
citation issuance and filing.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue citations for
violations of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe to the extent
and in the manner provided by this chapter. Any such citation may be served
either by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
person named in such citation. If the person named in a citation sent by
certified mail fails or refuses to accept such mail, the citation shall be sent
by regular United States mail. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall file and
retain an original or certified copy of the citation. Any citation issued shall
identify the specific Town of Monroe zoning regulation violated.
§ 505-3. Applicability.
A citation may be issued for any violation of the Zoning Regulations of the
Town of Monroe.
§ 505-4. Fine and payment.
The fine for each such violation or offense shall be $150 or such amount
as authorized by Connecticut General Statutes, payable to the Treasurer of
the Town of Monroe ("Treasurer"). Any fine collected by the Town pursuant
to this chapter shall be deposited to the general fund of the Town. Each
day for which a violation exists shall be a separate offense, and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall only be required to issue one citation with regard
to the same violation which exists for multiple days.
§ 505-5. Time period for uncontested payment of fines.
Any person receiving such a citation shall be allowed a period of 30 days
from his or her receipt of the citation to make an uncontested payment
of the fine specified in the citation to the Town of Monroe. If the citation
has been sent by regular mail pursuant to the provisions in § 505-2 of this
chapter, the day of receipt of the citation shall be deemed to be three
business days after the day of mailing of the citation.
§ 505-6. Hearing procedure.
Any person issued a citation shall be entitled to a hearing to contest the
citation. The procedures for hearing, disposition and enforcement shall be
§ 494-10 MONROE CODE § 505-6
1:228
as set forth in § 7-152c of the Connecticut General Statutes, as the same
may be amended from time to time.
§ 505-7. Appointment of hearing officers.
The First Selectman shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers to
conduct the hearings provided by this chapter. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the Building Inspector, any employee of the Town of Monroe or any
volunteer of the Town of Monroe exercising zoning authority may not be
appointed to be a hearing officer pursuant to this section.
§ 505-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 505-7
1:229

TOWN OF MONROE CONNECTICUT 
CHAPTER 117 OF THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF MONROE 


ZONING REGULATIONS 

Adopted September 19, 2013 
Effective October 1, 2013 
Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 

See List of Amendments at End of Regulations 
ARTICLES


Article 1 – Introduction and General Provisions Article 2 – Definitions Article 3 – Residential Districts Article 4 – Nonresidential Districts Article 5 – Special Districts Article 6 – Supplemental Regulations Article 7 – Site Plan Review Article 8 – Special Exception Permits Article 9 – Enforcement, Administration and Appeal Article 10 – Schedules 

ARTICLE 1 INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
§1.1 Short Title 
These “Regulations” shall be known and cited as the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe, effective October 1, 2013, as may be amended from time to time. 

§1.2 Authorization 
These Regulations have been adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission (“Commission”) of the Town of Monroe in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the Town of Monroe, as amended, and Title 8, Chapters 124 and 126 of the 1958 Revisions of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended (formerly Chapter 29 of the 1930 Revision of the Connecticut General Statues). 

§1.3 Purpose 
The purpose of these Regulations is to direct development in the Town of Monroe consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development; to provide for the best use of land in the Town; to conserve and stabilize the value of property; to promote the health, safety and general welfare of its people and the general public; to protect the social and economic stability of all areas of the Town; to regulate the location, use, height and bulk of buildings and structures; to regulate the location and use of yards and open spaces; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air; to secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; to facilitate adequate provisions for community utilities and facilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to protect agricultural resources; to provide for housing choice and economic diversity in housing; and to provide for the preservation of desirable open space, historic related resources, water resources, ridgelines, and other environmentally important lands. 

§1.4 Validity and Severability 
If any section, paragraph or provision of these Regulations is declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Regulations as a whole or any part, other than that so declared. 

§1.5 Compliance Required 
No land, building or other structure shall hereafter be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, relocated, demolished, extended, or enlarged, except in conformity with these Regulations. All principal uses shall be conducted inside a building unless otherwise specified in these Regulations. 

§1.6 Relationship to Other Laws; Interpretation 
Whenever restrictions or standards imposed by provisions of these Regulations are in conflict with restrictions or standards imposed by provisions of any other governing law, rule, or regulation, then, to the extent permitted by State and Federal law, the more restrictive provisions shall govern. When one section, provision or requirement of these Regulations imposes restrictions or standards greater than those of another section, provision or requirement the more restrictive section, provision or requirement shall govern. 

§1.7 Prior Regulations Repealed 
These Regulations, and any amendment or change hereto, shall be in full force and effect from the date established by the Commission, and stated above in §1.1, in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. The Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe previously adopted by the Commission and all amendments relating thereto are repealed coincident with the effective date set forth in §1.1 of these Regulations. Such repealing shall not affect the status of any personnel and shall not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or any liability, penalty, or forfeiture of punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal took effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been effected. 
§1.8 Zoning Districts 
§1.8.1 Districts Enumerated 
For the purpose of these Regulations, the Town of Monroe is divided into the following districts: 
Residential Districts  Nonresidential Districts  
RF-1 RF-2 RF-3 MFR RR  Residential and Farming District 1 Residential and Farming District 2 Residential and Farming District 3 Multifamily Residence District Recreational Residence District  B-1 B-2 LOR I-1 I-2  Business District 1 Business District 2 Limited Office Retail District Industrial District 1 Industrial District 2  
ARR HOD  Age Restricted Residence District Housing Opportunity District  I-3  Industrial District 3  

§1.8.2 Zoning Map 
The boundaries of all designated zoning districts and any amendments thereto are established by the Commission, as shown on a map entitled ”Town of Monroe Zoning Map” and shall bear the date of the enactment of these Regulations and of the most recent amendment to the district boundaries. The Official Zoning Map, updated to the date of the most recent amendment, shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk and in the office of the Planning and Zoning Department. The Zoning Map shall be at a scale of one (1) inch equals eight (800) feet, and shall be certified by the Chairperson of the Commission as “The Official Zoning Map of Monroe, Connecticut Prepared from Official Records of the Planning and Zoning Commission.” 
§1.8.3 Zoning District Boundaries and Interpretation 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the Official Zoning Map, or where physical features existing on the ground are inconsistent with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or where the precise location of any district boundary is uncertain, the Commission shall determine the boundary location aided by the standards set forth below. Where written documentation of a zoning district boundary change is available and said change is inconsistent with the zone boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map, the documented written approval location of the zone boundary shall govern. 
A. 	Boundaries indicated as following a street, road or highway shall be construed as following the center line of such street, road or highway unless specifically dimensioned or otherwise designated. 
B. 	Boundaries indicated as following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
C. 	Boundaries indicated as running parallel to any of the above mentioned lines, at dimensioned, scaled or depicted distances, shall be construed as parallel.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map or described in these Regulations shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
D. 	Boundaries indicated as following the center line of a river, stream or other watercourse shall be construed as following that line.  Boundaries indicated as following a shore line shall be construed as following such shore line. 

§1.9 General Regulations 
§1.9.1 Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots 
A. 	Continuance of Nonconforming Structures or Uses 
Any building, structure or use existing at the time of promulgation of these Regulations may be continued even though such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions of these Regulations. 
B. Abandonment of Nonconforming Structures and Uses 
(1) 	
Removal (not involving normal and reasonable maintenance and repair) of a nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof dimensionally nonconforming shall constitute a discontinuation and abandonment of same. 

(2) 	
A nonconforming use shall not be deemed abandoned solely as a result of nonuse for a specified period of time without regard to the intent of the property owner to maintain that use.  If the owner of said premises desires to resume a presumptively abandoned nonconforming use, an application to the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine whether or not said nonconforming use was abandoned may be presented.  The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to show that the use was not in fact abandoned. 

(3) 	
Notwithstanding Subsections (1) and (2) above, removal of a building, structure or other developed or operational feature shall constitute a discontinuation and abandonment of a nonconforming use or portion thereof. 

(4) 	
Notwithstanding Subsections (1) and (2) above, the discontinuance of a nonconforming use and replacement thereof by a conforming use, for any period of time, no matter how short, shall constitute abandonment of the nonconforming use.  Such replacement by a conforming use shall occur when the portion of the lot, building or structure formerly devoted to a nonconforming use is used for a conforming use. 


C. Enlargement or Extension of Nonconforming Uses or Structures 
(1) 	
A principal or accessory structure which is conforming in use but does not conform to the height, yard, building coverage, floor area ratio or other dimensional requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be dimensionally nonconforming. 

(2) 	
No permit shall be issued nor shall any changes be made in such structure that will result in the increase of any such dimensional nonconformity.  Any structure or portion thereof may be altered so as to decrease a dimensional nonconformity or in a manner that will not affect an existing dimensional nonconformity, subject to compliance with any applicable approvals. 

(3) 	
Normal maintenance and repair 

(a) 	
Normal maintenance and repair, including structural repairs of a building or structure with noncomplying bulk is permitted if the same does not increase the degree of or create any new noncomplying bulk in such building or structure. 

(b) 	
Normal maintenance and repair of a building or structure is permitted if it does not extend a nonconforming use. 



(4) 	
No nonconforming building or structure shall hereafter be enlarged, and no nonconforming use of any land, building or other structure shall hereafter be extended to include any land, building or other structure or portion thereof which is not already part of such nonconforming use, except: 

(a) 	
Residential buildings and structures located in residential zones that conformed to the thirty-foot (30) setback requirement in effect on May 18, 1965.  When a building or structure conforming to the aforesaid thirty-foot setback requirement is enlarged, it shall not be enlarged any further forward into the required front yard setback. 

(b) 	
To provide for conforming use thereof or to adapt an existing building or structure to a conforming use. 

(c) 	
Extension of a nonconforming use as may be permitted under Subsection (5) below. 



(5) 	
A nonconforming use may be extended, as follows, subject to Special Exception Permit approval by the Commission: 

(a) 	
A nonconforming use of an existing principal building or structure may be extended to occupy additional floor area within such existing principal building or structure not formerly used for such nonconforming use provided the portion of the building to be used lawfully existed prior to October 1, 2013. 

(b) 	
A nonconforming non-building use may be extended to use additional land where no substantial operations were previously conducted, provided such extension is on the same lot and said lot existed in its current configuration prior to October 1, 2013, and provided such does not require clearing of trees or alteration of topographic grades greater than two (2) feet in elevation. 

(c) 	
Permitted extension of a nonconforming use shall also be deemed to include necessitated changes in the size and layout of parking areas, access drives, changes in exterior lighting, landscaping, architectural changes, including structure entries, and grade alterations. 

(d) 	
The Commission may only approve the proposed extension of a nonconforming use where it determines that the following criteria are met: 

(i) 	
The extension of the nonconforming use will not be inconsistent with the purposes of these Regulations and would not have a detrimental impact on other uses of the property, if any, and on surrounding properties occupied by conforming uses. 

(ii) 	
The percentage of extension will not result in an increase in a cumulative excess of 100 percent (100%) of the existing gross floor area or total land acreage occupied by the existing nonconforming use prior to the date set forth in Subsections (a) and (b) above. 






(iii) 	The increase of the nonconforming aspect of a use is the minimum possible so as to achieve an overall site development or use in greater conformance with the intent and purposes of these Regulations. 
(iv) 	All modifications or safeguards identified by the Commission as necessary or appropriate to further the purposes of these Regulations are required of the property owner and included as conditions of approval. 
D. Use of Nonconforming Lot of Record 
A building or structure may be erected as a permitted use on any existing lot of record which does not conform to the minimum required lot area or lot shape requirements of these Regulations, provided that: 
(1) 	
Such lot was lawfully in existence prior to October 14, 1963 and was not created by the recording of a “First Cut” or “Lot Line Revision” map or declared as “Not a Building Lot” on a map recorded in the Monroe Land Records. 

(2) 	
All other bulk regulations and other applicable provisions of these Regulations are complied with. 

(3) 	
The owner of such lot does not own sufficient contiguous land to make a conforming lot or more nearly conforming lot. 

(4) 	
The use of such lot shall satisfy all applicable requirements of the Town of Monroe Health Department for potable water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 

(5) 	
The use of such lot shall be such that there shall be no adverse effect on the public health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood in which it is located. 


E. Change of Nonconforming Use 
Any lot on which a lawfully nonconforming use has been conducted shall not be used for any other nonconforming use.  Any nonconforming use shall not be expanded above the level at which such activity existed on the date on which it became nonconforming by virtue of these Regulations or any amendments thereto, except as may be permitted in Subsection A above.  If such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is changed to a conforming use, any future use of such land or portion thereof shall be in conformity with all use provisions of these Regulations.  No nonconforming use, building or other structure once changed to conform to these Regulations shall be changed to a nonconforming use, building or structure. 
F. Restoration of Damaged Nonconforming Structure 
No nonconforming building or other structure shall be restored where damaged by fire or other casualty to an extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value on the last completed Grand List of the Town of Monroe unless a building permit for such restoration is issued within eighteen (18) months from the date of said fire or other casualty and restoration completed within three (3) years of the time of such damage. The Commission may grant an extension upon a showing of proper cause and diligent progress in the restoration.  Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the restoration of a nonconforming building or other structure damaged by fire or other casualty to an extent of not more than fifty percent (50%) of its assessed value on the last completed Grand List, pursuant to these Regulations and provided that the restoration of said structure does not expand any aspect of the nonconforming conditions (use or dimensional aspects), except in conformity to these Regulations. 
G. Restoration of Unsafe Nonconforming Structures 
Nothing in these Regulations shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any nonconforming structure which shall have been declared unsafe by the Building Inspector, provided that the right to continue such nonconforming building or structure has not otherwise been abandoned, expired or lost, pursuant to these Regulations and provided that the strengthening or restoring of said structure does not expand any aspect of the nonconforming conditions (use or dimensional aspects), except in conformity to these Regulations. 
§1.9.2 Foundation Requirements; Commercial, Farm, Trailers and Other Vehicles 
A. Foundations 
All principal buildings shall be erected upon a permanent foundation. 
B. Commercial Vehicles 
Not more than one (1) gross vehicle weight rated (GVWR) Class 1 through 3 commercial pickup, truck or utility van with its cab and cargo area consisting of a single continuous body may be parked outside on a developed lot in a residential district.  No commercial vehicle or parts thereof shall be parked or stored on any unimproved lot in any district, except as may be permitted during authorized construction and/or pursuant to an approved Subdivision, Site Plan and/or Special Exception Permit. 
Examples of Acceptable Class 1 through 3 Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts per above. 
Minivan Utility Truck Pick-Up Truck 

Examples of Unacceptable Class 1 through 3 Commercial Vehicles in Residential Districts per above. 

C. Farm Vehicles 
Customary farm vehicles are permitted in any Residential and Farming District, but shall not be stored or parked within any required yard (setback). 
D. Trailers, Recreational Vehicles and Boats 
House trailers, horse trailers, recreational vehicles, boats and boat trailers may be parked or stored on a developed residential lot, provided same are not parked in front of the principal building or in any required side or rear yard setbacks, and suitable all-year screening is provided and maintained.  All other parking, storage or use of such vehicles is prohibited. The use of such vehicles for dwelling purposes or for storage purposes is prohibited. 
E. Temporary Construction and/or Sales Trailers 
(1) 	Trailers, vehicles and other mobile or temporary structures shall not be permitted for use as dwellings, storage or for the purpose of conducting a business on any lot, except as follows and pursuant to issuance of a Zoning Permit: 
(a) 	
Temporary living quarters related to a casualty loss of a residence which has been rendered inhabitable may be permitted for a period not to exceed two (2) years or the time of reconstruction, whichever is less. Subject to written request, an extension of up to one (1) additional year may be granted by the Commission where specific circumstances and conditions warrant such extension. 

(b) 	
Temporary structures for construction and sales may be permitted during the period of approved site construction of residential or non-residential lot, provided same is authorized by the Commission pursuant to Site Plan or Special Exception Permit approval, and subsequent issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 

(c) 	
Permitted temporary structures, trailers or combined construction/sales trailers shall be subject to all minimum yard setback requirements of the lot which same is located upon. 

(d) 	
A Zoning Permit may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for the placement and use of a combined construction and sales trailer in connection with a residential subdivision of more than five (5) lots; in such instances the trailer may be located on a lot within the subdivision and may be moved to other lots within the subdivision as construction progresses. 

(e) 	
A Zoning Permit issued pursuant to this Section shall be issued for a period not exceeding six (6) months, except as otherwise may be permitted by the Commission under Subsection (b) above, but may be renewed for successive periods of not more than three (3) months each, at the Zoning Enforcement Officer’s discretion, if work on said construction is diligently progressing but not yet completed.  An applicant shall post a bond in the sum of five-thousand dollars ($5,000) or shall deposit one-thousand dollars ($1,000) to guarantee the removal of the temporary structure when the permit has expired. The applicant shall furnish a valid certificate of insurance to the Town evidencing minimum liability coverage of one-million dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit liability insurance. 

(f) 	
All permitted temporary structures shall be removed from the lot on which it is located before a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for any principal or accessory  use or structure on the lot. 


§1.9.3 Lots in More than One Zoning District 
Where a zoning district divides a lot in single ownership into two (2) or more zoning districts, the following standards shall apply: 
A. 	The use, density and other development standards and requirements of these Regulations not included in Subsection B below shall be that as required for the respective zoning district classified individually for each portion of the lot. 
B. 	Compliance with the applicable setback and landscape buffer standards and requirements of the less restrictive zoning district may encroach a maximum of fifty (50) feet into the portion of the lot with a more restrictive zoning district classification, provided an additional ten (10) foot landscape buffer is provided. 
C. 	The standards of any overlay zoning district shall apply uniformly over the area designated by the overlay zoning district. 
D. 	In determining minimum lot area, land subject to an easement for access or a private right-of­way, except underground utilities, shall not be included, nor shall land in a residential and farming district be used to satisfy a lot area in any other district, and land in a zoning district having a higher lot area requirement shall not be used to satisfy a lot area requirement in a zoning district having a lesser lot area requirement. 
§1.9.4 Building Lots and Subdivision of a Lot 
A. 	Every building and structure hereafter erected and every use hereafter established shall be located on a lot as defined herein. Accessory buildings, structures and/or uses shall only be permitted and located on the same lot as a duly authorized principal building, structure and/or use to which it is accessory, and no lot shall be created that has an accessory building, structure or use without a principal use. 
B. 	Building lots may only be established in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes and the Land Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe.  Where a lot is formed hereafter from part of a lot already occupied by a structure, such separation shall be effected in such manner as not to impair conformity with any of the requirements of these Regulations with respect to the existing building and all yards and other required spaces in connection therewith. 
C. 	No portion of a lot in a residential district shall be used for any surface or subsurface principal or accessory use or structure on a lot or portion thereof in a nonresidential district, except subsurface line connections to public utilities; and subsurface sewage disposal systems on nonresidential/residential bifurcated lots of record existing prior to October 1, 2013. 
D. 	The Town of Monroe boundary does not divide a parcel into separate distinct lots. 
E. 	Rear lots as defined in these Regulations shall be prohibited. 
§1.9.5 Driveway Access between Residential and Non-Residential Districts and Uses 
No driveway shall be permitted across or through a residential district to provide access to a lot or portion thereof located in a nonresidential district, except for access restricted to emergency access only as may be approved by the Commission. 
§1.9.6 Street Frontage 
A. 	No zoning or building permit shall be issued for the establishment of any use or construction of any building or structure unless the lot upon which such use is to be established or such building or structure is to be built has the required minimum street frontage on a street which has been suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Commission or for which a bond sufficient to cover the full cost of such improvement has been furnished to the Town. 
B. 	Each lot shall be shown to be capable of providing access to a street and access for emergency vehicles between the frontage and any existing or proposed principal building and/or principal use of such lot.  No portion of a lot located between the required street frontage and the rear side of the required minimum square shall have a width less than the required street frontage, except as may be approved in conjunction with a Cluster Subdivision as defined in these Regulations. 
§1.9.7 Corner Lots and Through Lots 
A. 	The front yard setback requirement for the zoning district shall apply to all property lines located along any street, thereby providing a front yard setback equal in depth from all such property lines. 
B. 	The frontage from which the lot address is taken shall be used for the purposes of determining side and rear lot lines, as may be applicable. 
§1.9.8 Separation of Principal Buildings 
Where more than one principal building may be permitted on a lot, detached principal buildings shall be separated by a distance equal to or greater than the height of the taller of said buildings, except where otherwise permitted in these Regulations. 
§1.9.9 Setback Modifications and Exceptions 
A. 	Modification of required front yard setback.  On streets with less than the required minimum right-of-way width as set forth in the Monroe Subdivision Regulations or which are “user highways,” the required front yard setback shall be measured perpendicularly from the center line of the existing street with half the width of the required minimum street right-of-way of said street added to the required front yard setback to establish the applicable front yard setback line. 
B. 	The following architectural features of a building may extend into any required yard area subject to the limitations provided herein: 
(1) 	
Ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and other architectural features, for a maximum extension of two (2) feet into any required yard, provided that such architectural features shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the wall from which they project. 

(2) 	
Chimneys or pilasters for a maximum extension of three (3) feet into a required side or rear yard. 

(3) 	
Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves, for a maximum extension of three (3) feet into any required yard, provided the sum of such projection on any wall does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the length of said wall. 

(4) 	
Unroofed steps for a maximum extension of six (6) feet into any required yard. 

(5) 	
No porch or balcony shall project into any required yard area. Patios and terraces not exceeding one (1) foot in height above the surrounding ground surface may extend from a building within not less than twenty (20) feet from the front lot line nor less than ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot line, provided that the associated building complies with the yard requirements of these Regulations. 


C. 	Typical site features including mailboxes, catch basins, manholes, utility lines may extend into required yard areas. 
D. 	Buried propane tanks stormwater control basins and structures (above and below ground), and septic disposal systems may be located in a required setback area, subject to the following: 
(1) 	
All applicable landscape buffer requirements shall be provided, except the Commission may permit an encroachment into a required landscape buffer provided it can be shown that such encroachment is the minimum necessary and an alternative landscape buffer plan is provided to offset any such encroachment. 

(2) 	
Notwithstanding Subsection (1) above, a minimum setback of 10 feet from any property line shall be provided. 

(3) 	
The total area of encroachment into either a front, side or rear setback area shall not exceed an area greater than twenty-five (25%) percent of the individual setback area affected, be it the front, side or rear setback area. 

(4) 	
All-season visibility of above ground stormwater control structures (including outlet and overspill controls) located in a setback area shall be screened from abutting streets and lots with suitable landscaping, fencing, walls or a combination thereof. 


§1.9.10 Exceptions to Maximum Permitted Height 
A. 	The height limitations set forth in the bulk regulations shall be applicable to principal and accessory buildings and structures. Building elements, such as but not limited to roof air conditioners, ventilators and elevator shafts that have the potential to detract from the visual, cultural or historic appearance or style of the building's architecture shall be designed to appear as if they are an integral architectural element of the structure.  No structure, or other exception, shall be used as a place for habitation or for signage not otherwise authorized by these regulations. 
B. 	The height limitations shall not be applicable to the following: 
(1) 	
Spires, domes, belfries, chimneys, cupolas, skylights, parapets or railings, elevators, stair bulkheads, air-conditioning units, ventilation units or similar necessary mechanical appurtenances not used for human occupancy, provided they do not cover an area larger than one-hundred (100) square feet individually and no larger than ten percent (10%) in their aggregate coverage of the roof area of the building of which they are an integral architectural or mechanical element.  Such features shall be erected only to such minimum height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they are intended and shall not detract from the visual appearance of the structure as determined appropriate by the Commission. 

(2) 	
Cupolas, skylights, parapets or railings, air-conditioning units, ventilation units or similar necessary mechanical appurtenances shall not exceed a height of more than four (4) feet, and spires, domes, belfries, chimneys, elevators, stair bulkheads shall not exceed a height of more than fifteen (15) feet, above the ridge of a pitched roof or top of a flat roof on which it is located. 

(3) 	
Flagpoles, water towers, standpipes or similar structures in no case shall exceed forty-five 

(45) feet in height above average finished grade at its base, subject to Commission approval and adequate screening thereof. 

(4) 	
Telecommunication facilities approved in accordance with these Regulations. 


§1.9.11 Fences, Gates, Walls, Signs, and Landscaping in Required Yard Areas 
A. 	Fences, gates and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet in height measured from the adjacent ground level to the top of such fence, gate, wall or combination thereof. 
B. 	In no case shall any fence, gate or wall be located within an abutting street right-of-way. 
C. 	No fence, gate, wall or landscaping shall be erected or placed on a lot so as to obstruct a clear line of sight for traffic on a street. 
D. 	The finished quality on the side of all fences, gates and walls shall face outward from the premises towards the adjacent street or neighboring property. 
E. 	Signs as may be permitted in accordance with the standards set forth in §6.3 of these Regulations. 
§1.9.12 Prohibited Uses 
Uses which are not specifically permitted under the Zoning Regulations are hereby declared to be prohibited uses. Any use not specifically listed for an individual Zoning District of the Town as set forth in Article 10, Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District shall be deemed prohibited in that Zoning District. In addition, the following uses are specifically prohibited in all Zoning Districts of the Town of Monroe: 
A. 	Marijuana Dispensary. 
B. 	Marijuana Production Facility. 
C. 	Outdoor Wood Burning Furnaces. 
D. 	Junkyard. 
E. 	Commercial Quarry. 
§1.9.13 Utilities 
In order to achieve greater safety and improved appearance all water, sewer and gas facilities and all electric, telephone and other wires and equipment for providing power and/or communication shall be installed underground in the manner prescribed by regulations of the State, Town of Monroe and/or utility company having jurisdiction. Where compliance with this provision will result in undue hardship because of the design and location of existing facilities, the Commission may waive this requirement. 
§1.9.14 Emergency Fire Access 
A. 	All buildings, structures and property shall be provided with unobstructed access for firefighting and emergency service personnel, apparatus and equipment. Premises which are not readily accessible from public roads and which the fire department or an emergency service may be called upon to protect in case of fire shall be provided with access roads or fire lanes so that all buildings on the premises are accessible to the fire department and emergency service apparatus. 
B. 	The determination of adequate emergency fire access shall be made by the Commission during review for new construction or by the Zoning Enforcement Officer before the issuance of a Zoning Permit. The Commission and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall seek the recommendations of appropriate fire district officials before determining adequate emergency fire access. 
C. 	Designated access roads and fire lanes shall be adequately maintained and kept free and clear of obstructions at all times by the property owner. 
§1.9.15 Restoration of Disturbed Areas 
All areas disturbed during the course of construction or site alteration shall be restored and stabilized as soon as possible with a minimum of six (6) inches of topsoil and planted with appropriate plant species in type and quantity to achieve a stable, non-erosive and aesthetically appropriate finished condition. 
§1.9.16 Obstructions at Intersections 
A. 	No wall, fence, earth berm, temporary or permanent signage, utility structure, vegetation or trees, or other shall be erected, maintained or installed on any lot which unreasonably or dangerously obstructs or interferes with visibility of drivers of vehicles on a curve or at any street intersection. 
B. 	On a corner lot, no fence, gate, wall, or landscaping (exceeding two (2) feet at mature size) shall be erected, placed or maintained so as to obstruct a clear line of sight for traffic within the pavement and a straight line between two (2) points, each seventy-five (75) feet back from the theoretical intersection of the nearest edges of pavement prolonged. "Line of Sight" is defined as observer's eye being four (4) feet above the grade of the pavement edge and the object being one (1) foot above the grade of the pavement edge. In addition, the maintained clearance shall be a height not exceeding twenty-four (24) inches above the street grade within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersecting lot lines bordering corner lots. These requirements shall be in addition to intersection sight line requirements as may be required or detailed elsewhere in these Regulations, and consistent with the current Connecticut Department of Transportation Highway Design Manual and American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards, or as specifically determined and recommended by the Town Engineer. 
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS 

§2.1 General Rules of Construction 
In the construction of these Regulations words and phrases shall be construed according to the commonly approved usage of the language as defined by the following sources in sequence: 
• 
The Illustrated Book of Development Definitions, latest edition 

• 
The Connecticut General Statutes, as amended 

• 
lack’s Law Dictionary, latest edition 

• 
Webster’s Dictionary, latest edition 


Technical words and phrases that have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed accordingly. All words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular; the masculine gender includes the feminine. The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory. The word “used” shall be deemed also to include “designed, intended or arranged to be used.” Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally. 

§2.2 Terms Defined 
§2.2.1 General Zoning Terms 
Except as otherwise defined in these Regulations or as the context may otherwise require, the following words are defined for the purposes of these Regulations as follows: 
ADJOINING LOT – A lot that shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot. 
ACCESS MANAGEMENT – A set of policies and standards that manage the number and location of driveways/curb cuts on the road system. 
ACCESSORY APARTMENT – See Dwelling Unit, Accessory Apartment. 
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE – A detached building or structure, or portion thereof, the use of which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal use on the same lot. 
ACCESSORY DRIVE-THROUGH – See Accessory Use; and §8.2.3(J) of these Regulations. 
ACCESSORY SEASONAL FARM STORM – See Farm Store, Accessory Seasonal. 
ACCESSORY USE – A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use on the same lot. 
ADAPTIVE REUSE – Rehabilitation or renovation of an existing structure for a use(s) other than the present use(s) or former use(s) if the structure is vacant. 
AGE RESTRICTED DWELLING UNIT – See Dwelling Unit, Age Restricted. 
AGRICULTURE – The inside and/or outside growing of crops, raising of and caring for livestock, poultry and bees as defined in Connecticut General Statutes §1-1q and any amendments thereto, including the storing, processing and sale of agricultural and horticultural products and commodities originating from the property where said agricultural activities occur except as may otherwise be permitted by these Regulations. 
AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES – Buildings or structures used in connection with agriculture, including shelter for livestock and enclosed storage for farm machinery, equipment and supplies, excluding farm stores and seasonal farm stands. (See also Farm Store and Accessory Seasonal Farm Store). 
ALTERED – Change from an existing condition by constructing, grading, regrading, clearing, grubbing, trimming, utilizing, paving, excavating, filling, removal, deposition of material or change in light or temperature. 
ANTENNA – A device used in communications which transmits or receives telecommunications radio signals. Examples include panel, whip, dish antennas affixed to telecommunications towers and antennas affixed to mechanical equipment installed and maintained by utility companies. 
AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA – As defined in the Town of Monroe Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. 
ARBORIST – A trained individual in the art of science of planting, removing, pruning, caring for and maintaining trees and woody shrubs to improve their appearance, health and value in the landscape.  
ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD – The Architectural Review Board of the Town of Monroe. 
ART STUDIO / GALLERY – A place where an artist (an individual who practices one of the fine, design, graphic, musical, literary, computer or performing arts; or an individual whose profession relies on the application of the above-mentioned skills to produce creative product, i.e., craftsperson, photographer, etc.) produces and/or displays their work, including the ancillary sale of such. 
AUTOMOBILE – Self-propelled vehicles designed to carry 10 passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons and goods primarily on public streets. 
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP – An automobile service shop providing collision repair services, including body and frame straightening, replacement of damaged body and frame parts, and painting. 
AUTOMOBILE SALES – An establishment for the interior and/or exterior display, sale and/or lease of new and/or used automobiles (may include light trucks and/or vans), including incidental accessory vehicle preparation, warranty and/or repair services conducted wholly inside a building. 
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE SHOP – An establishment primarily engaged in the repair and maintenance of automobiles, including the sale, installation and/or servicing of automobile components, equipment and parts, excluding dismantling and salvage of automobiles. 
BANK – A Connecticut and/or Federally licensed financial institution open to the general public for the custody, loan, and/or exchange of currency, including extension of credit, transmission of funds, and similar fiduciary activities. 
BASEMENT – The portion of a building all or partly below grade with at least one-half of its height below grade. 
BOAT, CAMPER, RV, TRAILER SALES / SERVICE – An establishment for the interior and/or exterior display, sale and/or lease of new and/or used watercraft (motor and non-motorized boats, jet skis, canoes, kayaks or similar small watercraft), campers, RVs and/or related trailers, including incidental accessory vehicle preparation, warranty and/or repair services conducted wholly inside a building. 
BREW PUB – An establishment for the manufacture, containerization and storage of beer producing at least five thousand (5,000) gallons but not more than five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons annually, which includes the on-site sale and consumption of said manufactured beer and may include the on-site sale and consumption of other alcoholic liquor and/or food, as well as the wholesale and/or limited retail sale of said manufactured beer for off-site consumption, all in compliance with a State of onnecticut duly issued “manufacturer permit for beer and brew pub” pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes 545 §30-16(f), as amended. 
BUILDING – A structure having a roof supported by enclosed walls on all sides, including doors and windows as appropriate. 
BUILDING, ACCESSORY – A subordinate building on the same lot as the principal building and use. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL – A building in which is conducted the main or primary use of the lot on which it is located. 
BUILDING PERMIT – An administrative permit for construction issued by the Town of Monroe Chief Building Official. 
BULK – The size of buildings or structures and their relationships to each other and to open areas and lot lines. 
BULK REGULATIONS – Regulations pertaining to floor area, setback dimensions, building height, lot area, lot frontage, lot width, required yard areas, spacing between buildings on a single lot or development and length of buildings in a row. 
BUSINESS SERVICES – Establishments primarily engaged in rendering supportive services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis. 
CARETAKER RESIDENCE – See Dwelling Unit, Caretaker Residence. 
CAR WASH (RETAIL) – AUTOMATIC AND SELF-SERVICE FACILITIES FULLY WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDING WITH RECYCLED WATER – An establishment for washing motor vehicles within a building where the water used is internally recycled, including application of polish and other detailing services whether by an automated application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water and heat or wind for drying, or a drive-in bay with a washing wand for individual application. 
CEMETERY – Property used for the interment of deceased persons below and/or above ground (mausoleum and columbarium), but not including crematories. 
CERTIFICATION -A signed, written approval by an appropriate qualified and/or licensed professional. 
CHANGE OF USE – Any use that differs from the previous use of a building or land. 
CLUB – 
COUNTY CLUB (SWIM, TENNIS, GOLF) – A recreational facility (golf course, tennis, swimming pool or similar outdoor recreation activity), including incidental accessory clubhouse, dining amenities and/or maintenance facilities. 
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION – An establishment used by a group of persons formally organized as a legally established nonprofit organization with a common beneficial social or cultural purpose and interest (such as Masons, Knights of Columbus, VFW and similar), having written membership requirements or bylaws for the conduct of regular meetings, rituals, and associated activities to further their common interest. 
HEALTH CLUB / SPA – An establishment within a building that provides facilities for recreational activities such as aerobic exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts, swimming facilities and similar, as well as accessory support facilities such as saunas, showers, massage rooms and lockers or similar. 
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION – A subdivision in which the lot sizes may be reduced upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission in exchange for the provision of permanent open space. 
COMMERCIAL QUARRY – The process and act of removing overburden to extract minerals, sand, clay, gravel, rock, and/or other naturally occurring aggregate deposits from a parcel or tract of land for the purpose of commercially selling such; this does not include incidental land preparation excavation or filling activities as set forth in §6.4 of these Regulations. 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE FACILITY – An establishment where commercial licensed vehicles, typically consisting of fleet vehicles designed to carry freight, passengers for a fee, or merchandise, or which are incidental to a tradesman business, are collectively housed and stored inside and/or outside when they are not in service off-premises, including administrative, security, dispatch and minor maintenance facilities thereto within a fully enclosed building. 
COMMISSION – The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Monroe. 
COMMUNITY CENTER (non-town) – A structure or other facility used for providing fraternal, social, religious, recreational, educational or cultural programs and activities. 
COMMUNITY-WIDE EVENT – An indoor and/or outdoor annual, seasonal or otherwise temporary special event such as a carnival, fair, festival or other similar civic oriented organized program open to the general public, which is not part of the property's normal use or otherwise permitted, and is reasonably expected to draw in excess of 150 persons, 100 vehicles, and/or more vehicles than can be accommodated by available permanent on-site parking. 
COMMUNITY-WIDE EVENT PERMIT – That form of Zoning Permit approval as issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer authorizing a temporary community-wide event. 
COMMON INTEREST COMMUNITY – Real property described in a residential condominium declaration with respect to which a person, by virtue of his ownership of a condominium unit, is obligated to pay for a share of real property taxes on, insurance premiums on, maintenance of, improvement of, or services or other expenses related to, common elements, other units or any other real property other than that condominium unit described in the residential condominium declaration. An association of property owners funded solely by voluntary payments from those owners is not a common interest community. 
ONDOMINIUM !SSOI!TION OR UNIT OWNERS’ !SSOI!TION – The condominium association or unit owners’ association organized under onnecticut General Statute §47-243, as may be amended from time to time. 
CONDOMINIUM COMMON ELEMENTS – All portions of the residential condominium other than the condominium units and any other interests in real property for the benefit of the condominium unit owners which are subject to the residential condominium declaration. 
CONDOMINIUM UNIT – A physical portion of a residential condominium designated for separate ownership or occupancy by a condominium unit owner. 
CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNER – A declarant or other person who owns a dwelling unit in a residential condominium created by a residential condominium declaration. 
CONSERVATION / OPEN SPACE – A parcel or area of land or water, essentially unimproved and legally set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use and/or enjoyment in its relative natural state for perpetuity through deeds or other legal means; lands protected and/or restricted from development; lands dedicated to remain unaltered or in a natural state. 
ONTR!TOR’S / UILDING TR!DES EST!LISHMENT – The managerial and administrative office of an electrician, plumber, painter, carpenter, general or specialized contractor, or other trades contractor (heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, refrigeration, alarm/security, roofing, and other similar trade occupations), including the orderly inside and/or outside on-site parking of company fleet vehicles (excluding Federal Highway Administration Classes 7 and above, and vehicles weighing greater than 26,000 lbs) during off-business hours (i.e., where tradesman utilize company vehicles during the conduct of off-site services, leaving their personal vehicles at the premises until returning at the end of business), as well as the related contained storage of directly associated materials, equipment and supplies as otherwise permitted. This definition does not include vehicle fueling facilities; contractor's storage yard; waste/refuse haulers or haulers of chemical, flammable or hazardous materials; a mason, landscaper or excavator type contractors. 
COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT – The Fairfield County Soil and Water Conservation District established under Subsection (a) of Section 22a-315 of the General Statutes. 
DAY CARE SERVICES 
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER – An establishment, licensed by the State of Connecticut, which offers or provides a program of supplementary care for adult persons outside their home for part of the twenty-four (24) hours in one or more days in the week. 
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER – An establishment, licensed by the State of Connecticut, offering or providing a program of supplementary care to more than twelve related or unrelated children outside their own home on a regular basis. 
GROUP DAY CARE HOME – An establishment, licensed by the State of Connecticut, offering or providing a program of supplementary care a) to not less than seven or more than twelve related or unrelated children on a regular basis, or b) that meets the definition of family day care home except that it operates in a facility other than a private family home. 
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME – An establishment, licensed by the State of Connecticut, consisting of a private family home caring for not more than six children, including the provider’s own 
children not in school full time, where the children are cared for not less than three (3) or more than twelve (12) hours during a twenty-four (24) hour period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis except that care may be provided in excess of twelve (12) hours but not more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours to accommodate the need for extended care or intermittent short-term overnight care. 
DEVELOPMENT – Any construction or grading activities or noticeable site disturbance or change to improved or unimproved real estate. 
DIAMETER-AT-BREAST-HEIGHT (DBH) – Measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk, measured at chest height four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. 
DISTURBED AREA – An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
DWELLING UNIT – One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within. 
ACCESSORY APARTMENT – A residential dwelling unit accessory to a principal single-family dwelling unit on a lot zoned RF-1, RF-2 or RF-3 only, provided that the accessory apartment use is limited in extent, clearly secondary and incidental to the use of the principal dwelling unit, and does not alter the single-family residential or exterior character of the principal dwelling or property, subject to the standards enumerated in these Regulations. 
AGE RESTRICTED DWELLING – A deed restricted residential condominium dwelling unit where one or more of the occupants is fifty-five (55) years of age or older, as further set forth in §3.5 of these Regulations. 
ATTACHED DWELLING – A dwelling with ground floor outside access, attached to one or more dwellings by common vertical walls without openings. 
CARETAKER RESIDENCE – An accessory residential dwelling unit for the exclusive residential occupancy by the person (and immediate family) charged with the care, operation, maintenance and protection of the larger subject premises and related facilities. 
DETACHED DWELLING – A dwelling that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING – A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units on the same lot. 
MULTI-FAMILY, GROUP HOME <6 RESIDENTS – A community residence, licensed by the State of Connecticut, as otherwise defined by State of Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 124, §8-3e, as may be amended from time to time. 
MULTI-FAMILY, GROUP HOME >6 RESIDENTS – A community residence, license by the State of Connecticut, as otherwise defined by State of Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 124, §8-3e, as may be amended from time to time. 
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING – A building containing one (1) dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING – A building on a single lot containing two (2) dwelling units. 
EASEMENT – A right, established in a deed or other legal document, of one (1) party to use land of a second party for a special purpose. 
EROSION – The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
EXCAVATION – The process of altering the natural grade/elevation by cutting the earth, or any activity by which soil or rock is cut, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated. 
EXCLUSIVE USE AREA – Area surrounding each dwelling unit that shall be treated as a limited common element under the Connecticut Common Interest Ownership Act, Connecticut General Statute §47-200. 
FAMILY – A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit. 
FARM – A parcel or parcels of land under single ownership or leasehold where the principal or accessory use is agriculture. (See also Agriculture). 
FARM STORE (accessory to Farm) – An accessory permanent structure used by a farm for the year round sale of agricultural products and commodities. 
FARM STORE, ACCESSORY SEASONAL – An accessory structure used by a farm for the temporary, seasonal sale of agricultural products and commodities. 
FIREWOOD PROCESSING FACILITY – A business establishment engaged in the cutting and splitting of felled trees and timber into smaller pieces, sized (less than three feet in length) to fit whole into a typical residential fireplace or interior wood burning stove, for the end purpose of commercially selling as firewood, which may include kiln drying and/or bundling. 
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) – The sum of gross horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a building or buildings on a lot, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating two buildings. 
FLOOR AREA, NET – The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading and all floors below the ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public. 
FOOT-CANDLE – A measure of illumination or light falling on a surface that is everywhere one (1) foot from a uniform point source of light – one (1) foot-candle is equal to one (1) lumen. Foot-candle measurements are made with a photometric light meter and with a specified horizontal orientation. 
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION – See Club, Fraternal Organization. 
FUNERAL HOME or MORTUARY – An establishment used for the preparation and/or viewing, including associated rituals connected therewith, of deceased persons prior to burial or cremation elsewhere, including the display and sale of burial/cremation related items (caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral supplies), all within a building. 
GASOLINE STATION – An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale and dispersal of automobile gasoline via outdoor dispensers and other petroleum products to the general public. 
GOLF COURSE – An establishment with at least nine holes (designated tees, greens, fairways and hazards) designed and regularly maintained for the playing of golf outside, may include other indoor and/or outdoor recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis, golf practice greens and driving ranges but excluding miniature golf. 
GRADING – Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
HEALTH CLUB – See Club, Health Club / Spa. 
HEIGHT – The vertical distance of a building or structure measured from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding a building or structure within ten (10) feet of the building or structure to the highest elevation of a flat roof or the mean elevation of a sloped roof between the eve (at bottom soffit) and ridge. The height of a structure without a roof shall be the vertical distance measured to the highest point of such structure. Measurement of building height shall not include church spires, ornamental towers, water towers, chimneys, solar panels, HVAC or other mechanical equipment, except as otherwise regulated herein. 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE – Any structure that is: (a) listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places; (b) certified by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on the State of Connecticut inventory of historic places; or (d) recognized as a local historic structure by the Town of Monroe. 
HOME-BASED BUSINESS (accessory to single-family dwellings) – A business carried out in a dwelling unit by the resident thereof and no more than two (2) nonresident persons or employees that is of higher intensity than a home occupation, but clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and does not alter the residential character of the dwelling or property, subject to the standards enumerated in these Regulations. 
HOME OCCUPATION (accessory to single-family dwellings) – An occupation carried out in a dwelling unit by the resident thereof and no more than one (1) non-resident employee, provided that the use is limited in extent, clearly secondary and incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and does not alter the residential character of the dwelling or property, subject to the standards enumerated in these Regulations. 
HOSPITAL – An institution, licensed by the State of Connecticut that primarily provides health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, or other abnormal physical or mental conditions, may include as an integral component related incidental accessory facilities such as patient related laboratories, out patient services, medical offices; excluding drug and alcohol dependency facilities. 
HOTEL – An establishment providing for a fee, short-term (less than 30 consecutive days) transient lodging accommodations (maid service, furnishing and upkeep of furniture, bed and bath linens and supplies, telephone, television, internet and similar) to the general public where access to all guest rooms is from interior lobbies, courts or hallways, may include incidental accessory facilities and services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, sundry retail goods, and recreational facilities primarily serving the transient guests of the hotel. 
HOUSING OPPORTUNITY DEVELOPMENT – A proposed housing development in which, for at least thirty 
(30) years after the initial occupancy of units within the proposed development: (a) not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the dwelling units will be conveyed by deeds containing covenants or restrictions which shall require that such dwelling units be sold or rented at, or below, prices which will preserve the units as affordable housing, as defined in Connecticut General Statute §8-30g, for persons or families whose income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) of the area median income or the statewide median income, whichever is less; and (b) not less than ten percent (10%) of the dwelling units shall be conveyed in the same manner to persons or families whose income is less than or equal to sixty percent (60%) of the area median income or the statewide median income, whichever is less. 
HOUSING OPPORTUNITY UNIT – Housing for which persons and families are presumed to pay thirty percent (30%) or less of their annual income, where such income is less than or equal to eighty percent (80%) or sixty percent (60%), as applicable, of area median income for the Town of Monroe or the statewide median income, whichever is less, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
HOUSE PET – An animal of such size and nature as is commonly and traditionally kept in the home, including but not restricted to dogs, cats, birds, fish and smaller animals. 
INLAND WETLANDS COMMISSION – The Town of Monroe Inland Wetlands Commission. 
INSPECTION – The periodic review and evaluation of properties in the conduct of enforcement activities and/or to determine compliance with permits and approvals as issued pursuant to these Regulations. 
JUNK – Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris; unregistered or inoperable vehicles, machinery or equipment, or parts thereof; tires; construction and building materials; household appliances; brush; or similar. 
JUNKYARD – Any lot, land, parcel, building, or structure, or part thereof, used for the temporary or permanent storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of junk, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery, or parts thereof, any of which not being stored for immediate use on the lot. The term shall also include any junkyard, motor vehicle junk business, and motor vehicle junkyard as defined in the State of Connecticut General Statutes. 
LANDSCAPER – A business principally engaged in landscape planning, design, installation, removal and maintenance services of offsite lawns and gardens (trees, shrubs, perennials, annuals and incidental hardscape features such as patios, stone walls and walkways). 
LAUNDROMAT, DRY CLEANERS (retail and drop-off centers) – An establishment providing to the general public facilities for the washing, drying or dry cleaning of clothing and/or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron, or by employees of the establishment on or off-premises. 
LIGHT FIXTURE – Complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp, lens, optical reflector, housing and electrical components necessary for ignition and control of the lamp, which may include a ballast, starter and/or photo control. 
LIGHT FIXTURE, DIRECTIONALLY SHIELDED – A light fixture which emits a light distribution where some light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane located at the bottom of a fixture. Such fixtures may contain visors, louvers or other types of shields or lenses which are designed to direct light onto a targeted area and to minimize stray light. 
LIGHT FIXTURE, FIXED – A light fixture whose means of support (pole, arm or other) is not adjustable so the direction of light cannot be moved or repositioned. 
LIGHT FIXTURE, FULL-CUT-OFF – A light fixture which emits a light distribution where no light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane located at the bottom of a fixture. 
LOT – A parcel of land having defined boundaries not divided by streets and considered as a unit, devoted to or intended to be devoted to a particular principal use and/or occupied by a principal structure or group of structures that are united by a common interest, use or ownership, and including customary accessory structures, uses, open areas and yards, which parcel shall have frontage on a street as defined herein and complies with all applicable area and bulk requirements set forth in these Regulations. The mere recording of a deed and/or map in the Monroe Land Records in the Monroe Town Clerk's office shall not constitute the creation of a lot or a lot for purposes of development or obtaining a zoning or building permit. 
LOT AREA – The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
LOT, CORNER – A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection forming an interior angle of not more than one-hundred-thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines is the “corner.” 
LOT DEPTH – The horizontal distance measured from the median point on the front lot line to the median point on the rear lot line. 
LOT FRONTAGE – The distance between the side lines of a lot measured along the front lot line. 
LOT, INTERIOR – Any lot other than a corner lot. 
LOT LINE – A property line of record bounding one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public or private space. 
LOT, REAR also FLAG LOT – A lot with less than the minimum required lot frontage and/or an accessway, typically narrow, to the rear buildable portion of a lot measuring less than the width of the required minimum lot frontage. 
LOT, THROUGH – An interior lot having frontage on two (2) or more segments of a street or different streets. 
LOT WIDTH – The average minimum horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth. 
MAINTAINED AVERAGE ILLUMINATION – Values which the average light levels for a playing field shall always meet or exceed during the life expectancy of the system. The average light levels shall be calculated over the entire playing field using a grid method of measurement which divides the total light levels by the number of grid points. 
MANUFACTURING / INDUSTRIAL – 
MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING AND/OR ASSEMBLY OF PRODUCTS WHERE CONDUCTED WITHIN FULLY ENCLOSED BUILDINGS – Includes a range of assembling, fabricating, and manufacturing activities conducted within enclosed buildings, including production, processing, packaging, warehousing and distribution of: household and consumer goods, clothing and shoes, electronic equipment, medical instruments, food and beverages, pharmaceuticals, personal care health and beauty products and other similar products from previously manufactured components; manufacture of products and merchandise involving the use of chemicals and plastics; wholesaling, warehousing and distribution centers; machine shops; and printing and publishing. Excluding concrete and asphalt batch plants; slaughter plants, packing houses, animal by-products rendering, and other such animal processing activities; automobile salvage and reclamation yards and facilities; processing or production of oil, natural gas, geothermal resources or other hydrocarbons; foundries; medical, biological or hazardous waste disposal facilities; bulk chemicals; explosives; sulfuric, sulfurous, nitric or hydrochloric acids; pesticides, insecticides and herbicides. 
BUSINESS SERVICE FACILITIES PROVIDING SUPPORTING SERVICES TO INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS USES, INCLUDING COMPUTER AND BUSINESS MACHINE SERVICE AND REPAIR – An establishment primarily engaged in rendering services to other business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing, photofinishing, protective services, equipment rental and leasing, computer and business machine service and repair. 
MARIJUANA DISPENSARY – A place of business where marijuana is dispensed or sold at retail for any purpose, including but not limited to recreational use and/or to qualifying patients and primary caregivers, and for which the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection has issued a dispensary facility permit or license to an applicant in accordance with Public Act 12-55, §21a-408, as amended, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
MARIJUANA PRODUCTION FACILITY – A secure, indoor facility where the production of marijuana occurs, and that is operated by a person to whom the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection has issued a producer license in accordance with Public Act 12-55, §21a-408, as amended, of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies. 
MEDICAL CLINIC: URGENT CARE FACILITY (no overnight), RADIOLOGY/DIAGNOSTICS LABORATORY – 
An establishment, licensed by the State of Connecticut that provides outpatient health and medical services to the general public on a walk-in or referral by a physician or other licensed medical care provider basis. 
MEDICAL REHABILITATION FACILITY – An establishment providing short-term, primarily in-patient care, treatment, and/or rehabilitation services for persons recovering from illness, injury, or surgery who do not require continued hospitalization; excluding drug and alcohol dependency treatment. 
MIXED USE LANDMARK PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT – The reinvestment and renovation of a designated older structure to ensure its continued existence. 
MOBILE HOME – A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to required utilities. 
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR – Any vehicle or conveyance-mounted unit, cart, trailer, kiosk or other similar apparatus, used to store, prepare, display or serve food and/or non-alcohol beverages intended primarily for immediate consumption, sited on public or private property for a limited duration lasting longer than ten (10) minutes. A mobile food vendor shall be mounted on wheels or other method of moveable design, and must be readily moveable. If the operation is not immediately mobile, it shall be 
considered a “building” or “structure” and shall be required to comply with applicable regulations for 
such. 
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LOCATION – The specific location on public or private property upon which a duly approved and authorized mobile food vendor may temporarily operate. 
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PERMIT – That form of Zoning Permit approval as issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer authorizing the time, duration, location and use of property by a duly Health Department licensed mobile food vendor. 
MUSEUM – An establishment operated as a repository and/or exhibit for a collection of literary, historical, natural or scientific curiosities or objects of interest, or works of art, and arranged, intended and designed to be used by members of the public for viewing, with or without an admission charge, including the holding of meetings or seminars in the promotion and education of the exhibited items, as well as accessory sale of related materials. 
NIGHTCLUB – An establishment dispensing liquor and food and in which music, dancing or entertainment is conducted. 
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING – A structure or building, the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the zoning regulations, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning regulations. 
NONCONFORMING USE – A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the zoning regulations but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
OFFICE – A room, suite of rooms or building in which the affairs of a commercial business, profession or service provider entity are conducted. 
ACCESSORY OFFICE – An incidental office customarily ancillary to a permitted principal use. 
GENERAL OFFICE – An office for the transacting of executive, administrative and clerical functions in the conduct of a business (i.e., insurance, real estate, tax preparation, advertising, stockbroker or similar). 
MEDICAL AND DENTAL OFFICE – An office for physicians, dentists or other licensed medical practitioners for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis. 
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE – An office for a member or members of a recognized profession (licensed or holding an advanced degree) maintained for the conduct of that profession (i.e., architecture, landscape architecture, land use planner, engineering, accounting, law, or similar). 
ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD PLAIN – Shall include Flood Zones A1-A30, including the floodway as designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Community Panel Numbers 090009-005C and 090009-001013 and the Flood Study, Town of Monroe, Connecticut, Fairfield County, as amended. 
OPEN SPACE – Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved, set aside or protected from certain development and/or disturbance; may include active and passive recreational uses. 
OUTDOOR DISPLAY – An outdoor arrangement of objects, items, products or other materials, typically not in a fixed position, for the purpose of advertisement or sales. 
OUTDOOR SALES of ACCESSORY PLAY EQUIPMENT and SHEDS – A business establishment providing for the outdoor display and retail sale of accessory play equipment and sheds, including the offering of incidental off premises installation services. 
OUTDOOR STORAGE – The outdoor keeping of any goods, materials, merchandise, vehicles, boats, equipment or other items. Storage within a structure other than a building is considered outdoor storage. 
OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING FURNACES – A wood-fired boiler in a small, insulated shed with a smoke stack. 
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS – A set of criteria or limits established by these Regulations related to nuisance elements that a use or process shall not exceed. 
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS – Establishments primarily engaged in providing specialized services involving nonmedical care and individual needs of a person or his or her apparel, including the incidental retail sale of related products, goods and merchandise. 
PET GROOMER BUSINESS – A business establishment providing non-medical personal care services to domesticated pets, not including boarding. 
PLACE OF WORSHIP – A facility for an established body organized to sustain faith based and/or religious services on a regular basis, like a church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other similar facility. 
PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR – The Planning and Zoning Administrator (or Town Planner) of the Town of Monroe. 
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION – See Commission. 
PREFABRICATED HOME – A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built and is designed for connection to a permanent foundation and serviced by required utilities. Also referred to as Manufactured or Modular Home. 
PROPERTY LINE – See Lot Line. 
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY – Any facility or structure erected by a public service company, as that term is defined by Connecticut law, unless the location of such is regulated by the Connecticut Siting Council. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – A motor vehicle built on a chassis and designed to serve as a self-contained living quarters for recreational use. 
RECREATION FACILITIES – 
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITIES – A commercial building or structure designed and equipped for the conduct of indoor sports and leisure time activities. 
OUTDOOR RECREATION FACILITIES – Outdoor places, sites or fields and incidental structures designed and equipped for the pursuit of leisure time activities, usually of a formal nature, often performed with others and/or requiring equipment. 
RECREATION, PASSIVE – Activities that involve relatively inactive or less environmentally intrusive activities including, but not limited to walking, sitting, picnicking, board and table games. 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES (not involving hazardous or biological materials use, storage or disposal) – An establishment for the research, investigation, testing, experimental analysis, and/or technological advancement, storage or disposal, of new and innovative systems, equipment, products and/or devices, which does not involve hazardous or biological materials use. 
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM – A common interest residential community in which portions of the real property are designated for separate ownership (individual dwelling units where each owner receives a recordable deed to the individual unit purchased, including the right to sell, mortgage, etc.) and the remainder of the real property is designated for common shared ownership solely by all of the owners of the individual dwelling units. 
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM DECLARATION – The legal instruments which are required to be recorded on the land records of the Town of Monroe, however denominated, that create a residential condominium, including any amendments to those instruments. 
RESTAURANT and FOOD RELATED USES – 
BAKERY, RETAIL – A Retail Food Establishment which sells baked goods directly to the public on premises. Goods may or may not be baked on the premises. Does not include a fast food restaurant as defined herein. 
BAKERY, WHOLESALE – An establishment which produces and sells baked goods primarily to other establishments, on premises sale directly to the public is incidental and occupies an inside area of no more than 2,000 square feet. Does not include a fast food restaurant as defined herein. 
CAFÉ – An establishment, licensed pursuant to a Café permit from the State of Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection, Liquor Control Division, within a suitable and permanent building, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where all types of alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages, and food is served for sale at retail for consumption on the premises but which does not necessarily serve hot meals, and which may include provisions for music, dancing or live entertainment. The availability of food is required but is secondary and incidental to the business. May also be referred to as grill, nightclub, cabaret, saloon, bar, pub, public house, beer garden or similar named establishment. 
CATERER, OFF-PREMISES – An establishment whose principal business is the preparation of food and beverages for a specific event, person or organization, typically consisting of full course meals, for consumption off-premises, where the food and beverages are picked-up or delivered, and service thereof may be provided at the off-premises location. 
CATERER, ON-PREMISES – An establishment whose principal business is the preparation of food and beverages for a specific event, person or organization, typically consisting of full course meals, for consumption on-premises, where the food and beverages are served to patrons via buffet or table service within a dedicated banquet hall or meeting rooms. 
ICE CREAM PARLOR (Yogurt Shop / Dairy Bar) – A Retail Food Establishment primarily engaged in the preparation and retail sale of ice cream, yogurt and other frozen dessert type products and beverages, typically served to order from a counter for consumption on-or off-premises. 
OUTDOOR DINING – An outdoor area with tables and seating for the consumption of food and beverages in conjunction with and accessory to a principal permitted food service or restaurant use, operated and located on the same lot and functionally coordinated to the interior of the principal food service or restaurant use. 
RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE – An establishment engaged in the retail sale of prepared food and beverages, primarily consisting of hot meals, ordered from individual menus, served by waiters/waitresses, in a ready-to-consume state, on or in non-disposal dishes or containers, and where customers consume these foods and beverages while seated at tables or counters located within the building. Such establishments may offer take-out, delivery and catering services, which if provided, are ancillary to the overall establishment business and are not provided via drive-thru or window service. Such establishments may also offer the retail sale of all types of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises, pursuant to a Restaurant permit from the State of Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection, Liquor Control Division. 
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD – An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of pre­prepared or quickly prepared meals and other food and beverage products for consumption on-or off-premises, in a ready-to-consume state, made available upon a short waiting time, generally served in disposable or prepackaged containers or wrappers with disposal utensils, where customers usually select their orders from a standardized posted menu offering a limited number of specialized and/or standardized array of items, such as but not limited to, hamburgers, chicken, fish and chips, pizza, tacos and hot dogs, prepared according to standardized methods in advance and kept hot then finished and packaged to order, where a substantial portion of sales is by stand-up service where the customer generally pays before eating and performs self cleanup. Such establishments typically include standardized décor, façades, site treatments, food and beverage ingredients, as well as systemic purchasing and distribution of food, containers, wrappers, and other consumable goods from a central source and are usually part of a restaurant chain or franchise operation, typically including drive-through service via an exterior window to allow customers to remain in their vehicles to order and receive food and/or beverages. 
RESTAURANT, DRIVE THROUGH or EXTERIOR WINDOW SERVICE – An accessory means of serving restaurant establishment patrons via an exterior walk-up or drive-up service window along a side or rear building wall of the interior restaurant. 
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT – An establishment primarily engaged in the on-site preparation and retail sale of "carry-out" food and beverage products from a counter-type installation for consumption primarily off-premises, including but limited to: 
. Coffee Houses or Shops 
. Pizzerias 
. Ice Cream Parlors / Yogurt Shops / Dairy Bars 
. Bakeries 
. Delicatessens 
. Fish, Produce or Specialty Food Markets (non-supermarket or grocery store) 
. Off-Premises Caterers (not associated with a restaurant or other food service use) TAVERN – An establishment, licensed pursuant to a Tavern permit from the State of Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection, Liquor Control Division, within a suitable and permanent building, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where beer, wine and alcohol cider is sold at retail for consumption on-premises, with or without the sale of food. 
RETAIL, GENERAL – An establishment engaged in selling goods, wares, packaged foods and beverages, and/or merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer for immediate purchase and off-premises personal use or household consumption, and rendering services incidental to the sale of such. 
RETAIL, INSTRUCTIONAL (martial arts, dance, music, learning support, painting/pottery, or similar) – A retail establishment offering for a fee, personal or group lessons of specified instruction in a specific field, artistic endeavor or other specialized form of expression such as dance, painting, music, learning support or similar; or supported self-application in the creation of an artistic endeavor such as candle making, glazing of pottery, canvas painting, or similar craft activities. 
RETAIL GARDEN CENTER – A retail establishment primarily engaged in the selling of nursery and residential gardening materials, supplies, tools and similar related products, including but not limited to the inside and outside growing, cultivation and sale of garden plants, flowers, trees, shrubs and garden materials such as mulch, stone, peat moss, seed and similar. 
RIDING ACADEMIES, BOARDING STABLES – An establishment where horses are boarded indoors and cared for, and where inside and/or outside instruction in riding, jumping, and showing is offered, and where horses may be hired for riding. 
SAFE HOMES – A residence licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide a safe, stable environment for children between the ages of three (3) and twelve (12) who are transitioning to foster care. 
SCHOOL BUS PARKING FACILITY – A facility for the inside and/or outside parking of school buses when not in use or between times of active service deployment, including administrative, security, dispatch and minor maintenance facilities thereto within a fully enclosed building. 
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC and PRIVATE – An institution for the teaching of children and adults (K-12), including preschool and nursery schools, elementary and middle schools, senior high schools, and secondary, vocational and trade schools, providing full time instruction with an educational curriculum which meets the requirements of the laws of the State of Connecticut. 
ELEMENTARY or MIDDLE – A public or private school that meets the State of Connecticut requirements for elementary or middle school education. 
PRESCHOOL/NURSERY SCHOOL – A school that is primarily educational in nature, meeting the needs of children generally between the ages of two (2) and five (5). 
SENIOR HIGH – A public or private school that meets the State of Connecticut requirements for high school education. 
SECONDARY, VOCATIONAL, TRADE – A public or private school that meets the State of Connecticut requirements for secondary, vocational or a recognized tradesman education. 
TOWN OF MONROE BOARD OF EDUCATION OFFICES – A parcel and/or facility owned or leased by the Town of Monroe for the conduct of school administrative functions, may be within a public school facility. 
SEDIMENT – Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
SENIOR HOUSING – Any age restricted development, which may be in any housing form, including detached and attached dwelling units, apartments and residences offering private and semiprivate rooms, with or without services for residents. 
SETBACK – The minimum horizontal distance that buildings, structures and other features must be set back from the front, side and rear lot property lines, and an access easement or right-of-way, as required by these Regulations (see also Yard, Required). 
SIGN – Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors, excluding vehicles, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images; but shall not include the sign, directional notice, flag, pennant or insignia of any governmental unit. Signs shall be used only for goods sold, services rendered, or establishments on the premises and shall be accessory to a use only on the premises. 
AGRICULTURAL SIGN – A sign directly relating to agricultural products or activities on the premises. 
ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGN – Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation or which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. 
BILLBOARD SIGN – A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
CHANGEABLE LETTERING SIGN – A sign upon which any combination of letters and numbers may be readily changed to convey varying information about goods sold or services rendered without reconstruction of the sign. 
CONSTRUCTION SIGN – A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, restricted solely to the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
DIRECTIONAL SIGN – Signs limited to on-premises directional or warning messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as but not limited to “one-way,” “entrance,” and “exit” but shall not include any advertising or name of establishment. 
DIRECTORY SIGN – Signs internal to the premises located within parking areas or at entry doors indicating locations of tenants on the premises. 
FLASHING OR INTERMITTENT SIGN – Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign, either outdoors or indoors, which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. 
FREESTANDING SIGN – A non-movable sign supported by and placed upon the ground with or without a subsurface foundation, independent of and not affixed to a building or structure, including monuments, support poles or other supporting measures or devices, including pole and ground signs. 
GASOLINE PRICE SIGN – An integrated portion of other permitted signs relating to an authorized and licensed gasoline sales facility advertising the type and current price of motor fuel for sale on the premises. 
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN – A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental functions; or required by law, ordinance or other governmental regulation; flag, pennant, or insignia of any governmental unit. 
GROUND SIGN – Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure. 
HOME OCCUPATION OR HOME-BASED BUSINESS SIGN – A non-illuminated sign containing only the name and occupation of a permitted home occupation. 
ILLUMINATED SIGN – A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign. 
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN – A lighted sign whose light source is internal to its construction. 
MENU BOARD SIGN – A sign listing items for purchase and typically including a radio communication device in connection to an otherwise permitted drive-through facility, such as that of a fast food restaurant. 
NAME PLATE SIGN – A non-illuminated sign, located on premises giving the name address, or both, of the owner or occupant of a building premises. 
POLE SIGN – A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support. 
POLITICAL SIGN – A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with national, state or local election. 
PORTABLE SIGN – A sign that is not permanent, affixed to building, structure or the ground. This shall include any sign mounted on a vehicle in any manner parked on any premises. 
REAL ESTATE SIGN – A sign pertaining to the sale, rental lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises, on which sign is located. 
ROADSIDE SIGN – Any sign other than governmental sign located within the right-of-way of any street, road or highway. 
ROOF SIGN – A sign that is mounted on the roof or portion thereof of a building or structure or which projects above the top of the wall of the building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
SEASONAL SIGN – A sign or advertising display of a temporary nature not to exceed sixty (60) days in any given year describing a seasonal activity, product or service. 
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN – A temporary sign advertising a community, civic or not-for-profit organization temporary occurrence or event such as a carnival, festival, charity event, bazaar, 
farmers’ market, arts and crafts fair or similar. 
TAG SALE SIGN – A temporary sign advertising a private sale of personal property by the owner of the premises, such as a garage sale, yard sale, tag sale, estate sale and the like. 
TEMPORARY SIGN – A sign which may be permitted for a short duration or specified period of time as otherwise regulated and authorized by these Regulations, such as a special event or portable sign. 
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN – An official sign indicating or directing the required conduct of vehicular and pedestrian traffic movements along streets and at intersections of streets and/or streets and private driveways. 
WALL SIGN – A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign. 
SITE PLAN – An accurate and detailed topographic and geometric representation of existing and/or proposed conditions on a lot or lots that is consistent with accurate property survey information. 
SOIL – Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin. 
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN – A scheme that minimizes soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development and includes, but is not limited to, a map and narrative. 
SPA – See Club, Health Club / Spa. 
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE – A use where specified in these Zoning Regulations that, because of its nature, requires special and careful consideration of all aspects of the proposed operation in order to protect other properties in the zone and to preserve the basic Zoning Regulations. 
STORAGE USES – 
COMMERCIAL WAREHOUSING CONTAINED WITHIN FULLY ENCLOSED BUILDINGS – A building or part thereof used primarily for the temporary housing of raw materials, works in progress, and/or finished goods, wares, food and non-food products, equipment, parts, and supplies before their use, export, or distribution off-premises, including climate control facilities, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable, explosive, or that present hazardous conditions. 
SELF-STORAGE WAREHOUSING FOR RENTAL OF FULLY ENCLOSED BUILDING SPACE – A building designed and constructed with internal individual rooms, compartments, or units, which may be of various sizes within a larger facility, leased or rented on an individual basis pursuant to a specified duration basis (i.e., monthly, annually), for the storing of personal property. 
STORAGE OF CARNIVAL RIDES – A parcel or tract of land used for the coordinated inside and/or outside storage of carnival rides when not in use off-premises. 
STORY – That portion of a building above the basement included between any floor and the ceiling or roof above it. 
STORY, HALF – Any place under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the floor of which is not more than two (2) feet below the plate. 
STRUCTURE – Anything constructed, erected or installed, the use of which requires location on or under the ground level, in whole or in part, or attachment to something having location on or under the ground. Depending upon its applicability, the use herein of “structure” shall include the term “building.” (See also Building) 
SUBDIVISION – The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development or lease. 
SUBDIVISION, CLUSTER – A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots that would be permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase in the overall density of development. The remaining land on the site is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas or agriculture. 
THEATER (indoor for stage/movies) – An indoor establishment designed and constructed with fixed seating for the showing of motion pictures and/or dramatic, theatrical, musical, or other live action performances for an admission fee, including rehearsal activities. 
TOWER – A structure intended to support equipment for receiving and/or transmitting electromagnetic waves, including self-supporting lattice, guyed and monopoles. 
TOWN ENGINEER – The Town Engineer of the Town of Monroe. 
TOWN OF MONROE USES – 
TOWN OF MONROE GOVERNMENTAL NON-SCHOOL ADMINISTRATIVE FACILITIES: INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO OFFICES, EMS, FIRE, POLICE, LIBRARY, SENIOR/COMMUNITY CENTER, FOOD PANTRY – A parcel and/or facility owned or leased by the Town of Monroe for the conduct of non-school administrative functions, including municipal government offices, police, fire, library, senior and/or community center, food pantry, and/or similar facilities operated and maintained by the Town of Monroe in the pursuit of serving the needs of its citizens. 
TOWN OF MONROE GOVERNMENTAL SERVICE FACILITIES: INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO DPW YARD, DOG POUND, TRANSFER STATION, SHOOTING RANGE – A parcel and/or facility owned or leased by the Town of Monroe for the purpose of housing inside and/or outside municipal service facilities such as DPW offices and yard, dog pound, transfer station, shooting range, and/or similar facility operated and maintained by the Town of Monroe in the pursuit of serving the needs of its citizens. 
TOWN OF MONROE COMMUNICATION SITES AND FACILITIES – A parcel and/or facility owned or leased by the Town of Monroe for the placement, operation and maintenance of Town of Monroe owned telecommunication devices and facilities. 
UNIT OWNERS’ !SSOI!TION – See Condominium Association. 
VARIANCE (Zoning) – Permission granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals to vary the literal requirements of these Regulations. 
AREA VARIANCE – Specific relief from the literal area, bulk and other dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district standards, not including use, without changing or amending these Regulations or the underlying zoning classification of a property, based on a demonstration of hardship relating to the peculiarities of the lot. 
USE VARIANCE – Variance to permit a use or facility not otherwise allowed in the zoning district within which the property is located. 
VETERINARY HOSPITAL – An establishment, licensed by the State of Connecticut to provide veterinarian care, observation, and/or treatment of animals, primarily domesticated pets, and where boarding is limited to a short term for convalescence incidental to the hospital treatment or procedure conducted only. 
WATERCOURSES – As defined in the Town of Monroe Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. 
WETLANDS – As defined in the Town of Monroe Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. 
WHOLESALE AND DISTRIBUTION CENTERS, NOT INCLUDING AUTOMOBILES OR BOATS – A business establishment within an enclosed building primarily engaged in the selling and/or distributing of merchandise to other businesses; excluding automobiles, boats and recreational vehicles with living accommodations. 
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY – The antenna, telecommunications equipment, communication towers, monopoles and/or support structures used together in conjunction with the provision of commercial wireless communication services. These services may include, but are not limited to cellular communications, personal communication services, and paging. 
YARD – An area on a lot that lies between the nearest lot line and the applicable setback and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward to the sky by any structure or portion thereof, except as permitted herein (see also Setback). 
YARD, FRONT – An open area extending across the full width of the lot between the front property line and the front setback line. 
YARD, REAR – An open area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear property line and the rear setback line. 
YARD, SIDE – An open area extending across the full depth of the lot between the side property line and the side setback line. 
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS – The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Monroe. 
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER – The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Monroe. 
ZONING PERMIT – Written approval as required by these Regulations, signed and issued by the Town of Monroe Zoning Enforcement Officer, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a Building Permit and commencement of use, change in use, or the erection, construction, reconstruction, restoration, alteration, conversion, or installation of a principal or accessory building or structure. 
§2.2.2 Definitions Pertaining to Off-Street Parking and Loading 
The following definitions pertain particularly to the regulation and standards pertaining to off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth in §6.1 of these Regulations: 
AISLE – The traveled path through a parking facility along or between one (1) or two (2) rows of parked vehicles. 
BAY – A parking facility unit that has two (2) rows of parking stalls and a central aisle. 
BENCH SEATING – One (1) seat is equal to two (2) feet of bench length. 
CLEAR HEIGHT – The clear vertical height inside a parking structure which is a minimum of seven (7) feet. 
DEFERRED PARKING – The practice exercised at the discretion of the Commission where up to fifteen percent (15%) of designed parking is not constructed and is placed in landscaped lawn subject to the provision that the owner of the premises may be required to construct said parking if it is determined by either Commission or owner that circumstances require such construction. 
DIRECTIONAL PAVEMENT MARKINGS – Line, symbols and words painted on a pavement surface to direct drivers and control traffic flow. 
DESIGN STANDARDS – The criteria, both written and graphic as contained in this article, established to define the design characteristics and specifications of a parking facility. 
DRIVEWAY (OR ACCESS OR LANE) – The area of a facility that allows motor vehicles access to or from any public street, other facility or area, or within the facility. 
EMPLOYEE PARKING – Parking areas specifically designated for use by employees. 
FIRE LANE – The aisle immediately adjacent to a building or structure reserved for access by emergency public safety vehicles in which no parking or standing is permitted. 
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) – The total interior floor area of a building or structure measured at the inside face of the exterior walls. 
HALF-BAY – The minimum parking facility unit that has one row of parking stalls and aisle. 
HANDICAP ACCESSIBLE PARKING – A parking space or bays of parking designed for the exclusive use by persons or drivers as defined in §14-253a of the Connecticut General Statutes and other applicable requirements of the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code, both as amended. 
ISLAND – A raised or depressed area in a roadway, driveway, or parking lot designed to control or direct traffic flow, minimize pavement expanse and provide area for landscaping, signage, lighting, and drainage and snow storage. 
LOADING SPACE – A dedicated area designed and dimensioned for the temporary parking or standing of truck-type vehicles for the purpose of loading and/or unloading activities in support of uses on the site. 
NET SQUARE FEET – In a commercial or public access use, that portion of the GFA accessible to the general public, generally used for display and sales, seating or assembly. 
OFF-STREET PARKING – A portion of a lot designed and dedicated for parking on the same site as the principal or accessory building it serves or where a shared and/or joint parking agreement is approved by the Commission as set forth in these Regulations. 
ON-STREET PARKING – Parking located within a private or public street right-of-way. 
PARKING LOT – A surface area for parking, constructed at grade, off the street and beyond the right-of­way. 
PARKING ANGLE – The angle formed by a parking stall and the wall or center line of the facility, ranging from ninety (90°) degrees (perpendicular) to thirty (30) degrees. 
PARKING FACILITY – A parking lot, garage, or deck for the purpose of off-street parking. 
PARKING SPACE (OR STALL) – A dedicated area directly accessible to an access aisle, designed and dimensioned for the temporary parking of a single vehicle. 
PARKING STRUCTURE – Any building or portion thereof either above grade, below grade, or both, for the parking of motor vehicles. 
PEAK PERIOD – A period of maximum parking activity; can be by the hour, portion of a day, day of week, or seasonal. 
QUEUE SPACE – A standing space for a vehicle equivalent in area to a parking space. 
SEATING (OR SEATS) – The total of fixed seats and temporary seats based upon design capacity. 
SHARED OR JOINT USE PARKING – The sharing of parking spaces by two or more uses with each use having different peak demand periods. 
STANDING – The practice of brief vehicle stopping or waiting, generally for pick-up/ delivery or purchase of an outside service, in an area not designated or permitted for parking. 
STRIPING – Painted lines or similar applications delineating stalls and circulation patterns. 
§2.2.3 Definitions Pertaining to Flood Damage Control 
The following definitions pertain particularly to the regulation and standards pertaining to flood damage control requirements as set forth in §6.6 of these Regulations: 
APPEAL (Flood Damage Control) – A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of §6.6 or a request for a variance (flood damage control) relating thereto. 
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD – The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
BASE FLOOD – The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also referred to as the one-hundred (100) year flood, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as part of a Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and depicted on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) – The elevation of the crest of the base flood (100-year flood). The height in relation to mean sea level (NAVD of 1988) expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
BASEMENT – For floodplain management purposes, a basement is any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
COST – As related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor’s estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on 
at the same time-contractor’s overhead-contractor’s profit-and grand total. Items to be excluded 
include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
DEVELOPMENT – Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, as a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date, April 17, 1985, of the floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community. 
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY – The Federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
FINISHED LIVING SPACE – As related to fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE), a space that is, but is not limited to, heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair or replace. 
FLOOD or FLOODING – A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation/runoff of surface waters from any source. 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – The official map of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain) and the insurance risk premium zones applicable to a community. 
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) – The official study of a community in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has conducted an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
FLOODWAY – The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE OR FACILITY – A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to the water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities.  The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long­term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE – Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
LOWEST FLOOR – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). 
MANUFACTURED HOME (also referred to as pre-fabricated home) – A structure, transportable in one or more sections that is built and designed for connection to a permanent foundation and served by required utilities. 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
MARKET VALUE – The market value of the structure shall be determined by the property’s tax assessment, minus land value, prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
MEAN SEA LEVEL – For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (N!VD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood 
insurance rate map are referenced. 
NEW CONSTRUCTION – Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after !pril 17, 1985, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date, April 17, 1985, of the floodplain management regulation adopted by the community. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE – For floodplain management purposes, a portable vehicle built on a single chassis, four-hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed to be used as temporary living quarters for travel, camping and recreational purposes, including but not limited to campers, travel trailers and motor homes but excluding mobile manufactured homes. 
START OF CONSTRUCTION – For floodplain management purposes, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barriers Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within one-hundred-eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/ or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
STRUCTURE – For floodplain management purposes, a structure is a walled and roofed building which is principally above ground, including a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE – Damage of any origin sustained by a structure, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT – For floodplain management purposes, any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations, additions, or other improvements to a structure, taking place during a one (1) year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the 
market value of the structure. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other 
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term does not, however, include either: (a) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (b) any alteration of a “historic” structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” 
VARIANCE (Flood Damage Control) – A grant of relief from the terms of the floodplain management regulation that allows construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited and where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
VIOLATION (Flood Damage Control) – Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION – The height, in relation to the North American Vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

§3.1 Residential and Farming District 1 (RF-1) §3.1.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §3.1 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Residential and Farming District 1 (“RF-1 District”). 
§3.1.2 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§3.1.3 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental to the principal use may be allowed subject to the following additional standards and conditions. 
A. 	The accessory use, building or structure shall be located on the same lot as the principal permitted use to which it is accessory. 
B. 	Accessory uses shall not include any commercial activity except as specifically permitted in these Regulations. 
C. 	Accessory uses, buildings or structures may include: 
(1) 	
Accessory apartments, subject to the specific standards contained in Article 6 of these Regulations. 

(2) 	
Signs, as provided in Article 6 of these Regulations. 

(3) 	
Private garages and sheds for the storage of personal property for use in connection with a residence. 

(4) 	
The keeping of no more than four (4) dogs.  Any run, fenced enclosure or shelter for the use of said dogs shall be setback at least one-hundred (100) feet from any property line. 

(5) 	
The keeping of horses and livestock on lots that are two (2) acres or more. The number of animals permitted shall be two (2) animals over five-hundred (500) pounds for the first two (2) acres and one (1) animal over five-hundred (500) pounds for each one (1) additional acre or four (4) animals under five-hundred (500) pounds for the first two (2) acres and two (2) additional animals for each one (1) additional acre, or combination thereof. All animals shall be kept in a manner so as not to create a public health hazard or have an adverse effect on the environmental quality of the surrounding area and community in general. Manure piles shall be located and maintained so as to prevent runoff of polluting materials onto adjacent properties, roads, wells or watercourses. Fencing and structures shall be installed so as to confine all animals within the property. 

(6) 	
The keeping of poultry. All poultry shall be kept in a manner so as not to create a public health hazard or have an adverse effect on the environmental quality of the surrounding area and community in general. Manure piles shall be located and maintained so as to prevent runoff of polluting materials onto adjacent properties, roads, wells or watercourses.  Fencing and structures shall be installed so as to confine all fowl within the property. 

(7) 	
Regular outdoor parking not to exceed more than three (3) registered noncommercial vehicles or more than one (1) registered noncommercial vehicle per licensed driver at the corresponding address, whichever is greater.  The outside parking or storing of any unregistered or unused vehicle is specifically prohibited. 

(8) 	
No unregistered vehicles may be parked or stored on the premises. There shall be no more than one (1) commercial registered vehicle bearing commercial advertising parked or stored on the premises.  Any commercial registered vehicle showing commercial advertising shall be garaged or suitably screened.  Screening shall consist of dense foliage completely obscuring sight of the vehicle from the road and adjoining properties, or a solid fence or similar enclosure equal to the height of the vehicle, acceptable to the Commission.  No commercial registered vehicle shall exceed one ton capacity. Parking of all vehicles must be neat and in driveway areas. Vehicles may not be parked on lawns. The parking or storage of truck-tractors, commercial semi-trailers and/or commercial trailers is prohibited. 

(9) 	
Recreational vehicles or boats may be parked or stored on the premises, provided they are suitably screened and kept at least one-hundred (100) feet from the property line. Screening shall consist of dense foliage completely obscuring sight of the vehicle or boat from the road and adjoining properties, or a solid fence or similar enclosure equal to the height of the vehicle or boat. 


§3.1.4 Lot Area and Bulk Standards 
A. 	Each lot shall have a minimum area of one (1) acre (or 43,560 square feet), shall be of such shape that a square with one-hundred-thirty-five (135) feet on each side will fit on the lot and shall have a frontage of one-hundred-fifty (150) feet or more on a public street, measured along the front property line. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the minimum required lot area may include lands under water and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum required lot area may include wetland soils and shall be considered as part of the lot area requirements. Land area necessary to comply with minimum lot area requirements must be contiguous and not separated by environmentally constrained lands. 
B. 	In the case of subdivision or resubdivision of land in accordance with a subdivision plan and all applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe, the minimum area, lot frontage and/or width of any lot in said subdivision may be reduced by the Commission in accordance with the provisions for cluster subdivision provided for in the Town of Monroe’s Subdivision Regulations. 
§3.1.5 Setbacks 
A. 	No building or other structure shall extend within less than fifty (50) feet of any front lot line, nor within twenty-five (25) feet of any side or rear lot line. 
B. 	Any structure housing horses and livestock shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
C. 	Any structure housing male poultry or more than twelve (12) female poultry shall be located not less than one-hundred (100) feet from any property line and may not be erected between the principal structure and the street. 
D. 	Any structure housing twelve (12) or fewer female poultry shall be located not less than fifty 
(50) feet from any property line and may not be erected between the principal structure and the street. 
E. 	Horses, livestock and/or poultry manure piles and/or associated containers shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
F. 	Any instrument used as a satellite ground receiving station for the purpose of reception of transmitted radio, television or microwave signals shall only be mounted on a structure or the ground, and in the case of said mounting being on the ground, shall not be installed within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line, but in any case shall be installed no closer to the streetline than the closest point of setback of the dwelling to which it is accessory. All such stations when mounted on the ground shall be affixed to a permanent foundation. 
§3.1.6 Height 
A. 	No building or other structure shall exceed a height of two-and-one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
B. 	No radio or television antennae, flagpoles, farm silos, solar panels, weathervanes, cupolas, power poles and lines, weather station, recording equipment, or survey/recording equipment shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet as defined in these Regulations, inclusive of any building or structure upon which they may be erected. 
C. 	Property, structures, and services owned and maintained by the Town of Monroe shall be exempt from the provisions of Subsections A and B above where a height in excess of these provisions shall be necessary to perform the intended function in support of public works, administration, safety, emergency, civil services, civil defense, and education. Such structures shall be located a minimum distance from any property line, should be at least one-and-one­quarter (1.25) times the height of such structures and shall be subject to a Special Exception Permit as set forth in Article 8 of these Regulations. 
§3.1.7 Coverage 
The aggregate coverage of all buildings and other structures as well as driveways and other impervious areas on any lot shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the area of the lot. 

§3.2 Residential and Farming District 2 (RF-2) 
§3.2.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §3.2 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Residential and Farming District 2 (“RF-2 District”). 
§3.2.2 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§3.2.3 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses permitted in an RF-2 District shall be the same as those permitted in an RF-1 District, subject to the same restrictions described in §3.1 and other provisions of these Regulations as applicable. 
§3.2.4 Lot Area and Bulk Standards 
A. 	Each lot shall have a minimum area of two (2) acres (or 87,120 square feet), shall be of such shape that a square with one-hundred-seventy-five (175) feet on each side will fit on the lot and shall have a frontage of two-hundred (200) feet or more on a public street. In computing area of land necessary to meet zoning requirements, no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum required lot area may include lands under water and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum required lot area may include wetland soils and shall be considered as part of the lot area requirements. Land area necessary to comply with minimum lot area requirements must be contiguous and not separated by environmentally constrained lands. 
B. 	In the case of subdivision of land in accordance with a subdivision plan and all applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe, the minimum area, lot frontage and/or width of any lot in said subdivision may be reduced by the Commission in accordance with the provisions for cluster subdivision provided for in the Town of Monroe’s Subdivision Regulations. 
§3.2.5 Setbacks 
A. 	No building or other structure shall extend within less than fifty (50) feet of any front lot line, nor within thirty (30) feet of any side or rear lot line. 
B. 	Any structure housing horses and livestock shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
C. 	Any structure housing male poultry or more than twelve (12) female poultry shall be located not less than one-hundred (100) feet from any property line and may not be erected between the principal structure and the street. 
D. 	Any structure housing twelve (12) or fewer female poultry shall not be located less than fifty 
(50) feet from any property line and may not be erected between the principal structure and the street. 
E. 	Horses, livestock and/or poultry manure piles and/or associated containers shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
F. 	Any instrument used as a satellite ground receiving station for the purpose of reception of transmitted radio, television or microwave signals shall only be mounted on a structure or the ground, and in the case of said mounting on the ground, shall not be installed within thirty (30) feet of any property line, but in any case shall be installed no closer to the streetline than the closest point of setback of the dwelling to which it is accessory. All such stations when mounted on the ground shall be affixed to a permanent foundation. 
§3.2.6 Height 
A. 	No building or other structure shall exceed a height of two-and-one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
B. 	No radio television antennae, flagpoles, farm silos, solar panels, weathervanes, cupolas, power poles and lines, weather station recording equipment, or survey/recording equipment shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet as defined in these Regulations, inclusive of any building or structure upon which they may be erected. 
C. 	Property, structures, and services owned and maintained by the Town of Monroe shall be exempt from the provisions of §3.2.6A and B above where a height in excess of these provisions shall be necessary to perform the intended function in support of public works, administration, safety, emergency, civil services, civil defense, and education. Such structures shall be located a minimum distance from any property line and should be at least one-and-one-quarter (1.25) times the height of such structures and shall be subject to a Special Exception Permit under the provisions of Article 8 of these Regulations. 
§3.2.7 Coverage 
The aggregate coverage of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the lot. 

§ 3.3 Residential and Farming District 3 (RF-3) 
§3.3.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §3.3 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Residential and Farming District 3 (“RF-3 District”). 
§3.3.2 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§3.3.3 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses permitted in an RF-3 District shall be the same as those permitted in RF-1 District, subject to the same restrictions described in §3.1 and other provisions of these Regulations as applicable. 
§3.3.4 Lot Area and Bulk Standards 
A. 	Each lot shall have a minimum area of three (3) acres (130,680 square feet), shall be of such shape that a square with two-hundred (200) feet on each side will fit on the lot and shall have a frontage of two-hundred-fifty (250) feet or more on a public street. In computing area of land necessary to meet zoning requirements, no more than thirty percent (30%) of the minimum required lot area may include lands under water and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the minimum required lot area may include wetland soils and shall be considered as part of the lot area requirements. Land area necessary to comply with minimum lot area requirements must be contiguous and not separated by environmentally constrained lands. 
B. 	In the case of subdivision or resubdivision of land in accordance with a subdivision plan and all applicable requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe, the minimum area, lot frontage and/or width of any lot in said subdivision may be reduced by the Commission in accordance with the provisions for Cluster Subdivision provided for in the Town of Monroe’s Subdivision Regulations. 
§3.3.5 Setback 
A. 	No building or other structure shall extend within less than fifty (50) feet of any front lot line, nor within thirty (30) feet of any side or rear lot line. 
B. 	Any structure housing horses and livestock shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
C. 	Any structure housing male poultry or more than twelve (12) female poultry shall be located not less than one-hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
D. 	Any structure housing twelve (12) or fewer female poultry shall be located not less than fifty 
(50) feet from any property line and may not be erected between the principal structure and the street. 
E. 	Horses, livestock and/or poultry manure piles and/or associated containers shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
F. 	Any instrument used as a satellite ground receiving station for the purpose of reception of transmitted radio, television or microwave signals, shall only be mounted on a structure or the ground and in the case of said mounting being on the ground, shall not be installed within thirty 
(30) feet of any property line, but in any case shall be installed no closer to the streetline than the closest point of setback of the dwelling to which it is accessory. All such stations when mounted on the ground shall be affixed to a permanent foundation. 
§3.3.6 Height 
A. 	No building or other structure shall exceed a height of two-and-one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
B. 	No radio or television antennae, flagpoles, farm silos, solar panels, weathervanes, cupolas, power poles and lines, weather station/recording equipment, or survey/recording equipment shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet as defined in these Regulations, inclusive of any building or structure upon which they may be erected. 
C. 	Property, structures, and services owned and maintained by the Town of Monroe shall be exempt from the provisions of §3.3.6A and B above where a height in excess of these provisions shall be necessary to perform the intended function in support of public works, administration, safety, emergency, civil services, civil defense, and education. Such structures shall be located a minimum distance from any property line and should be at least equal to one-and-one-quarter 
(1.25) times the height of such structures and shall be subject to a Special Exception Permit as set forth in Article 8 of these Regulations. 
§3.3.7 Coverage 
The aggregate coverage of all buildings and other structures on any lot shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the lot. 

§3.4 Multifamily Residence District (MFR) 
§3.4.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §3.4 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Multifamily Residence District (“MFR District”). 
An MFR District shall be established only in an area where such District will: 
A. 	Have no significant detrimental impact on the environment. 
B. 	Have a water supply provided by the utility franchised to serve the area. 
C. 	Be capable of providing safe, sanitary sewage disposal by means of a treatment plant or subsurface sewage disposal system or systems, either of which methods shall be approved by State and Local Authorities. 
D. 	Be so located that they can be served by present or projected community facilities without undue cost to the town. 
§3.4.2 General Requirements 
A. 	For the purpose of providing a balance in the distribution of housing types, the number of dwelling units contained in buildings in an MFR District designed for more than one family shall not at any point in time exceed ten percent (10%) of the number of single-family dwellings as listed on the current Grand List of the Town of Monroe as effective on October 1 of the current list year in the office of the Assessor of the Town of Monroe, but this shall in no way limit the number of single-family dwellings approved by the Commission in an MFR District, provided all other requirements of the zoning, subdivision and other applicable regulations are met. 
B. 	In an MFR District, the property shall be suitable for the long-term disposal of sanitary waste effluent without danger to public health by an environmentally suitable and legally acceptable method. 
C. 	No habitable building in a MFR District shall be occupied nor shall a permanent certificate of zoning compliance therefore be issued until such building is connected to an adequate public water supply and adequate hydrants are provided for fire protection as prescribed by the Fire Marshal. 
D. 	Where community facilities are not available or are difficult to provide for an MFR District, the Commission may reject an application unless and until there is assurance that such community facilities will be provided. 
E. 	At the time of application for an approval, the applicant should designate whether or not any dwelling unit will be held in condominium ownership under the State Unit Ownership Act. 
§3.4.3 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§3.4.4 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to the principal permitted use are allowed in an MFR District, provided that such accessory uses are for the benefit of the tenants, residents or guests living within such MFR District, including maintenance, storage and utility buildings and garages as accessory to a permitted use. 
A. 	Accessory and subordinate recreational and social facilities directly serving and to the benefit of the multifamily development community residents and their invited guests; such facilities shall be private and not open to the general public: 
B. 	Signs, as provided in Article 6 of these Regulations, which shall be limited by the sign requirements applicable to the Residential and Farming Districts. 
C. 	Conservation and open spaces. 
D. 	Off-street parking, landscaping, lighting, site utilities and similar site infrastructure improvements as regulated in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§3.4.5 Density and Dimensional Requirements 
A. 	Density 
Subject to the provisions of §3.4.2 above, the total number of dwelling units permitted within an MFR District shall not exceed: 
(1) 	
Attached single-family units: two-and-half (2.5) units per gross acre of the parcel, computed by multiplying the parcel gross acreage by two-and-half (2.5); or 

(2) 	
Detached single-family units: One (1) unit per gross acre of the parcel, computed by multiplying the parcel gross acreage by one (1). 


B. 	Minimum Parcel Size 
Minimum parcel size shall be seventy (70) acres under same ownership in a single continuous area, except that when divided by a public street the Commission may approve such MFR District, provided that not less than thirty percent (30%) of the land on one side of the street is dedicated to open space and seventy percent (70%) of the land opposite is open space. 
C. 	Frontage 
Such parcel shall have not less than two-hundred (200) feet of frontage on a public highway. 
D. 	Setbacks 
No building shall be constructed within one-hundred (100) feet of any adjoining property lines or within fifty (50) feet of any streetline.  The land area of such yards shall have landscaped area treatment as provided in Article 7 of these Regulations.  No structures, no driveways and no roadways, except where crossing a front yard for street access, and no parking areas shall be permitted in a required yard. Walkways are permitted in a required yard. 
E. 	Height 
No building shall exceed two-and-one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. A basement shall not be considered a story. 
F. 	Coverage 
The aggregate land area covered by all buildings and other structures shall not exceed twelve percent (12%) of the total area of the parcel. 
G. 	Vertical Unit Design 
In a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, there shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit or portion thereof located above another dwelling unit. 
§3.4.6 Distribution of Unit Sizes 
A. 	In buildings containing more than one dwelling unit: 
(1) 	
At least sixty percent (60%) of the total number of multi-family units shall be limited to one bedroom, with: 

(a) 	
A maximum of four (4) rooms containing a minimum of nine-hundred-fifty (950) square feet of living area; and 

(b) 	
A maximum of three (3) rooms containing a minimum of seven-hundred-fifty (750) square feet of living area shall be constructed for a minimum ten percent (10%) of the total number of units. 



(2) 	
Not more than forty percent (40%) of the total number of multi-family units shall be limited to two (2) bedrooms with a maximum of five (5) rooms containing a minimum of one-thousand-two-hundred (1,200) square feet of living area. 


B. 	"Living floor area" shall be that area within the perimeter walls of the dwelling unit devoted to the exclusive use of the occupant and shall not include balconies, porches or other spaces outside the dwelling unit. 
§3.4.7 Separation of Units 
A. 	Not more than six (6) dwelling units shall be contained within the enclosing walls of a building, but this shall not prevent the use of a garage or carport structure from connecting two (2) buildings provided that the opposing wall has no windows.  Walls with windows in a building shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from an opposing wall without windows and not less than fifty (50) feet from an opposing wall with windows. 
B. 	A garage or carport may be attached to a building wall without windows on the first floor. Where such garage or carport projects beyond the building wall or is detached, the floor area shall not be less than ten (10) feet from any building wall and shall be screened with a fifty percent (50%) solid wall or screening with the top six (6) feet above grade and the bottom not more than two (2) feet above the garage floor level. 
C. 	The scale of buildings shall be compatible with the scale of residential buildings in the town. No building facade shall have a continuous surface exceeding fifty (50) feet in length without a horizontal offset from grade to eaves of at least two (2) feet, and the plane of rooflines shall be similarly broken. 
§3.4.8 Open Space Requirements 
A. 	Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the gross area of the parcel shall be designated as and shall remain as open space in perpetuity, and such area may be developed only for open space and recreational uses. No less than fourteen percent (14%) of such open space land shall be used for passive recreation, park or playground areas. This open space shall be located where approved by the Commission in accordance with its policy and criteria for the location of open space, shall be dedicated to recreation and open space. Maintenance of said open space shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property if held in single ownership, or of a homeowners’ association, if the lots and/or units are sold to individual owners. 
B. 	Open space may be retained in private ownership for the public good by an organization, such as a land trust, provided there is proper assurance that the land will remain as open space. 
(1) 	
Open space may be retained in private ownership, provided an organization is formed prior to the sale or leasing of any land in an MFR District, consisting of all the landowners therein, each having an undivided interest in and responsibility for the costs of maintenance of all such private open space land. 

(2) 	
In the case of private open space land developed with recreation facilities, including a golf, swimming or tennis club, the corporation owning such land shall make available to all residents of an MFR District such recreational facilities, subject, as applicable, to payment of normal fees or charges by persons using such facilities. 

(3) 	
No privately owned open space in an MFR District shall be sold or the ownership thereof transferred until after the Town of Monroe has been given the right to purchase such land and any facilities thereon. 

(4) 	
No special exception approval shall be granted until private open space disposition has been documented in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and has been approved by the Commission and filed in the land records of the Town of Monroe. 

(5) 	
Any recreational open space or passive open space shall be permanently dedicated to such use by appropriate covenants and restrictions so as to prohibit the use thereof for any other purpose whatsoever in perpetuity. Land to be used as public or private open space shall be left in condition for the purpose intended.  Wooded and brook areas shall be left natural, where appropriate. All debris and solid waste shall be removed. 

(6) 	
A site improvement plan shall be prepared for all public and private open space. Except as otherwise permitted in writing by the Commission, there shall be no depositing, dumping or storage of waste or other natural or man-made materials, supplies or equipment on any land designated as open space. No work, farming, gardening, clearing, landscaping, removal or filling shall be done, nor shall the existing natural characteristics of open space land be altered from its original condition, until a site improvement plan, prepared by a competent professional person, has been approved by the Commission. 


§3.4.9 Off-Street Parking 
A. 	Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 6 of these Regulations, parking spaces for not less than two cars per dwelling unit shall be provided off the public streets; at least fifty percent (50%) of such spaces shall be in a garage or in a garage within a residential building. 
B. 	Parking of motor vehicles outdoors shall be limited to operable registered passenger vehicles only, but this shall not limit the parking of other vehicles of residents in a roofed building or structure having solid walls and a garage door.  No parking spaces shall be located in a required front yard facing a public street, and all parking spaces visible from a public street shall be screened with landscaping.  Parking areas and access driveways or roadways shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from a principal building, except as provided in §3.4.9A of these Regulations. Parking areas containing more than 40 car spaces shall have two access driveways. Parking areas shall have a permanent all-weather surface, be properly drained, provide for stormwater quality control, include line striping and comply with the requirements set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
C. 	Not more than twenty (20) dwelling units or more than forty (40) off-street parking spaces will be permitted off a permanent public dead-end street or on a private dead-end street or driveway on the lot. 
§3.4.10 Utilities and Improvements 
A. 	Water Supply 
(1) 	
Water from a public utility source shall be installed, including all pump station or valve pressure reduction equipment, hydrant and supply system appurtenances, without cost to the Town, to serve all buildings requiring same in an MFR District, in conformance with the rules and regulations of the utilities having jurisdiction. 

(2) 	
Adequate water pressure shall be provided to address all local, State and Federal requirements for domestic pressure and fire suppression. 


B. 	Sewerage System 
(1) 	
All buildings shall be served by an environmentally suitable sanitary waste treatment and disposal system that conforms to all applicable requirements of local, State and Federal law and shall be certified by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer.  The sanitary waste treatment and disposal system must be approved for construction by all relevant Federal, State and local authorities prior to the issuance of the written zoning certification needed for a building permit. All necessary permits for the discharge of wastewater shall be obtained and presented to the Commission or its authorized agent prior to the issuance of a final Zoning Certificate of Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy. 

(2) 	
Statement of ownership. A statement of ownership of the sewerage system and treatment plant shall be filed in Monroe Land Records, the office of the Town Planning and Zoning Department, and the Town of Monroe Water Pollution Control Authority.  At any time said ownership changes, a revised statement of ownership noting said changes shall be filed with the above offices. 

(3) 	
The system shall be operated and maintained at the expense of the owner(s) of said system.  This includes all costs of material, engineering, consultants, labor (full salaries, including all fringe benefits) and any other associated costs.  All costs are the sole expense of the owner and none shall be the obligation of the town. 

(4) 	
In the case where there is a community septic system serving more than one building, the community septic system must meet all the requirements of State of Connecticut General Statutes, §7-245 through §7-273u, as amended, and the regulations and requirements of the Monroe Water Pollution Control Authority. An agreement for use of the community septic system shall be executed and recorded in the Monroe Land Records prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for Building Permits. 


C. Sidewalks 
Sidewalks shall be provided, as required by the Commission, to assure safe pedestrian travel between buildings and from buildings to off-street visitor parking, recreational or community facilities, mail delivery pickup facilities, and to bus stops. 
D. Trash Collection and Removal 
(1) 	
Trash collection points and/or trash storage areas within enclosed individual garages, or similar areas, shall be provided throughout the site in locations and enclosures approved by the Commission and shall be shown on the Site Plan of development. 

(2) 	
Dumpsters shall be appropriately enclosed and screened. 

(3) 	
Collection points shall be regularly maintained and kept free of all loose and/ or accumulated material. Receptacles for deposit shall be kept tightly closed at all times to minimize the effect on public safety and health. 

(4) 	
Maintenance and removal of trash and garbage shall be the sole responsibility of the owners, or their designated representative, however, in no case shall removal by a refuse collector, duly licensed, take place on a frequency of less than once a week.  Methods of collection and removal shall be subject to regular inspection by the Health Department of the Town of Monroe. 

(5) 	
Provisions for recycled materials shall be included in trash collection points where applicable and shall comply with all of the other requirements of trash removal. 


E. 	Mailboxes 
Mailbox delivery structures/facilities and adequate access for mail pick-up shall be provided in a location(s) approved by the Commission and shall be shown on the Site Plan. 
§3.4.11 Statement of Satisfactory Completion 
Upon completion of all construction including sanitary sewer systems, storm drainage, roads, parking buildings, structures and recreational facilities, the owner/developer shall provide the Commission, the Town Engineer and the Water Pollution Control Authority, when applicable, with the following: 
A. 	Reproducible "As-Built" plans of all improvements in a form satisfactory to the Town Planner and Town Engineer. 
B. 	Copies of all permits and/or documentation issued by or submitted to any and all governmental agencies and officials in connection with the review or approval of the sanitary waste treatment and disposal system, including but not limited to "As-Built" plans, including certifications of State of Connecticut licensed professional engineer(s), licensed land surveyors, licensed architects, licensed landscape architects and/or other licensed professional where applicable. 
§3.4.12 Approval and Execution 
A. 	In order to ensure the orderly development by staging construction of an MFR District over a period not to exceed five years, the Commission may limit the number of building permits issued in one year to not over one-third (1/3) of the total number of units approved in the overall Site Plan. 
B. 	The Commission's approval of a proposed MFR District shall be treated solely as an approval of the concept shown on the Site Plan submitted with the application.  The approval shall not be deemed to authorize the construction of any improvements shown on the Site Plan.  Neither the Commission nor its authorized agent shall issue the written certification necessary for the issuance of a building permit until the applicant has submitted adequate documentation that the proposed sanitary waste treatment and disposal system, water supply and other utilities have been approved by all governmental agencies or authorities having jurisdiction thereof. 

§3.5 Age Restricted Residence (ARR) District 
§3.5.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §3.5 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified Age Restricted Residence District (ARR) District. 
A. 	An ARR District shall be established only in an area where the uses meet the following conditions: 
(1) 	
Will have no significant detrimental impact on the environment. 

(2) 	
Will have a water supply provided by the utility franchised to serve the area. 

(3) 	
Will be established only from lands presently zoned Residential and Farming (RF-1, RF-2 and RF-3 District), which lands shall upon rezoning be required to be a single contiguous lot owned in fee simple with frontage as required herein on a Major Arterial, Minor Arterial or Collector Road as identified in the 2010 Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development, as may be amended from time to time. 


B. 	Relation to Connecticut General Statutes. The Unit Ownership Act, Chapter 825 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall continue to govern residential condominiums in the Town of Monroe created prior to 1984, except to the extent Chapter 828 of the Connecticut General Statutes prevail as set forth therein or as may be amended from time to time. 
C. 	For the purpose of this regulation, “age restricted” shall be a deed restricted dwelling unit where one or more of the occupants is fifty-five (55) years of age or older.  There shall be no permanent residents eighteen (18) years of age or younger for more than three (3) months in any consecutive twelve (12) month period.  Such dwellings shall comply with all State and Federal regulations pertaining to housing for persons fifty-five (55) years and older.  All dwelling units shall be restricted in use in accordance with the requirements of these Zoning Regulations by restrictive covenant, the required residential condominium declaration and condominium bylaws. The residential condominium association shall provide evidence to the Town of Monroe Planning and Zoning Department on an annual basis, no later than January 31st of each year, compliance with the provisions of this section. 
D. 	Ownership. The ownership of all dwelling units in an ARR District shall be by residential condominium.  No permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued until the Commission is in receipt of a copy of the condominium documents for the project, including the Public Offering Statement, Declaration and By-Laws, as approved and recorded in the Monroe Land Records, which documents shall provide provisions limiting occupancy of units to occupancy where one or more occupants is fifty-five (55) years of age or older, provisions establishing a budget to insure maintenance of all private access driveways, parking areas and all buildings, utilities and site improvements on the project and other applicable provisions insuring that all requirements of the ARR District as set forth in these Regulations are adhered to by the dwelling unit owners and condominium association. 
E. 	Organization. Organization of condominium association or unit owners’ association shall be pursuant to CGS §47-243A.  Such association shall be organized no later than the date the first condominium unit in the residential condominium is conveyed. The membership of the association at all times shall consist exclusively of all condominium unit owners. The association shall have an executive board.  The association shall be organized as a business or nonstock corporation, trust, partnership or unincorporated association. 
F. 	No individual condominium unit may be subdivided into two or more units. 
G. Bylaws. Bylaws of the condominium association shall: 
(1) 	
Provide the number of members of the executive board and the titles of the officers of the association. 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified in the residential condominium declaration, provide for election by either the executive board or the unit owners of a president, treasurer, secretary and any other officers of the association the bylaws specify. 

(3) 	
Specify the qualifications, powers and duties, terms of office and manner of electing and removing executive board members and officers and filling vacancies. 

(4) 	
Specify the powers the executive board or officers may delegate to other persons or to a managing agent. 

(5) 	
Specify the officers who may prepare, execute, certify and record amendments to the residential condominium declaration on behalf of the condominium association. 

(6) 	
Specify a method for amending the bylaws. 

(7) 	
Contain any provision necessary to satisfy requirements in this chapter or the residential condominium declaration concerning meetings, voting, quorums and other activities of the condominium association. 

(8) 	
Provide for any matter required by the law of the State of Connecticut and Town of Monroe, which is not inconsistent thereto, to appear in the bylaws of organizations of the same type as the association. 

(9) 	
Provide for the establishment, publishing and adherence to policies and procedures that demonstrate clear intent and implementation of providing for housing for persons fifty-five (55) years or older. Proposed residents must be required to sign a notarized affidavit and present verification of their age. 

(10) 	
Contain procedures and policies for the verification of the age restricted occupancy of individual condominium units. 

(11) 	
Subject to the residential condominium declaration, the bylaws may provide for any other necessary or appropriate matters including matters that could be adopted as a rule or regulation of the residential condominium. 


§3.5.2 General Requirements 
A. 	For the purpose of providing a balance in the distribution of housing types throughout the Town, the total number of permitted age restricted dwelling units within all areas in the Town zoned ARR District shall not at any point in time exceed six percent (6%) of the total number of single-family dwellings within the combined RF-1, RF-2 and RF-3 Districts, as listed on the current Grand List of the Town of Monroe as effective on October 1 of the current list year in the office of the Assessor of the Town of Monroe at the time an application is filed with the Commission. 
B. 	No habitable building in an ARR District shall be occupied nor shall a permanent certificate of zoning compliance be issued until such building is connected to an approved and operational adequate water supply, sewage disposal system, central utilities, and adequate fire protection measures are installed and operational as prescribed by the Fire Marshal. 
§3.5.3 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§3.5.4 Accessory Uses 
A. 	Accessory maintenance and utility uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to the principal use provided such accessory uses are for the benefit of the residents living within the related ARR District development property. 
B. 	Signs, as provided in Article 6, which shall be limited by the sign requirements applicable to residential and farming districts. 
C. 	A caretaker residence, which residence shall count as one of the total dwellings permitted but is not subject to the age restrictions.  Said dwelling shall contain a maximum of three (3) bedrooms and shall be designed and located to be integral with the age restricted dwellings. 
D. 	Indoor and outdoor passive and active recreation facilities solely for the residents of the particular ARR District development and their guests, including such facilities as a swimming pool, racquet sport court, clubhouse or meeting room, pavilion, gazebo or other similar condominium association community center facility. 
E. 	Off-street parking, landscaping, lighting, site utilities and similar site infrastructure improvements as regulated in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§3.5.5 Density and Dimensional Requirements 
A. Density 
(1) 	
Attached age restricted dwellings. Subject to the provisions of §3.5.2A above, the total number of attached age restricted dwelling units permitted within an ARR District development shall not exceed five (5) units per gross acre of the parcel, computed by multiplying the parcel gross acreage by five (5). 

(2) 	
Detached age restricted dwellings.  Subject to the to the provisions of §3.5.2A above, the total number of detached age restricted dwelling units permitted within an ARR District development shall not exceed two (2) units per gross acre of the lot, computed by multiplying the parcel gross acreage by two (2). 


B. Minimum Lot Area 
Minimum lot area shall be not less than ten (10) acres contained within a single contiguous fee-simple lot. 
C. Minimum Lot Frontage 
Such lot shall have not less than one-hundred twenty-five (125) feet of street frontage on a public highway as set forth in §3.5.1(A)(3) above. 
D. Setbacks 
(1) 	Minimum setbacks. No building or structure shall be constructed except in conformance with the following minimum standards: 
Age Restricted Residence District Minimum Setbacks Minimum Standard Attached Dwellings Detached Dwellings 
Front Yard 50 feet 50 feet 
Side Yard 100 feet 50 feet 
Rear Yard 100 feet 50 feet 
From Internal Access Driveway 25 feet 25 feet 
From Sidewalk Dwelling Side 20 feet 20 feet 

(2) 	
The lands within the minimum required setback yard areas shall have a landscape treatment as required in §6.2 of these Regulations, including an adequately maintained landscape buffer from adjoining properties. 

(3) 	
No access driveway or walkway, except crossing to provide access to the abutting public street, and no building, structure or parking area shall be permitted in a required minimum front yard. 

(4) 	
In no case shall parking be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of a side or rear property line or a required minimum landscape buffer area, whichever is greater. 

(5) 	
Subsurface sewage disposal systems may be located in a required setback area, subject to the following: 

(a) 	
All applicable landscape buffer requirements shall be provided, except the Commission may permit an encroachment into a required landscape buffer provided it can be shown that such encroachment is the minimum necessary and an alternative landscape buffer plan is provided to offset any such encroachment. 

(b) 	
Notwithstanding Subsection (a) above, a minimum setback of 10 feet from any property line shall be provided. 




E. 	Height 
No building or structure shall exceed two-and-one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
F. 	Coverage 
(1) 	
Building coverage.  The aggregate land area covered by all buildings and other structures shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total area of the lot. 

(2) 	
Site Coverage.  The aggregate land area covered by all buildings, structures and other impervious surfaces shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total area of the lot. 


§3.5.6 Floor Area 
A. 	Age restricted attached dwelling units. A minimum net floor area (living space) per age restricted attached dwelling unit shall not be less than the following: 
(1) 	
Studio/Efficiency Unit: Five-hundred (500) square feet. 

(2) 	
One-Bedroom Unit: Seven-hundred-fifty (750) square feet. 

(3) 	
Two-Bedroom Unit: One-thousand (1,000) square feet. 


B. 	Age restricted detached dwelling units. A minimum gross floor area (living space) per age restricted detached dwelling unit shall not be less than one-thousand (1,000) square feet, nor contain more than three (3) bedrooms each. 
C. 	“Floor area (living space)” shall not include unfinished interior spaces or garages or exterior balconies, porches, decks or other spaces outside the individual dwelling unit. 
§3.5.7 Separation of Units 
A. 	Age restricted attached dwelling units. 
(1) 	
Not more than six dwelling units shall be contained within the enclosing walls of a single building. 

(2) 	
The minimum separation distance between buildings shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 

(3) 	
Each individual dwelling unit shall have its own separate entrance/exit leading directly to the outside.  No more than two such entrances/exits shall be within thirty (30) feet of each other. 


B. 	Age restricted detached dwelling units. The minimum separation distance between principal buildings shall be thirty-five (35) feet as measured from the closet point of each building, except certain architectural features as set forth in §1.9.9(B)(1), (2) and (3) of these Regulations may project a maximum of two (2) feet into said separation area. 
C. 	The architectural design, scale and mass of buildings and structures, including materials, colors, rooflines and elevations shall be compatible with the design, character and scale of residential buildings in the town.  No building facade shall have a continuous surface exceeding fifty (50) feet in length without a horizontal offset from grade to eaves of at least two feet. 
D. 	All buildings and structures shall be designed and grouped in such a manner as to provide adequate light, air, ventilation and privacy for all habitable rooms and exterior extensions of the interior living area such as balconies, porches, decks and patios. 
E. 	Buildings shall be designed to be compatible with the functions that they will perform, in relationship to existing topography and to minimize adverse visual effects on the surrounding area. 
F. 	All mechanical equipment and refuse/recycling containers shall be screened from view. Individual refuse/recycling facilities shall be stored within a structure except on day of pickup. Centralized refuse/recycling collection areas shall be maintained and conveniently located for all groups of units.  The collection areas shall be properly enclosed, screened and supplied with all covered receptacles. 
G. 	A centralized mailbox location and structure shall be provided with sufficient parking or automobile standing area separated from the internal access driveway by a landscaped island traffic control islands or other similar buffer. 
§3.5.8 Off-Street Parking 
A. 	Off-street parking for age restricted attached and detached dwellings units shall be provided in accordance with the standards contained in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
B. 	The location of visitor spaces shall be distributed evenly throughout the development to ensure proximity to each dwelling unit. 
C. 	Accessory facilities: the Commission shall require an appropriate number of additional off-street parking spaces for accessory uses, buildings, structures and recreation facilities. Such additional spaces shall be located in direct proximity to said accessory facilities. 
D. 	A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all minimum required dwelling unit parking spaces shall be in individual or common garages. Garages shall not be converted to living habitable space and no garage shall be configured as a work room, storage area or similar to preclude its use for parking of passenger vehicles. Off-street parking spaces in front of individual dwelling unit garages may be counted as an exterior space. Parking of motor vehicles outdoors shall be limited to operable registered passenger vehicles only. 
E. 	No parking spaces shall be located in a required front yard facing a public street, and all parking spaces visible from a public street shall be screened with fencing and landscaping.  There shall be no parking permitted on internal access driveways, curbs, sidewalks or lawn areas.  All parking shall be in designated parking spaces as approved by the Commission. 
F. 	Parking areas containing more than forty (40) parking spaces shall have two (2) access driveways.  Parking areas shall have a permanent all-weather surface and shall be properly drained with a maximum grade of five percent (5%). 
G. 	On-site parking shall also be in conformance with the requirements set forth in §6.1.13 through §6.1.17 of these Regulations. 
H. 	The parking and storage of recreational vehicles, boats, campers, ATV and other similar vehicles shall comply with the standards of §1.9.2D of these Regulations. The location of any such parking and storage shall be designated on the development plans and approved by the Commission, including the required screening thereof. 
I. 	Maintenance equipment and vehicles if maintained by the ARR development shall be stored and parked in an enclosed building. 
§3.5.9 Utilities and Improvements 
A. 	Water Supply 
(1) 	
Water for all facilities in an ARR development shall be served by a public utility source. 

(2) 	
Adequate water pressure shall be provided to address all local and federal requirements for domestic pressure and fire suppression. 

(3) 	
All water supply facilities and extension of water mains to the site shall be constructed, maintained and operated at no cost to the Town of Monroe. 


B. Sewerage System 
(1) 	
The ARR development shall be served by a Subsurface Sewage Disposal System (SSDS) or an On-site Wastewater Renovation System (OWRS) in conformance with all Federal, State and Local laws, standards and regulations. 

(2) 	
All sewage system facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated at no cost to the Town of Monroe. 

(3) 	
The SSDS or OWRS shall be owned by the residential condominium association, and as such, the residential condominium association shall be responsible for its operation and maintenance in conformance with all Federal, State and Local laws, standards and regulations.  The ownership and responsibility shall be incorporated in the residential condominium declaration. 


C. Pedestrian Walkways 
(1) 	
Walkways shall be provided at the Commission’s discretion. 

(2) 	
Walkways shall be provided at locations as required and accepted by the Commission, to assure safe pedestrian travel between buildings and from buildings to off-street visitor parking, recreational or community facilities, mail delivery pick-up facilities, bus stops, and other site areas as determined appropriate by the Commission. 

(3) 	
Walkways shall not be pitched at a slope greater than five (5) percent.  The use of steps on a sidewalk is prohibited unless an ADA compliant alternate access is also provided. 

(4) 	
Walkways shall have a minimum of five feet clear and unobstructed width. 

(5) 	
Walkways shall be constructed of concrete, pavers set in concrete, or other similar materials (asphalt shall not be permitted), and shall be ADA complaint. 

(6) 	
Cross walks shall be provided at appropriate driveway access intersections and other appropriate locations. 


D. Access Driveways 
(1) 	
There shall be provided a safe and convenient system of internal access driveways, individual unit driveways, parking areas and pedestrian walks, with due consideration given in planning such facilities to the needs of the physically handicapped and aged. 

(2) 	
The access driveways and other related development facilities shall remain private and shall be constructed, maintained and operated at no cost to the Town of Monroe. 

(3) 	
Internal access driveways shall comply with the “commercial” standards set forth in Chapter 260, Driveway Construction of the Code of the Town of Monroe, as amended from time to time.  Where an internal driveway intersects with a public highway, there shall be a minimum pavement width of twenty four (24) feet of a wearing surface course consisting of bituminous concrete or equivalent surface treatment in accordance with Town standards for a distance of fifty (50) feet from the intersection. 

(4) 	
Internal access driveway(s) shall be designed for safe and easy circulation of traffic within the development. Driveways shall be laid out with attention to the natural contours of the land and provide easy access for all emergency vehicles. 

(5) 	
No internal access driveway segment shall be greater in length than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet without two (2) internal through access (not a “dead end”) driveway connections/alternatives or an emergency accessway.  The emergency accessway shall be suitable for use by emergency vehicles. The emergency accessway shall be not less than twenty (20) feet wide throughout its length.  The emergency accessway need not be paved with an impervious surface.  However, it shall be hard surfaced and accessible by apparatus.  The emergency accessway shall be clear and maintained at all times so that there are no impediments to emergency vehicle use.  Emergency accesssways shall be specifically approved by the Police and Fire Departments. 

(6) 	
In addition to the standards set forth in Chapter 260, Driveway Construction of the Code of the Town of Monroe, as amended from time to time, the design criteria for internal access driveways shall be in compliance with the Connecticut Department of Transportation 2003 Highway Design Manual, as amended from time to time; the 2004 AASHTO Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, as amended from time to time; and the following design criteria: 

(7) 	
As per evaluation of proposed conditions, the location, type, and amount of curbing required within an ARR development shall be at the discretion of the Commission. 

(8) 	
Appropriate directional and traffic signage shall be provided throughout the ARR development, including stop signs and stop bars at internal access driveway intersections and intersections with public roads. 


ITEM  CRITERIA  
Speed Limit  15 mph (posted with proper signs)  
Design Speed  20 miles per hour  
Minimum Horizontal Curve Radius  80 feet  
Minimum Length of Vertical Curve  Length: 8.6(A)  (A = algebraic difference in grades)  
Minimum Stopping Sight Distance Internal to the Site  115 feet  
Minimum Sight Distance at Intersections Internal to the Site  All approach stop controlled: 70 feet Stop control for minor approach: • Left Turn: 225 feet • Right Turn: 135 feet  
Cross Slope  Three-eighths (3/8) inches per foot.  
Subbase  Eight (8) inches of gravel.  
Base Course  Four (4) inches of processed aggregate.  
Surface Course  Three (3) inches of asphalt in two (2) courses.  
Guide Rail  Per guidelines set forth in the State Traffic Manual, as updated; per Best Management Practices; and per Town of Monroe Standard No. 1 “Typical Roadway Sections.”  
Shoulder  Three (3) foot stabilized area adjacent to pavement with a half (1/2) inch per foot slope.  

(9) 	Individual unit driveways 
(a) 	
Each individual unit driveway serving a dwelling unit shall have a width of no less than ten (10) feet.  Individual unit driveways serving more than one dwelling unit shall be no less than sixteen (16) feet and no greater than twenty (20) feet wide. Common driveway courts, landscaping , fencing, walls and other such measures shall be incorporated to minimize the visual appearance of such shared individual driveways from the internal access driveway, abutting dwelling units and adjacent yard areas.  All individual unit driveways shall not contain grades no less than one percent (1%) or greater than five percent (5%). 

(b) 	
All individual unit driveways shall intersect only with an internal access driveway. No individual unit driveway shall intersect directly with a public highway unless the unit and driveway were constructed prior to 1960 and the unit is and remains a detached single-family residence. 


E. Stormwater Management 
There shall be provided a coordinated and comprehensive system of stormwater collection and treatment addressing water quality and quantity issues prepared by a Civil Engineer, licensed in the State of Connecticut. 
(1) 	
The proposed development shall be planned so that there will be no increase in the post development peak rate of flow from the site for each 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, 25-year, noting that a 50-year and/or 100-year design storm may be required where warranted by downstream site conditions, the size of the development, and/or the size of the drainage basin. 

(2) 	
All data shall be analyzed using Natural Resource Conservation Service (formerly SCS) TR­55 and TR 20 methodology.  Design storms shall be Type III, 24-hour duration.  The Rational methodology may be used for evaluation of conveyance systems in some situations as approved by the Town Engineer. 

(3) 	
The analysis shall include existing and proposed conditions watershed runoff maps; narrative of activity; summary of changes to impervious areas; tabulation of design input values including land use, curve number and time of concentration; graphical hydrograph and routing diagrams for each watershed subarea and detention facility; and tabular summary of existing and proposed condition peak rates of runoff.  Evaluation of upstream and downstream conditions shall also be included. 

(4) 	
Percolation tests and test pits must be conducted in the location of detention facilities. The test shall be conducted prior to design and the location shall be shown on the plans. The percolation tests shall be conducted as defined by the Connecticut Health Code and must be in the soil layer below the detention facilities.  The tests shall be certified by a Civil Engineer, licensed in the State of Connecticut. 

(5) 	
Maximum infiltration is encouraged.  A minimum separation distance of 18 inches must be achieved between the bottom of the detention facilities and any restrictive layer (ie; Redoximorphic features, ledge or other restrictive layer) as determined by the soils tests unless an underdrain system is proposed. No exfiltration shall be included in the computations of the detention facilities. 

(6) 	
All detention or retention facilities shall have an emergency spillway sized to safely pass a 100-year design storm in a controlled manner without eroding the outlet works. 


F. Other Site Utilities 
(1) 	
Underground utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to water supply, electric, natural gas, telephone, internet and cable television service, shall be placed underground. 

(2) 	
Fire protection.  Provisions shall be provided for proper access for fire-fighting equipment and personnel and include facilities and water supply for fire-fighting purposes as may be determined adequate and approved by the Commission based upon the recommendations and requirements of the Fire Marshal. 

(3) 	
Installation and extension of all site utilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated at no cost to the Town of Monroe. 


G. Landscaping and Lighting 
Landscaping and lighting shall comply with 6.2 of these regulations. 

§3.6 Recreational Residence District (RR) 
§3.6.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §3.6 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Recreational Residence District (“RR District”). 
A. An RR District shall be established only in an area where such district will: 
(1) 	
Have no significant detrimental impact on the environment. 

(2) 	
Have a water supply provided by the utility franchised to serve the area. 

(3) 	
Be so located that it can be served by present or projected community facilities without undue cost to the town. 


§3.6.2 General Requirements 
A. 	For the purpose of providing a balance in the distribution of housing types, the number of building lots in an RR District shall not at any point in time exceed ten percent (10%) of the number of single-family dwellings as listed on the current Grand List of the Town of Monroe as effective on October 1 of the current list year in the office of the Assessor of the Town of Monroe. 
B. 	No habitable building in an RR District shall be occupied nor shall a permanent certificate of zoning compliance therefore be issued until such building is connected to an adequate public water supply and adequate hydrants are provided for fire protection as prescribed by the Fire Marshal. 
§3.6.3 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§3.6.4 Accessory Uses 
A. 	Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to the principal use are allowed in an RR District, provided such accessory uses are for the benefit of the tenants, residents or guests living within such RR District. 
B. 	A country club, golf club or a clubhouse facility. 
C. 	Maintenance, storage and utility buildings and garages as accessory to or required by a permitted use. 
D. 	Signs, as provided in Article 6, which shall be limited by the sign requirements applicable to Residential and Farming Districts. 
E. 	Off-street parking, landscaping, lighting, site utilities and similar site infrastructure improvements as regulated in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§3.6.5 Density and Dimensional Requirements 
A. 	Density 
Subject to the provisions of §3.6.2A of these Regulations, the total number of single-family building lots and/or dwelling units permitted within an RR District shall not exceed one (1) unit per net acre of the parcel if the parcel was conventionally subdivided. 
B. Minimum Parcel Size 
Minimum parcel size shall be twenty-five (25) acres under same ownership in one (1) contiguous area. 
C. Frontage 
Such parcel shall have not less than two-hundred (200) feet of frontage on a public highway. No lot shall have less than ninety (90) feet of frontage on a public highway. 
D. Lot Size 
The minimum area of each individual building lot shall be three-quarters-of-one-acre (3/4 acres or 32,670 square feet) for each RR District to be established. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the total area of the lot area may be under water, and no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot may consist of wetlands as defined by the governing wetland authority. 
E. Height 
No building shall exceed two-and-one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. A basement shall not be considered a story. 
§3.6.6 Minimum Floor Area 
Each single-family detached building shall have a floor area of not less than one-thousand-one-hundred (1,100) square feet. 
§3.6.7 Setback of Units 
No building or other structure shall extend within less than thirty (30) feet of any front lot line; within less than twenty-five (25) feet of an RF-1 District; within less than thirty (30) feet of an RF-2 District or RF-3 District; nor within fifteen (15) feet of any side or rear lot line. 
§3.6.8 Open Space Requirements 
A. Amount Required 
(1) 	
Not less than thirty percent (30%) of the gross area of the parcel shall be designated as and shall remain in open space, and such space may be developed only for recreational uses.  Such land shall be located where approved by the Commission and shall be dedicated to recreation and open space by such covenants or restrictions as may be required by the Commission. 

(2) 	
Not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the parcel shall be conveyed to the Town of Monroe as open space. 


B. Ownership 
Recreational open space or passive open space maybe retained in private ownership for the public good provided there is proper assurance that the land will remain as open space. 
(1) 	
Open space may be retained in private ownership, provided an organization is formed prior to the sale or leasing of any land in the RR District, consisting of all the landowners therein, each having an undivided interest in and responsibility for the costs of maintenance of all such private open space land. 

(2) 	
In the case of private open space land developed with recreation facilities, including a golf, swimming or tennis club, the corporation owning such land shall make available to all residents of the Town of Monroe such recreational facilities, subject, as applicable, to payment of normal fees or charges by persons using such facilities. 

(3) 	
No privately owned open space in an RR District shall be sold or the ownership thereof transferred until after the Town of Monroe has been given the right to purchase such land and any facilities thereon. 

(4) 	
No special exception approval shall be granted until private open space disposition has been documented in a form satisfactory to the Commission. 

(5) 	
Any recreational open space or passive open space shall be permanently dedicated to such use by appropriate covenants and restrictions so as to prohibit the use thereof for any other purpose whatsoever in perpetuity. 


C. Open Space Plan 
A site improvement plan shall be prepared for all public and private open space.  Except as otherwise permitted in writing by the Commission, there shall be no depositing, dumping or storage of waste or other natural or man-made materials, supplies or equipment on any land designated as open space.  No work, removal or filling shall be done, nor shall the existing natural characteristics of open space land be altered from its original condition, until a site improvement plan, prepared by a competent professional person, shall have been approved by the Commission. 
(1) 	Land to be used as public or private open space shall be left in condition for the purpose intended. Undesirable growth and debris shall be removed from all such areas.  Wooded and brook areas shall be left natural, where appropriate.  Open spaces shall be graded to properly dispose of surface water and shall be seeded in a manner directed by the Commission. 
§3.6.9 Utilities and Improvements 
A. Water Supply 
Water from a public utility source shall be installed, without cost to the town, to serve all buildings requiring same in an RR District, in conformance with the rules and regulations of the utilities having jurisdiction.  A certified affidavit shall be supplied by the utility company that contractual agreement has been made to provide water. 
B. Sewerage System 
(1) 	
All buildings shall be served by an environmentally suitable sanitary waste treatment and disposal system that conforms to all applicable requirements of local, state and federal law and shall be certified by a Connecticut licensed professional engineer.  The sanitary waste treatment and disposal system must be approved for construction by all relevant Federal, State and local authorities prior to the issuance of the written zoning certification needed for a building permit.  All necessary permits for the discharge of wastewater must be obtained and presented to the Commission or its authorized agent before the final zoning certification will be issued for a certificate of occupancy 

(2) 	
A statement of ownership of the sewerage system and treatment plant shall be filed in the Monroe Land Records, the office of the Planning and Zoning Department and the Town of Monroe Water Pollution Control Authority.  At any time said ownership changes, a revised statement of ownership noting said changes shall be filed with the above offices. 

(3) 	
The system shall be operated and maintained at the expense of the owner(s) of said system.  This includes all costs of material, engineering, consultants, labor (full salaries, including all fringe benefits) and any other associated costs.  All costs are the sole expense of the owner and none shall be the obligation of the town. 

(4) 	
In the case where there is a community septic system serving more than one building, the community septic system must meet all the requirements of State of Connecticut General Statutes, §7-245 through 7-273u, as amended, and the regulations and requirements of the Monroe Water Pollution Control Authority. An agreement for use of the community septic system shall be executed and recorded in the Monroe Land Records prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for Building Permits. 


§3.6.10 Statement of Satisfactory Completion 
Upon completion of all drainage installations and associated work requiring engineering plans and specifications, the developer’s engineer shall submit a statement of satisfactory completion asserting that all engineering requirements have been met according to the plans and/or amendments submitted. This statement shall be signed by and bear the seal of the developer’s engineer, who shall be a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. 
§3.6.11 Approval and Execution 
A. 	In order to ensure the orderly development by staging construction of an RR District over a period not to exceed five (5) years, the Commission may limit the number of building permits issued in one (1) year to not over one-fourth (1/4) of the total number of units approved in the overall Site Plan. 
B. 	The applicant shall file with the Commission its request for approval of a Site Plan of development, including the following information in addition to the provisions of Article 7 of these Regulations: 
(1) 	
Boundary survey, Class A-2, related to the intersection of at least two (2) existing Town streets or State Highways, with accurate dimensions. 

(2) 	
Topography of the parcel at two (2) foot contours, based on the National Geodetic Survey. 

(3) 	
Layout of the recreational facilities and open space to be developed on the land. 

(4) 	
Layout of the approximate boundaries of each section of the overall development, showing in schematic form the approximate number of building lots to be developed in each section. 

(5) 	
Such other information or data as the Commission may deem necessary. 


C. 	Where deemed appropriate in the judgment of the Commission, the construction and development of an RR District site may be phased in sections.  The applicant shall file with the Commission its request for each section accompanied by a Site Plan of development, including the information specified in §3.6.11B of these Regulations. 
D. 	After approval of a Site Plan by the Commission, the applicant shall thereafter submit detailed maps and plans for the subdivision of each section into individual building lots.  Such maps and plans shall conform to the requirements of Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe.  All roads and subdivision improvements shall comply with said regulations. Each such section map shall conform to the approximate boundaries of the overall Site Plan, and the number of building lots in said section shall not vary more than five percent (5%) from the number shown on the overall Site Plan; provided, however, that the total number of lots as finally approved shall not exceed the total number shown on the overall Site Plan.  A public hearing may be required with respect to the approval of individual sections. 
E. 	Upon approval of the subdivision of a section into individual building lots, the applicant shall file with the Commission a bond to guarantee the completion of all roads and subdivision improvements in said section.  Said bond shall comply with the requirements of Article 7 of these Regulations. 

§3.7 Housing Opportunity District (HOD) 
§3.7.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the Housing Opportunity District HOD is: 
A. 	To comply with those portions of the Town's Plan of Conservation and Development that encourage on a long-term basis diverse housing patterns, including “starter” homes and other affordable housing. 
B. 	To encourage the construction of housing that is both affordable as defined by state statutes and is consistent with design and construction standards present in the community. 
C. 	To assist the Town in complying with the State Zoning Enabling Act, Connecticut General Statute §8-2, as amended, by adopting zoning regulations that promote housing choice and economic diversity, including housing for low and moderate income households. 
D. 	To efficiently utilize existing infrastructure and promote neighborhood planning by providing, where infrastructure support is available, a mix of housing densities, sizes, and prices. 
§3.7.2 Application of Provisions 
A. 	The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §3.7 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Housing Opportunity District (“HOD”). 
B. 	An HOD shall be established only in an area that has a water supply provided by the utility franchised to serve the area; and is capable of providing safe, sanitary sewage disposal by means of a treatment plant or subsurface sewage disposal system or systems, either of which methods shall be approved by State, regional and local authorities. 
§3.7.3 General Requirements 
No habitable building in an HOD shall be occupied nor shall a permanent certificate of zoning compliance therefore be issued until such building is connected to an adequate public water supply and adequate hydrants are provided for fire protection as prescribed by the Fire Marshal. 
§3.7.4 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§3.7.5 Accessory Uses 
A. 	Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental the principal uses are allowed in an HOD, provided that such accessory uses are for the benefit of the tenants, residents or guests living within such HOD. 
B. 	Signs, as provided in Article 6 of these Regulations, which shall be limited by the sign requirements applicable to the Residential and Farming Districts. 
C. 	Off-street parking, landscaping, lighting, site utilities and similar site infrastructure improvements as regulated in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§3.7.6 Density and Dimensional Requirements 
A. 	Density 
The total number of dwelling units permitted in an HOD shall not exceed 1.5 units per gross acre of the parcel. 
B. 	Minimum Parcel Size 
The minimum size of a parcel to be rezoned and developed as an HOD shall be not less than twenty (20) nor more than twenty-five (25) contiguous acres, under one ownership in one (1) contiguous parcel; be within two-hundred-fifty (250) feet of a street classified as a minor artery; be adjacent to existing open space; and have not less than seventy-five (750) feet frontage on a public street. 
C. 	Setbacks 
No building or other structure shall be constructed within fifty (50) feet of any front lot line; within twenty-five (25) feet of any side lot line; nor within fifty (50) feet of any rear lot line.  The land area of such yards shall have a landscaping treatment as required by Article 6 of these Regulations.  No roadways, except where crossing a front or side yard for street access, and no parking or loading areas shall be permitted in a required yard. 
D. 	Height 
No building shall exceed two-and-one-half (2½) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height. A basement shall not be considered a story. 
E. 	Coverage 
The aggregate land area covered by all buildings and other structures shall not exceed thirty-five percent (35%) of the total area of the parcel. 
§3.7.7 Separation of Units 
A. 	The distance between the exterior walls of the dwelling units in an HOD shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
B. 	The scale of buildings shall be compatible with the scale of residential buildings on adjacent properties.  No building facade shall have a continuous surface exceeding fifty (50) feet in length without a horizontal offset from grade to eaves of at least two (2) feet, and the plane of rooflines shall be similarly broken. 
§3.7.8 Open Space Requirements 
Not less than thirty percent (30%) of the gross area of a lot developed pursuant to the standards of an HOD shall be designated as and shall remain open space.  Such area may be developed only for open space or active or passive recreational uses.  Any open space subjected to a conservation easement shall preserve it for such uses in perpetuity. 
§3.7.9 Off-Street Parking 
Parking spaces for not less than two (2) cars per dwelling unit shall be provided off public streets.  Visitor parking shall be interspersed throughout the development area. 
§3.7.10 Utilities and Improvements 
A. 	Water Supply 
Water from a public utility source shall be installed, without cost to the Town, to serve all buildings requiring same in an HOD development, in conformance with the rules and regulations of the utilities having jurisdiction. 
B. 	Sewerage System 
(1) 	
A sanitary sewerage system shall be installed to serve all buildings requiring same in an HOD development, and if connected to a septic system, shall be as approved by state, regional and Town authorities as applicable and built to state and local specifications.  All sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be both constructed and operated separately and independently of each other.  The Town reserves the right to take corrective actions that are deemed necessary for public health, safety and welfare in case of malfunction of the system, the cost of such corrective action to be borne by the owners of the system. 

(2) 	
Statement of ownership. A statement of ownership of the sewage system and treatment plant shall be filed in the Monroe Land Records and the office of the Planning and Zoning Department.  At any time said ownership changes, a revised statement of ownership noting said changes shall be filed with the above offices. 

(3) 	
Should subsurface sewage disposal be employed in lieu of a treatment plant, such proposal shall demonstrate that suitable soils exist on the property for primary and reserve leaching areas in conformance with local and state health codes and criteria.  Final design documents for all such subsurface sewage disposal systems shall receive the approval of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, the Trumbull Monroe Health District and/or the Monroe Health Department.  All of the provisions of §3.6.10B(1) through (3) of these Regulations shall apply to subsurface sewage disposal systems if this option is selected by the applicant. 


C. Open Space 
(1) 	
Except as otherwise permitted in writing by the Commission, there shall be no depositing, clearing, farming, gardening, dumping or storage of waste or other natural or man-made materials, supplies or equipment on any land designated as open space. No work, removal or filling shall be done nor shall the existing natural characteristics of open space land be altered from its original condition, until a site improvement plan, prepared by a competent professional person, shall have been approved by the Commission. 

(2) 	
Land to be used as public or private open space shall be left in condition for the purpose intended.  Wooded and brook areas shall be left in their natural state. 


D. Trash Collection and Removal 
(1) 	
Trash collection points shall be provided throughout the site in locations and in enclosures approved by the Commission and shall be shown on the Site Plan of development. Collection points shall be regularly maintained and kept free of all loose and/or accumulated material. Receptacles for deposit shall be kept tightly closed at all times to minimize the effect on public safety and health. 

(2) 	
Maintenance and removal of trash and garbage shall be the sole responsibility of the owners or their designated representative. 

(3) 	
Provisions for recycled materials shall be included in trash collection points and shall comply with all of the other requirements of trash removal. 


E. Cul-de-sacs and Turnarounds 
A turnaround provided at the closed end of a cul-de-sac shall not exceed a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet. The maximum access length for roadways/driveways with no outlet shall be one-thousand (1,000) feet. 
F. Excavation 
An HOD Development must comply with regulations regarding excavation as set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§3.7.11 Statement of Satisfactory Completion 
Upon completion of all sewerage installations, drainage installations and associated work requiring engineering plans and specifications, the developer's engineer shall submit to the Commission a statement of satisfactory completion asserting that all engineering requirements have been met according to the plans and/or amendments submitted.  This statement shall be signed and bear the seal of the developer's engineer, who shall be a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut. 
§3.7.12 Additional Requirements 
The following requirements shall apply to an HOD: 
A. 	HOD Units shall be of a construction quality that is comparable to market-rate units within the development.  The final Site Plan and plan for administration of affordability rules shall identify the locations within an HOD Development of the HOD Units. 
B. 	The HOD Units shall be built on a pro rata basis as construction proceeds. 
C. 	In an HOD Development, no HOD Unit shall have less than two bedrooms, and at least thirty percent (30%) of such Units shall have three bedrooms. 
D. 	Calculation of the maximum monthly payment for an HOD Unit, so as to satisfy Connecticut General Statute §8-30g, as amended, shall utilize the area median income data as published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development: 
(1) 	
For a rental unit, as in effect on the day the lease is signed; or 

(2) 	
For an ownership unit, as in effect on the day a bond for deed or similar contract of conveyance is accepted by the seller. 


E. 	The maximum payment that the occupant for an HOD Unit shall pay shall not be greater than the amount that will preserve such unit as "affordable housing" as that term is defined in Connecticut General Statute §8-30g, as amended, and shall include the following: 
(1) 	
For rental housing, the maximum monthly housing payment shall include the cost of rent; common charges in the case of a rental in a common interest community, if the tenant is directly responsible; heat; and utility costs, including hot water and electricity, but excluding telephone and cable television. 

(2) 	
For ownership housing, the maximum monthly housing payment shall include periodic mortgage payments, based on a commercially reasonable down payment for affordable housing buyers and prevailing interest rates at the time of sale; taxes; insurance; common charges in the case of ownership of a unit in a common interest community; heat; and utility costs, including hot water and electricity, but excluding telephone and cable television. 


F. 	HOD Units shall be occupied only as a tenant's or purchasers’ principal residence.  Subletting of HOD Units shall be prohibited. 
G. 	At the same time that the market-rate units in an HOD Development are first advertised to the general public, notice of availability of the HOD Units shall be provided by advertising such availability in the real estate section of a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Monroe, and by providing notice to the Monroe Board of Selectmen, the Monroe Town Clerk, and the Commission. 
H. 	For one of every four HOD Units which become available for initial sale or rental, preference shall be given to applicants who are otherwise qualified and are Town of Monroe employees or Monroe Board of Education employees. 
I. 	Each deed or lease for an HOD Unit will contain substantially the following provision: This unit is sold or rented as an "affordable housing unit" as defined in Connecticut General Statute §8-30g, as amended, and is available only to persons or families whose income is at or below eighty percent (80%) or sixty percent (60%), as applicable, of the area median income for Monroe or the statewide median income, whichever is less, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  This development has been approved by agencies of the Town of Monroe based in part on the condition that a defined percentage of units will be preserved as affordable housing units.  The restrictions related to affordability are required by law to be strictly enforced. 
J. 	The thirty (30) year affordability period shall be calculated separately for each HOD Unit in a HOD Development, and the period shall begin on the date, as defined at closing, of occupancy of the Unit. 
K. 	In conjunction with an application for approval of a Site Plan for an HOD Development, the applicant shall submit an "Affordability Plan," which shall describe how the regulations regarding affordability will be administered.  The Plan shall include provisions for administration of and compliance with the provisions of this Section, notice procedures to the general public of the availability of affordable units, identification of those units which are to be designated affordable, procedures for verification and periodic confirmation of unit occupancy income, and compliance with affordability requirements.  Such Plan shall also include drafts of documents that will be used in the administration of the affordability restrictions and any explanations which will be provided to the unit occupants concerning such restrictions. 
L. 	A violation of the regulations contained in this Section shall not result in a forfeiture or reversion of title, but the Commission shall otherwise retain all enforcement powers granted by the Connecticut General Statutes, including the authority under §8-12, as amended, to issue notices of violation, to impose fines, and to seek injunctive relief. 
ARTICLE 4 NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

§4.1 Business District 1 (B-1) 
§4.1.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §4.1 shall apply to the alteration and use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Business District 1 (“B-1 District”). 
§4.1.2 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Lands Uses by Zoning District.” 
§4.1.3 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental to a principal use are allowed in a B-1 District, including: 
A. 	Mechanical and/or electronic amusement devices not to exceed two (2) per premises and located in a manner that their installation or use shall not constitute a hazard to public safety. 
B. 	Seasonal or special sales events provided that they occur not more than twice in a six (6) month period, but not within less than thirty (30) days of each event.  Each sales event shall not exceed a period of nine consecutive calendar days.  Such sales events are characterized as “sidewalk sales,” “Christmas Tree sales,” “holiday plant sales,” “grand opening sales,” “tent sales,” and similar. Such accessory uses may be conducted provided that the following provisions are met, subject to review of the Zoning Enforcement Officer: 
(1) 	
It is conducted by the owner(s) of the principal use(s) or business(s) on the premises. 

(2) 	
It is conducted on the premises on which the principal use(s) or business(s) are located. 

(3) 	
It is conducted during normal and reasonable business hours. 

(4) 	
The accessory use may use the front yard area but shall in no way encroach on any other yard requirement or on any road right-of-way. 

(5) 	
The accessory use and/or any temporary shelter or display fixtures shall be placed in such a manner as to not obstruct any vehicular line of sight or traffic control, any vehicular or pedestrian access or egress, or any parking or loading space required by these Regulations unless evaluated and accepted by the Commission. 

(6) 	
No sound systems shall be allowed. 


C. 	A bar/cocktail lounge is permitted only as an accessory use to a restaurant; shall occupy a space separated from the dining room area; must be located within the structure; shall have a capacity not to exceed forty percent (40%) of normal dining room seating capacity, and a standup bar with or without stools. Live entertainment, including customer dancing, is permitted. 
D. 	Outdoor storage of materials related to commercial uses: 
(1) 	
All materials to be stored outdoors shall be directly related to the principal use on the site. 

(2) 	
Outdoor storage shall comply with the bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district and related principal use. 

(3) 	
The outdoor storage area shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the principal building. 

(4) 	
Outdoor storage shall not interfere with parking, site access or on-site circulation of vehicles and pedestrians. 

(5) 	
Materials shall be stored in an environmentally safe and orderly fashion, and shall be properly secured. The contents of outdoor storage shall be temporary in nature. 

(6) 	
Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjoining properties and shall conform to landscaping and screening requirements of these Regulations. 

(7) 	
The limit or area of approved outdoor storage shall be physically delineated, controlled and contained by buildings, structures, fencing, landscaping or a combination thereof to screen said area and the contents therein. 


§4.1.4 Lot Area and Bulk Requirements for Business District 1 
No lot shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed or altered for use except in conformance with the following minimum standards: 
Schedule of Dimensional Requirements Lot Requirements B-1 
Minimum lot area  1 acre  
Minimum lot frontage  125 feet  
Minimum square*  125 x 125 feet  
Minimum front yard  50 feet  
Minimum yard  
At residential zone boundary  30 feet  
Rear and side  20 feet  
Maximum height  2 ½ stories/35 feet  
Building coverage  25%  
Minimum floor area (Effective 3-14-75]  1,400 square feet  

*Note: Each lot shall be of such shape that a square one hundred twenty-five 
(125) feet on each side can be placed entirely within the lot lines, with one (1) side parallel to and on the lot side of the street lot line. 
§4.1.5 Landscaping and Screening 
Site landscaping and screening must be provided in accordance with the landscape and screening provisions of Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§4.1.6 Parking and Loading 
A. 	Parking and loading areas shall be provided off the public streets for all vehicles using the premises and shall contain not less than the minimum space requirements of Article 6 of these Regulations. 
B. 	No parking areas or internal driveway shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from a street line, right-of-way line, or front property line, or within thirty (30) feet of a residence district. 
C. 	Parking lot driveway(s) or access aisle(s) may be located within required setbacks for the purpose of providing present or future vehicular access and circulation between adjacent parcels. 

§4.2 Business District 2 (B-2) 
§4.2.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §4.2 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Business District 2 (“B-2 District”). 
§4.2.2 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Lands Uses by Zoning District.” 
§4.2.3 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental to a principal use are allowed in a B-2 District, including: 
A. 	Accessory uses as permitted in a B-1 District. 
B. 	The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods and materials only when clearly incidental and accessory to a permitted principal retail use on the premises. 
§4.2.4 Lot Area and Bulk Dimensional Requirements for Business District 2 
No lot shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed or altered for use except in conformance with the following minimum standards: 
Schedule of Dimensional Requirements Lot Requirements B-2 
Minimum lot area 1 acre Minimum lot frontage 125 feet Minimum square* 125 x 125 feet Minimum front yard 50 feet Minimum yard 
At residential zone boundary 30 feet 
Rear and side 20 feet Maximum height 2 ½ stories/35 feet Building coverage 25% Minimum floor area 1,400 square feet 
*Note: Each lot shall be of such shape that a square one hundred twenty-five 
(125) feet on each side can be placed entirely within the lot lines, with one (1) side parallel to and on the lot side of the street lot line. 
§4.2.5 Landscaping and Screening 
Landscaping and screening requirements in the B-2 District shall be the same as those in the B-1 District, as described in §4.1.6, §6.2 and other sections of these Regulations as applicable. 
§4.2.6 Parking and Loading 
Parking and loading requirements in the B-2 District shall be the same as those in the B-1 District, as described in §4.1.7, §6.1 and other sections of these Regulations as applicable. 
§4.2.7 Uses Permitted within Minimum Front Yard Setbacks 
The following uses as may be approved by the Commission, shall be permitted within the minimum front yard setback established in §4.1.5 of these Regulations subject to all of the requirements set forth in these Regulations applicable to uses and structures in a B-2 district: 
A. 	Canopies over pump islands and adjacent areas utilized to fuel vehicles at gasoline service stations. 
B. 	Public access walks. 
C. 	Driveways and service roads for cross access only. 
D. 	Flagpoles. 
E. 	Lighting. 
F. 	Irrigation. 
G. 	Directional signage and pavement marking. 

§4.3 Industrial Districts 
§4.3.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §4.3 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Industrial District 1 (“I-1 District”), Industrial District 2 (“I-2 District”), and Industrial District 3 (“I-3 District”). 
An Industrial District shall be established only in an area where such district will: 
A. 	Have no significant detrimental impact on the environment. 
B. 	Have the capacity to provide for the onsite handling, disposal and/or storage in a safe, sanitary and harmless manner as prescribed by all applicable State, Federal or local laws, rules or regulations, of sewage, solid or liquid waste, toxic or hazardous substances, or any chemicals or by-products produced, kept, made, generated or used or to be used on the premises. In the event such sewage, solid or liquid waste, toxic or hazardous substances and materials or such chemicals and by-products as aforesaid are not to be handled, stored or disposed of on site, the manner of such handling, disposal and/or storage shall be reported including proof of compliance with all applicable State, Federal and local laws, rules and regulations. 
C. 	Must meet and continue to meet the performance standards of these Regulations. 
D. 	Be adequately protected from casualty by fire as may be determined by the Town Fire Marshal, subject to review by the Commission. 
§4.3.2 Performance Standards 
The following standards shall be considered minimal and shall apply to all uses of land, buildings and accessory uses on any premises within an I-1 District, I-2 District and I-3 District, and shall apply continuously, and failure to conform to any standard herein listed shall be construed to be a violation of these Regulations and subject to the penalties provided by law: 
A. Noise 
(1) 	The control of noise pollution is to protect residential areas surrounding Industrial Districts, as well as to protect adjoining industrial users within an industrial zone, and shall be so construed. During the hours between 7:00 am and 10:00 pm, at no point on a zone boundary between a Residential District and any Industrial District shall the radiating sound level, measured in decibels, from any operation exceed the decibel level in Column A below.  During the hours between 7:00 am and 10:00 pm, at no point less than two-hundred-fifty (250) feet from any other zoning district boundary or less than two-hundred-fifty (250) feet from any property line within an Industrial District shall the radiating sound level from any operation exceed the decibel level in Column B below: 
Maximum Permitted 
Sound Level (decibels) Octave Band Column A Column B (cycles per second) 0 –75 68 74 75 – 150 55 62 150 – 300 48 56 300 – 600 44 51 600 -1,200 40 45 1,200 -2,400 36 40 2,400 -4,800 32 36 Over 4,800 30 33 
(2) 	
In the event of any conflict during tests for noise level between Columns A and B, Column A shall have precedence. 

(3) 	
The above sound levels in both columns shall be reduced by five decibels for night operation between the hours of 10:00 pm and 7:00 am and for noise of impulsive character, such as hammering, or periodic in character, such as hum, screech or continuous tones.  Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level or decibel meter and associated octave band analyzer than conforms to current American Standards Association specifications. 


B. Vibration 
At no point on the boundary of any bordering residential zone shall any vibration exceed two­ten-thousandths (0.0002) inches to a frequency of fifteen (15) cycles per second or less when measured by a seismograph of accepted standard manufacture. 
C. Air Pollution 
No dust, smoke or fumes shall be emitted from any operation so as to be noticeable or evident or be in violation of Federal, State and local pollution regulations. 
D. 	Glare and Heat 
Glare and heat from lighting or any process or operation shall not be seen or felt at the boundary of a bordering residential zone. 
E. 	Hazardous Wastes / Materials 
No hazardous wastes/materials shall be stored, used or generated except in accordance with all applicable State, Federal and local laws, rules and regulations.  All applications for uses hereunder shall include a written statement detailing and identifying all hazardous wastes/materials to be used, stored or generated on the premises including the manner of onsite and/or offsite disposal, handling and/or storage and including proof of compliance with all applicable State, Federal and local laws, rules and regulations.  Said statement shall additionally include an estimate of the quantity of each toxic or hazardous material/waste, and approximately where on the applicant’s or operator’s property the material/waste will be located.  A copy of said statement shall be transmitted by the Commission to the Monroe Police Department, the Fire Marshal, and the Fire Department Chiefs.  Such materials/wastes to be identified shall be those defined in the Environmental Protection Agency Hazardous Waste Regulations published in the May 19, 1980, Federal Register (Part 261) as amended from time to time. All storage containers for any toxic or hazardous materials/wastes shall conform to specifications of the Federal Department of Transportation and Environmental Protection Agency, and shall each contain a warning label naming the contents and those that are hazardous/ toxic. 
F. 	Explosion, Fire or Radiation Hazards 
At any point in the zone, any exposure to explosion, fire or radiation hazards shall be safeguarded by all means available, and such safeguards shall be subject to the approval of the State and local Fire Marshals or appropriate authority.  No operation in this zone shall be the cause of radio or television interference. 
§4.3.3 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Lands Uses by Zoning District.” 
§4.3.4 Prohibited Uses in Industrial District 3 
A. 	Notwithstanding that any land use not specifically permitted is prohibited, the following uses are specifically prohibited in an I-3 District: 
(1) 	
Gasoline service stations, service and repair garages, and automotive, boat, recreational vehicle, truck, and similar sales.  Public display of any vehicle for sale is prohibited.  "Boat" shall not include non-motorized boats up to sixteen (16) feet in length (e.g., canoes and kayaks). 

(2) 	
Arcades (amusement centers with coin or token-operated games or any type of electronic payment for operation of games) as a principal use. 

(3) 	
Adult-oriented businesses (including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult theaters, and massage parlors). 

(4) 	
Mini-warehouses or self-storage facilities. 

(5) 	
Nightclubs, taverns, social clubs, and similar uses where the primary purpose of the business is the serving of alcoholic beverages. 

(6) 	
"Fast food" restaurants, where the majority of meals are not served by waitpersons to patrons at tables. Fast food restaurants are allowed only as part of a larger complex such as a food court in a shopping center. 

(7) 	
Stand-alone "convenience" stores: quick-stop, high-turnover mini-markets. 

(8) 	
Tattoo establishments. 

(9) 	
Firearms sales, except as a minor accessory use, not to exceed five percent (5%) of the gross floor area. 

(10) 	
On-site dry cleaning. 


§4.3.5 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental to a principal use are allowed in all Industrial Districts, except as limited below, including: 
A. 	Recreational facilities for employees, which shall not be located in a front yard or any yard abutting a residential zone. 
B. 	Child Day Care Center in conjunction with a general or professional office use. 
C. 	Retail not exceeding 5% of the gross floor area of the principal business. 
D. 	Restaurants, including corporate cafeterias, serving the principal use occupants only and not open to the general public. 
E. 	Outdoor storage of materials related to industrial uses. 
(1) 	
All materials to be stored outdoors shall be directly related to the principal use on the site. 

(2) 	
Outdoor storage shall comply with the bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district and related principal use. 

(3) 	
The outdoor storage area shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the principal building. 

(4) 	
Outdoor storage shall not interfere with parking, site access or on-site circulation of vehicles and pedestrians. 

(5) 	
Materials shall be stored in an environmentally safe and orderly fashion, and shall be properly secured. The contents of outdoor storage shall be temporary in nature. 

(6) 	
Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjoining properties and shall conform to landscaping and screening requirements of these Regulations. 

(7) 	
The limit or area of approved outdoor storage shall be physically delineated, controlled and contained by buildings, structures, fencing, landscaping or a combination thereof to screen said area and the contents therein. 


F. 	Storage Silos in the I-3 District only, not to exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, nor have a footprint exceeding ten (10) percent of the gross square footage of the principal building footprint that the silo is attached to.  No signage, flags or lights shall be attached to the silo, except as may be required for safety purposes at the base of the silo.  All such footprints shall include all enclosed overhangs. 
§4.3.6 Lot Area and Bulk Requirements for All Industrial Districts 
A. 	No lot shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed or altered for use except in conformance with the minimum standards set forth below in the Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements. Side yard setback requirements may be reduced at the discretion of the Commission in order to encourage clustering of industrial buildings where shared parking can be achieved for complimentary uses in accordance with provisions for shared parking provided in Article 6 of these Regulations. Site landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with the landscaping and screening provisions of Article 6 of these Regulations. 
Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements Lot Requirements I-1 I-2 I-3 
Minimum lot area  1 acre  3 acres  10 acres  
Minimum lot frontage  120 feet  200 feet  200 feet  
Minimum square*  110 feet  150 feet  350 feet  
Minimum front yard, public road  50 feet  50 feet  150 feet  
Minimum front yard, private commercial street  25 feet  50 feet  50 feet**  
Minimum yard  

For buildings at residential zone boundary 50 feet 100 feet 100 feet 
Rear and side yards 25 feet 25 feet 50 feet** Maximum height 3 stories/40 feet 3 stories/40 feet 3 stories/55 feet*** Building coverage 25% 25% 25% 
*Note: Each lot shall be of such shape that the applicable square can be placed entirely within the lot lines, with one 
(1) side parallel to the street lot line. 
**Note: The minimum yard for buildings and structures, or a portion thereof, exceeding a height of 40 feet shall be no less than the highest height of such buildings and structures, or portion thereof. 
***Note: Maximum height of sixty-five (65) feet allowed for accessory storage silos in accordance with §4.3.8G of these Regulations. 
B. 	Frontages for individual lots along an internal road in an industrial park development in an I-2 District and an I-3 District may be reduced by the Planning and Zoning Commission, upon written request with documented justification by an applicant, by an amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) when deemed to be in the interest of the town and overall design.  When considering such a request, the Commission shall take into account limitations imposed by topographic or geologic conditions, size and shape of property, effect upon integrity of overall design and impact upon future maintenance requirements of the town. 
§4.3.7 Parking and Loading 
Parking and loading areas shall be provided off the public streets for all vehicles using the premises and shall contain not less than the minimum space requirements set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
A. 	No parking areas or internal driveways shall be located no less than fifty (50) feet from a public street, no less than twenty-five (25) feet from a property line, and no less than fifty (50) feet from any Residential District boundary in an I-1 District, nor less than one-hundred (100) feet from a Residential District boundary in an I-2 District and an I-3 District, except for the purpose of providing a driveway(s) or access aisle(s) to an adjacent property to allow for vehicular access and circulation between adjacent parcels. Internal driveways giving access to the street may cross required buffers only in the case where residential zone lines follow the centerline of the street or parallel the centerline of the street at the streetline. 
B. 	Upon written request with documented justification by an applicant, including submission of an alternate landscape buffer plan, the Commission may allow surface parking areas or internal driveways to extend up to, but not more than fifty (50) feet into the required I-3 District buffer area.  If the Commission determines that the alternate landscape buffer plan, above, exceeds the landscape buffer requirements provided in Article 6 of these Regulations and provides adequate protection to an adjoining residential zone, the requirements provided in Article 6 may be waived. 
C. 	Adequate loading docks and loading space shall be provided to serve the uses of a building and shall be so separated from parking areas to the extent that maneuvering trucks will not cause hazards or inhibit the free and safe movement of passenger vehicles. In no case shall a loading area or access to a dumpster enclosure obstruct access to and from designated parking spaces. 
§4.3.8 Utilities and Improvements 
All site and public improvements, including water supply, sewage disposal, roads and drainage, shall conform to local and State regulations as applicable. 
A. 	Complete plans, profiles, engineering drawings and data on improvements, including parking areas on private property, shall conform to recognized standards and the best modern practice and shall be subject to the acceptance by the Town Planner and Town Engineer. 
B. 	Foundation and roof drains shall be connected to retention and/or detention facilities and/or appropriate storm water quality facilities, where appropriate. 
§4.3.9 Signs 
Signs in all Industrial Districts shall conform to and be limited by the provisions of Article 6 of these Regulations. 
ARTICLE 5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

§5.1 Limited Office Retail District (LOR) 
§5.1.1 Application of Provisions 
The standards, regulations and requirements as set forth in §5.1 shall apply to the use of land, buildings and other structures, and the location and bulk of buildings and other structures in any lands classified as Limited Office Retail District (“LOR District”). 
§5.1.2 Purpose and Intent 
A LOR District shall be established for the purpose of establishing a transitional zone between residentially zoned properties and nonresidential uses and districts. Such district will exist for the purpose of allowing a mix of office and retail uses while maintaining the quality of existing adjacent residential districts through site design and access management techniques. 
§5.1.3 Permitted Uses 
See Article 10 – Schedules for “Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District.” 
§5.1.4 Accessory Uses 
Accessory uses, buildings or structures customarily incidental to a principal use are allowed in an LOR District, including: 
A. 	Accessory uses as permitted in a B-1 District. 
B. 	The manufacturing, processing or assembling of goods and materials only when clearly incidental and accessory to a permitted principal retail use on the premises. 
§5.1.5 Lot Area and Bulk Requirements for Limited Office Retail District 
No lot shall be used and no building or other structure shall be constructed or altered for use except in conformance with the following schedule: 
Schedule of Dimensional Requirements 
Lot Requirements LOR 

Minimum lot area 1.5 acre (63,340 sf) Minimum lot frontage 150 feet Minimum square* 140 x 140 feet Minimum front yard 50 feet 
Minimum right-of-way reserve** 15 feet 
Minimum yards 
At residential zone boundary 50 feet 
Side yard 30 feet 
Rear yard 30 feet 

Maximum height 2.5 stories / 35 feet Maximum building coverage 25% Minimum non-residential floor area 2,400 square feet 
(new construction) 
*Each lot shall be of such shape that a square one-hundred-forty (140) feet on each side can be placed entirely within the lot lines, with one (1) side parallel to and on the lot side of the street lot line. **A minimum of fifteen (15) feet is reserved for expansion of the road right-of-way for future conveyance, as may be required, to the controlling agency in case of need for road widening or related improvements. This area may not be included within the street yard requirement. Should this area be used for right-of-way expansion, the reserve requirement shall not be deemed to have become nonconforming by such use. 
§5.1.6 Design Standards 
A. A mix of uses may be allowed on an individual lot and/or within a single building, provided that: 
(1) 	
The parking requirements for the individual uses are met in accordance with the parking provisions in Article 6 of these Regulations; or 

(2) 	
As part of the review process the Commission determines that parking requirements for the individual uses can be met through shared parking between uses in accordance with shared parking provisions provided in Article 6 of these Regulations. 


B. There shall be no outside storage of any kind. 
C. 	Outdoor display areas showcasing items for sale in conjunction with the principal use may be allowed contingent upon review and approval by the Commission. No outdoor display area shall be permitted in a parking area, pedestrian walkway, landscaping or buffer area, or required yard area. 
D. 	All new utility service(s) shall be provided underground. All mechanical equipment must be screened from view. 
E. 	Lighting of building and parking areas shall be located and shielded so that light sources are not directly visible from any adjoining property or from the street. Such illumination must not cause glare observable within a residence district.  In approving lighting, the Commission may limit the intensity of lighting and the hours of its use where determined necessary to protect adjacent property.  In no case shall any site lighting be provided from any street-side utility pole. 
F. 	There shall be no street/driveway access to LOR zoned land via roads classified as local street or road per the Plan of Development unless it is within two-hundred (200) feet of a main roadway. 
G. 	Site design in the LOR district must address the following access management provisions: 
(1) 	
No driveways/curb cuts may be located closer than one-hundred (100) feet from any intersection of public streets. 

(2) 	
Driveways/curb cuts within a single property must be separated at least one-hundred – twenty (120) feet from one another. 

(3) 	
Shared access between adjacent parking lots should be provided when possible and wherever practicable. The Commission may require a paved driveway to the property line to allow for potential future shared access between adjacent properties. 


H. 	Facade materials shall be limited to wood, brick, stone, decorative masonry and similar materials as approved by the Commission. 
I. 	Site landscaping must be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§5.1.7 Off-Street Parking and Loading 
A. 	All parking and loading areas shall be provided off the public streets for all vehicles using the premises. Parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the requirements provided in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
B. 	No parking areas or internal driveway shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from a street line or within forty (40) feet of a Residential and Farming District. 
C. 	All refuse and/or recycling enclosures shall be provided in locations and screened as approved by the Commission in accordance with the standards set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations. 


ARTICLE 6 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
§6.1 Off-Street Parking and Loading 
§6.1.1 Purpose and Applicability of Provisions 
The purpose of the off-street parking and loading standards is to ensure that such uses are treated as accessory uses, do not visually dominate the site, are properly placed in relation to buildings to minimize their visibility, and feature quality landscaping and architecture along the road frontage to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights and parking lot lights on adjacent roadways and neighboring properties. Off-street parking areas are to complement the buildings and other site improvements, improve the visual appearance of the property and surrounding neighborhood area, protect the character of residential, business, institutional and commercial areas, and conserve the value of land and buildings on surrounding properties. For any permitted use specified in these Regulations the standards herein for design of parking and loading shall apply. 
§6.1.2 Minimum Parking Space Requirements for Specific Uses 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the minimum standards for the uses as detailed in Article 10, Schedules – Schedule of Off-Street Parking. In no case shall a commercial, residential or mixed use development establish or permit a combination of uses which exceed parking facility design capacity, unless otherwise specified by these Regulations. Parking spaces in excess or less than of the minimum required standards (according to the provisions set forth in §6.1.9, §6.1.10 and §6.1.11 of these Regulations) shall be subject to the approval of the Commission, as the intent of these Regulations is to minimize the amount of impervious surface area in the Town of Monroe. 
§6.1.3 Queue Space 
Minimum queue spaces for each drive-through and exterior service window operating lane shall be provided for uses as specified below based upon the need to provide standing aisles for waiting vehicles. 
Automatic Teller Machine (ATM), Drive-up type: 3.0 spaces per machine. 
Bank: 8.0 spaces for a single lane facility; 4.0 spaces for each if multiple lanes. 
Car Wash: 14.0 spaces for each lane of a standalone principal facility and as determined appropriate by the Commission for a facility accessory to another permitted principal use. 
Gas Pump: 2.0 spaces for each pump or pump lane. 
Pharmacy: 5.0 spaces per lane. 
Restaurant: 8.0 spaces with a minimum of 4.0 spaces before the ordering speaker. 
All Other permitted uses as deemed appropriate by the Commission: No less than 2.0 spaces per window or access lane or such other number the Commission may prescribe based upon the unique characteristics of the use. 
§6.1.4 Loading Spaces 
A. 	Any nonresidential use containing a gross floor area (GFA) of 1,500 square feet or more shall provide one off-street loading space for 1,500 to 20,000 square feet of GFA plus one off-street loading space for each 20,000 square feet of GFA or portion thereof above 20,000 square feet of GFA. 
B. 	The Commission may waive the requirements for off-street loading space if in its judgment such space is not necessary or warranted for the use or development. However, the area for a future loading space must be documented so that it will be available for a future use, if needed. The Commission may require the deferral of any such loading spaces, consistent with the requirements for deferred parking as set forth in this Section. 
C. 	No off-street loading space shall be located in a front yard in any district. Loading spaces may be partially or fully contained within a structure. 
D. 	All loading activities and direct access to loading spaces shall be on-site only. 
E. 	All required loading spaces shall, at a minimum, be sized to accommodate small truck-type vehicles (SU30 or smaller). The Commission may require one or more loading spaces to be sized to accommodate a large truck-type vehicle (WB50 or larger). 
F. 	The location and access of all loading spaces shall include adequate and safe adjacent aisle space based on the size and type of vehicles to be served, as approved by the Commission. 
§6.1.5 On-Street Parking Not Accepted 
The use of on-street parking or portion thereof shall not be used for the calculation of any parking requirement contained in these Regulations. No off-street parking space shall be designed or located so that its ingress or egress is from any portion of a street or street right-of-way. 
§6.1.6 Handicap Accessible Parking 
A. 	ADA Compliance. Parking areas shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities (ADA) Act and the laws and regulations of the State of Connecticut. All handicap accessible parking spaces shall be designed and provided in number accordingly; such spaces shall be included in the total number of spaces required for structures and uses. 
B. 	No new structure, addition or use shall receive a Certificate of Zoning Compliance until the required handicap accessible parking, line striping and signs have been provided. 
§6.1.7 Multiple Uses 
Where separate parts of a building or structure or of a floor of a building are used for purposes requiring different numbers of parking spaces, the number of spaces shall be determined by adding the number of spaces required for the area devoted to each type of use. 
§6.1.8 Joint Use of Parking Facility 
Upon the authorization of the Commission, the owners of two or more abutting properties may establish a joint parking facility, which may be located on any of the properties involved, to provide the total number of required parking spaces. Upon establishing of a joint use arrangement, agreements shall be entered into by the property owners granting mutual use and access provisions to the parties and their successors in title in perpetuity.  Such agreement and corresponding cross easements of access and use shall be recorded upon the Land Records of the Town of Monroe. 
§6.1.9 Shared Use of Parking Facility 
The Commission encourages parking lots for different structures or uses, or for mixed uses, to be shared in any zoning district. Shared parking may be approved by the Commission, subject to the following provisions: 
A. 	The parties involved shall prepare and submit a draft proposed written perpetual reciprocal access and parking easement and maintenance agreement, which, following approval, shall be executed by the parties and recorded in the Land Records of the Town of Monroe. 
B. 	The Commission may require the applicant to provide a parking study with all information deemed necessary to its decision-making on a shared parking arrangement. This information includes but is not limited to: 
(1) 	
The type and hours of operation and parking demand, for each use. 

(2) 	
A Site Plan displaying shared use spaces in the lot and walking distance to the uses sharing the lot. 

(3) 	
A description of the character of land use and parking patterns of adjacent land uses, and d) an estimate of anticipated turnover in parking space use over the course of twenty-four 


(24) hours at the site. 
C. 	Parking spaces to be shared shall not be reserved for individuals or groups on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. 
D. 	Principal buildings sharing a parking facility do not need to be located on the same lot, but each principal building shall be a maximum of five-hundred (500) feet from the closest parking space in the lot providing the shared spaces. A waiver of the maximum allowable distance between the principal building and associated shared parking may be approved by the Commission with written justification and supporting information provided by the applicant. 
E. 	Uses sharing a parking facility shall provide for safe, convenient walking between uses and parking, including safe, well-marked pedestrian walks, crossings, signage, and adequate lighting, as approved by the Commission. 
F. 	If the conditions for shared parking become null and void, or uses change, such that the shared parking is no longer needed, and the shared parking arrangement is discontinued, this will constitute a violation of these Regulations for any use approved expressly with shared parking. The owner must then provide written notification of the change to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and, within sixty (60) days of that notice, provide a remedy satisfactory to the Commission to provide adequate replacement parking. Said remedy might involve the submission of an application to the Commission. 
§6.1.10 Reduction in Parking Space Requirements for Shared Parking 
A reduction in the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces may be approved by the Commission upon request by an applicant where a sharing of parking by a mix of land uses on the same or abutting properties can be shown to have operational and functional differences in their uses and peak demands for parking, as follows: 
A. 	Up to thirty percent (30%) of the parking spaces required for the predominant use on a site may be shared with other uses with different peak operating periods. The predominant use is considered to be that which requires the most parking of those sharing the parking facilities. 
B. 	Up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the parking spaces required for uses such as theaters, public auditoriums, bowling alleys, nightclubs, movie theaters, and similar predominantly evening and weekend uses may be shared with uses such as banks, offices, and similar predominantly daytime and weekday uses. 
C. 	Up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the parking spaces required for uses such as churches and other uses exclusively in operation during the weekend may be shared with uses such as medical offices, banks, and other similar uses predominantly in operation on weekdays. 
D. 	The final number and layout of parking spaces shall be based on the need to protect public safety and convenience while minimizing harm to the character of the community and to rural, scenic, historic and environmental resources. 
E. 	Determining the parking requirements for any proposed structure or use, the Commission shall consider the parking standards for similar uses as set forth in these Regulations, together with the following criteria: 
(1) 	
The number of persons who would be parking at the site as employees, customers, clients, members, students or other users throughout a typical day and week, as well as the maximum number of persons at times of peak daily usage. 

(2) 	
The size of the structure(s), number and types of mixed land uses, and the site. 

(3) 	
The rural, environmental, scenic and/or historic sensitivity of the site. 


F. 	An applicant shall legally assure, to the satisfaction of the Commission in consultation with the Town Attorney, how staggered hours of operation will continue for the life of the uses. 
§6.1.11 Deferred Parking 
At the discretion of the Commission upon evaluation of anticipated current demand, or, if an applicant can demonstrate that the actual demand is less than the minimum required number of parking spaces for said use, the Commission may approve a deferred parking plan reserving up to twenty-five (25) percent of the total otherwise required spaces. 
A. 	Such reserved spaces shall be of standard design, shown in hatched lines on the Site Plan and labeled “Deferred Parking,” and shall be limited to natural areas. 
B. 	Land approved as deferred parking shall remain in its natural state or be landscaped, but shall not be used in a manner that would prevent it from being developed for parking in the future. The Commission may require the area of deferred parking to be rough graded to accommodate future development as parking without the need for notable excavation or filling. 
C. 	A covenant shall be executed guaranteeing that the owner will provide the additional spaces if the Zoning Enforcement Officer, upon investigation of the actual use of parking spaces at the site of deferred parking, recommends to the Commission that the approved deferral be modified or revoked. 
D. 	The Commission may require the future construction of said deferred parking, or portions thereof, into usable parking, within ninety (90) days of written notice to do so based upon a change in parking demand, a change of use or a change of traffic safety circumstances as determined by the Commission, and provided such notice shall take into account the time of the year suitable for pavement installation.  Failure to construct such spaces per such request shall constitute a violation of these Regulations and the Site Plan or Special Exception Permit associated with the deferred parking plan, as the case may be. 
§6.1.12 Employee Parking 
Employee parking is incorporated in the facility computation determined in §6.1.2.  The areas of the facility to be used for employee parking shall be those designated and approved by the Commission. In designating employee parking spaces, the Commission shall give primary consideration to spaces located farthest from the main building entrance. The Commission may require that approved employee parking spaces be appropriately marked or signed. 
§6.1.13 Design Standards 
A. 	Calculation Rounding 
All calculations for minimum required parking and loading resulting in a fraction shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number (i.e., 10.1 = 11), while all calculations for reduction in minimum required parking and loading resulting in a fraction shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number (i.e., 10.9 = 10). 
B. Space Dimensions 
The design dimensions of parking spaces and loading spaces shall be as follows: 
(1) 	
Parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of seven (7) feet, shall have a dimension of nine (9) feet wide (ten (10) feet if adjacent to an interior or exterior walls and columns) and eighteen (18) feet long; provided overhang does not impact an adjacent sidewalk or landscaping area. 

(2) 	
Loading spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet, shall be twelve 


(12) feet in width and thirty (30) feet in length for small trucks (typically SU30 or smaller) and fifty (50) feet in length for large trucks (typically WB50 or larger). 
C. Parallel Parking 
Parallel parking shall not be used for facilities exceeding a cumulative total of twenty (20) spaces. 
D. Overall Facility and Bay Specifications 
The design of all parking facilities and bays shall conform to the specifications detailed in the following Table. The Table shall be used referencing Figure 1. 
Parking Angle 0 deg 45 deg. 60 deg. 90 deg. 
Stall width 9’ 9’ 9’ 9’ Stall length 24’ 18’ 18’ 18’ Aisle width 24’ 16’ 17’ 24’ 

E. Surface Treatment; Grade 
(1) 	
All off-street parking and loading facilities, outdoor storage, driveways and site access roadways shall be suitably improved, graded, stabilized and maintained so as to cause no nuisance or danger from such or from erosion or surface water flow. Nonresidential and multifamily residential off-street parking and loading facilities shall have a grade of no less than one percent (1%) nor greater than five percent (5%). Refer also to Chapter 260, Driveway Construction of the Monroe Town Code. 

(2) 	
All nonresidential and multifamily residential off-street parking and loading facilities, outdoor storage, driveways and site access roadways shall be paved with bituminous concrete, concrete, or other suitable hard impervious or alternate hard surface pervious pavement system as reviewed by the Town Engineer and ultimately determined appropriate by the Commission.  Gravel, crushed stone, asphalt millings or similar shall not be used or deemed suitable for finished pavement surfaces. Facilities shall have a dustless surface capable of maintaining (accommodating) painted line striping as approved by the Commission. 

(3) 	
Notwithstanding Subsection (2) above, the Commission may allow for alternative surface treatments (excluding asphalt millings) in seasonally used parking areas such as parks and at public trail access locations, outdoor storage where the materials to be stored would otherwise damage the integrity of the paved surface, and in non-commercial parking lots of less than 10 spaces, in accordance with the following provisions: 

(a) 
The proposed alternative surface treatment is determined to be suitable and adequate for the intended purpose. 

(b) 
Engineering details prepared in accordance with §7.3 of these Regulations which depict the typical section of the proposed alternative surface treatment must be submitted and approved by the Commission. 

(c) 
The proposed site design and alternative surface treatment must allow for stormwater management collection and runoff control in accordance with §6.5 of these Regulations. 

(d) 
The proposed alternative surface treatment, and/or the use thereof and/or materials to be placed or stored thereupon has been adequately demonstrated not to result in or cause a condition resulting in adverse environmental impacts to the immediate and surrounding area (i.e., cause or contribute pollution to surface and/or ground resources). 




F. Design Accommodations 
(1) 	
All parking spaces shall have adequate area off the street to accommodate the safe approach, turning and exiting of vehicles utilizing such parking spaces. 

(2) 	
No part of any parking space or area for the turning or maneuvering of automobiles within the facility shall encroach upon the right-of-way of any public or private street or highway. 

(3) 	
All parking spaces shall be designed in such a manner so as not to conflict with another or impede or constrict the turning movements or access of vehicles to other spaces or aisles. Points of entrance and exit from the street or highway shall be located so as to minimize hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the street or right-of-way. 

(4) 	
Priority consideration shall be given for non-residential parking facilities proposed to be located to the side and/or rear of principal buildings, as opposed to in the front of buildings. The combining and sharing of site entrance driveways and internal service driveway connections serving abutting properties is encouraged and preferred to separate access roads. Pedestrian sidewalks and crosswalks creating connections to shared parking and encouraging walking between abutting properties is encouraged. 


G. Circulation 
All parking facilities shall provide continuous circulation for its aisles and driveways. Where spaces terminate in a dead-end, the travel lane shall extend a minimum of five (5) feet beyond the end spaces with a transition edge to provide an area for maneuvering of vehicles backing out of the end spaces. 
H. Wheel Stops 
The use of wheel stops shall be prohibited in areas providing pedestrian access to sidewalks, buildings or other areas. 
I. Uses Restricted 
No non-residential space designed and approved for the purpose of parking shall be used for any use or activity other than regular vehicle parking; this restriction shall include storage of automobiles, trailers, dumpsters, grease containers, media dispensers, collection or donation containers, snow removal equipment, outdoor display or vending, storage containers, advertising devices or similar. The overnight parking of RVs or similar vehicles is prohibited. 
§6.1.14 Striping, Signage and Directional Pavement Markings 
Facility striping and directional and use signage for the purpose of delineating parking spaces and management and control of traffic shall be placed as directed by the Commission and/or its agent, both in initial design and as may be required from time to time as conditions may warrant. Such striping and signage shall be regularly maintained by the owners or their authorized agents so that all spaces and traffic controls are readily visible and comprehensible. 
§6.1.15 Lighting and Landscaping 
Parking facilities shall be landscaped and illuminated with lighting consistent with the standards set forth in §6.2 of these Regulations. 
§6.1.16 Maintenance 
All parking facilities shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory condition so as to be safe and attractive and free of any hazard, nuisance or other unsafe condition which may create potential for injury or casualty to life or property. 
§6.1.17 Change in Use; Additions and Enlargements 
When a change in use or an increase in floor area or other unit of measurement specified for calculating required minimum off-street parking and/or loading spaces, as set forth in these Regulations, creates the need for an increase in the number of required minimum off-street parking and/or loading spaces, said additional parking and/or loading spaces shall be provided accordingly. 


§6.2 Landscaping and Lighting 
§6.2.1 Purpose 
These standards are intended to ensure the use and maintenance of quality landscaping and lighting throughout the Town in the protection of property values by preserving existing vegetation, ensuring the adequacy and appropriateness of new landscape plantings, screens and buffers, and minimizing light pollution. 
A. 	The Commission finds that quality landscaping and lighting provides many unique services and values to the community.  Landscaping softens the edges of buildings, screens undesirable places, makes large buildings appear smaller and more human scale, assists in maintaining biodiversity, and can create places for social gathering.  Vegetation recycles the air and water, absorbs pollution and sequesters carbon, buffers noise, and provides shade, air-cooling and windbreak protection.  Quality landscaping also helps control flooding and erosion of topsoil, provides habitat for birds and other wildlife species, buffers and screens incompatible uses, provides privacy from visual intrusion, light and noise, moderates microclimate conditions such as that within paved parking facilities by providing vegetative shading, absorption of reflected heat and creation of natural wind breaks, improves the quality of the environment, enhances property values and beautifies the community which ensures the maintenance of existing community character attributes deemed important to the Town. 
B. 	Quality lighting minimizes light pollution through use of appropriately designed, installed and maintained light fixtures which are fully and permanently fixed and shielded, which lighting is designed to be shut off when the facility served is closed. 
§6.2.2 General Landscaping and Lighting Design Standards 
A. 	The Commission is responsible for determining the adequacy of landscaping and lighting during the review of Site Plans, Special Exception Permits and Subdivisions. 
B. 	Landscaping and lighting within a site shall be designed to facilitate conservation of the environment and preservation of community character.  Site landscaping is to be designed to dominate development plans, integrating the various elements of site design, preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site, and creating a pleasing site character.  Site lighting is to be designed to be subtle and ancillary to the overall site design of buildings and exterior facilities, providing the minimal lighting necessary to carry out the functional aspects of site operations while ensuring safety. 
C. 	The installation of new or replacement electric, telephone, television, and other communication lines, both main and service connections, shall be provided by underground wiring within easements of dedicated public rights-of-way, private roads, or common driveways, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services unless waived by the Commission involving minimal changes relating to existing overhead services.  Said installation shall be coordinated to preserve existing vegetation and to not hinder the installation, growth and maintenance of proposed landscaping. 
D. 	The Commission at its discretion may require or approve an alternative plan, or waive or modify the particular requirements of this Section, provided the intent of these Regulations for providing landscaping and lighting are still otherwise achieved. 
E. 	Landscaping 
(1) 	
Existing vegetation shall be preserved as much as possible by minimizing clearing and grading in new developments and by avoiding the drip-line area of existing trees to remain in order to protect the tree's root system. 

(2) 	
New landscaping species shall be selected to minimize the need for irrigation, pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers application. 

(3) 	
A variety of shade tree species to provide visual interest, to protect against same species die-out or disease, and for tolerance of road salt shall be provided.  Large-leafed and/or fruiting trees that may be considered a nuisance shall be avoided. 

(4) 	
Existing trees twenty (20) inches or more in diameter at breast height (dbh), or trees of lesser diameter as determined by the Commission and/or which are deemed to be locally important, shall be preserved to the maximum extent practical.  Locally important trees include, but are not limited to, rare or unusual species, trees associated with historic events or persons, or trees that contribute to an identified scenic viewshed. 

(5) 	
New development shall be generously landscaped to provide visual interest in all four seasons by including deciduous trees, conifers, perennials and annual bulbs. Landscape plans that are limited to deciduous trees and shrubs leave a barren winter landscape which fails to screen new development from the roadway and from neighboring properties. The landscaping of a site shall blend in with the prevailing scale, appearance and neighboring uses, and shall effectively screen incompatible development from its neighbors. 

(6) 	
Landscaping islands shall be used and designed to delineate vehicular and pedestrian patterns, integrated with the use of different colored and textured paving materials, raised or inverted areas, and other techniques used to further direct the flow of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic within a development site.  Landscape islands may include raised or depressed areas based on the integration of the landscaping and stormwater management controls.  However, stormwater management shall not compromise the need for landscape aesthetics. 

(7) 	
Landscape plantings of shrubs, ground cover, and shade and evergreen trees, as well as perennials and annuals and other materials such as rocks, water, walls, fences, paving materials and street furniture, shall be encouraged to create pedestrian-scale spaces and to maintain landscape continuity within the community.  As may be approved by the Commission, sculpture and art may also be integrated into the landscape plan, and is encouraged. 

(8) 	
Landscaping in combination with fencing and walls shall be required to provide all seasons screening and buffering of parking, loading and services areas, as well as site utilities, from view of adjacent properties and roadways. 

(9) 	
Landscaping shall be used and designed to create boundaries, transitions, screens and buffers between areas of differing development intensities, as well as to separate areas of incompatible land uses. 

(10) 	
Landscaping shall be provided generally at the base of and surrounding buildings, structures, refuse enclosures, recycling enclosures, mechanical equipment, free-standing signs and similar site features.  Freestanding light fixtures shall be installed in appropriately located, sized and landscaped areas and islands, or integrated with sidewalks and other areas outside of parking areas. 

(11) 	
Irrigation if proposed shall be detailed and the sufficiency of the water source and supply shall be demonstrated. 

(12) 	
Certain landscaping shall be installed with the following minimum sizes: 

Deciduous shade trees 3-3½ inches DBH 
Ornamental trees 2-2½ inches DBH 
Evergreen screen trees 10-12 feet in height 
Evergreen trees, general 6-8 feet in height 
Shrubs 2-3 feet in height/or 24”-36”spread 


(13) 	
All disturbed areas to be landscaped shall be restored with topsoil, in an amount not less than six (6) inches unless otherwise permitted by the Commission and specified on the landscape plan. 


F. Lighting 
(1) 	
Regulation of exterior lighting is intended to avoid excessively bright lighting that would cause direct or indirect glare, up-cast lighting or sky-glow, to avoid excessive contrast between lighted and unlighted sites creating hazardous driving or walking conditions, to avoid nuisance light spillover or glare affecting nearby residential properties or traffic and to distribute light levels more uniformly across a site. 

(2) 	
Exterior lighting shall be controlled in both height and intensity and shall be in conformance with the requirements established in these Regulations. The type, design, location, hours of operation and height of light fixtures and their mounting supports shall be approved by the Commission. 

(3) 	
The Commission may require site lighting levels to be reduced on all or part of the site at different times of the day, either after a facility is closed, or for 24 hour a day operations during period of reduced usage.  Such requirement shall be established as part of the review process. 

(4) 	
The Commission shall determine the maximum height of light fixtures on an individual project basis but in no case shall free-standing light fixtures in residential districts exceed fourteen (14) feet in height, twenty (20) feet in height in Business Districts and twenty-four (24) feet in Industrial Districts, except as otherwise may be permitted pursuant to Subsection G below. Wall mounted light fixtures shall include recessed light sources which do not produce horizontal glare.  Down lighting shall be required to prevent objectionable side casting of light to neighboring properties and adjacent land uses. 

(5) 	
Light fixtures shall produce low lighting levels targeted to the intended purpose of such lighting, including the use of full-cutoff and fully shielded light fixtures utilizing flat and recessed lenses attached to a pole or building on a fixed arm oriented parallel to the ground that cast little or no light upward, which minimize lighting overlap, reflection, and horizontal glare, as well as are turned off when their use and purpose are not necessary. 

(6) 	
Parking lot, walkway and other site lighting levels shall not exceed an average illumination level of three-quarters (0.75) to five (5) foot-candles at the ground. 

(7) 	
An applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission, that the light level at any lot line shall not exceed one-quarter (0.25) footcandle measured at ground level and that there shall be no adverse light spillage off the property or over wetland or watercourse resources. 

(8) 	
Foundation.  All light poles shall be grounded with a suitable permanent foundation.  All building or other structure mounted lighting shall be securely attached thereto. 

(9) 	
Measurement of light pole height.  The height of a light pole shall be measured from the finished grade or surface on which the light pole is mounted to the highest point of the light fixture. 

(10) 	
The architectural style of site light fixtures shall be consistent and complementary to the site architecture, or as otherwise required at the discretion of the Commission. 


G. School Stadium and Industrial District Sports Field Lighting 
(1) 	
School Stadium lighting may be permitted to exceed the maximum height standards for light fixtures of the underlying zoning district, subject to Special Exception Permit and Site Development Plan approvals, and compliance with the following supplemental performance standards of this Subsection as well as the following location and facility criteria: 

(a) 	
The stadium shall be owned and operated by a school providing a curriculum under the jurisdiction of the Connecticut State Board of Education. 

(b) 	
The subject lot area consisting of a single fee-simple lot shall be a minimum area of twenty five (25) acres. 

(c) 	
The school stadium shall include a minimum capacity of five-hundred (500) fixed spectator seats. 

(d) 	
The school stadium playing field shall individually or cumulatively exceed 10,000 square feet in area, which area shall include a perimeter area as follows: 

(i) 	
For baseball/softball fields, the perimeter area shall extend thirty (30) feet in a direction perpendicular to the foul lines and away from the field. 

(ii) 	
For rectangular playing fields, such as soccer, football, lacrosse and field hockey, the perimeter area shall extend ten (10) feet from the side lines and fifteen (15) feet from the end lines. 




(iii) 	For all other playing fields the perimeter area shall extend ten (10) feet beyond the playing field boundary. 

(2) 	
Industrial District sports field lighting may be permitted to exceed the maximum height standards for light fixtures of the underlying zoning district, subject to Special Exception Permit and Site Development Plan approvals, and compliance with the following supplemental performance standards of this Subsection as well as the following location and facility criteria: 

(a) 	
The light poles shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from a residential zone boundary. 

(b) 	
The subject lot area consisting of a single fee-simple lot shall be a minimum area of ten (10) acres. 

(c) 	
The field shall individually or cumulatively exceed 50,000 square feet in area, which area shall include a perimeter area as follows: 

(i) 	
For baseball / softball fields, the perimeter area shall extend thirty (30) feet in a direction perpendicular to the foul lines and away from the field. 

(ii) 	
For rectangular playing fields, such as soccer, football, lacrosse and field hockey, the perimeter area shall extend ten (10) feet minimum from the side lines and fifteen (15) feet minimum from the end lines. 




(iii) 	For all other playing fields, the perimeter area shall extend ten (10) feet beyond the playing field boundary. 

(3) 	
A Facility Illumination Plan shall be provided, including at minimum the following: 

(a) 	
Location, height and construction details (based on manufacturer specifications or cut sheets) of each style of all pole, building, and ground mounted lighting fixtures, including parking lot, walkway and other site lighting as indicated above. 

(b) 	
Annotated manufacturer specifications or cut sheets for each exterior lighting fixture. 

(c) 	
A photometric plan, prepared by a lighting professional certified by the National Council on Qualifications for the Lighting Professions (NCQLP), showing predicted maintained lighting levels for the proposed playing field. 



(4) 	
A Light Visibility Impact Assessment shall be provided, including at minimum the following: 

(a) 	
A map of the surrounding area context and locations of potential visual impact. 

(b) 	
A plan of the photometric spillage demonstrating the control of light trespass upon surrounding area and neighboring properties. 

(c) 	
A visual evaluation of the potential visibility of light poles and light fixtures during daytime and nighttime, and seasonally.  This may include a before and after viewpoint analysis, which viewpoints shall be approved by the Commission. 

(d) 	
The identification of existing or proposed visual screening and buffering, and long term control and protection thereof. 



(5) 	
Light Standards 

(a) 	
Maximum height.  The maximum height of a light pole shall be eighty (80) feet or as otherwise limited by the Commission, in consideration of the potential visibility and light emission to the surrounding neighborhood and the Light Visibility Impact Assessment as required above. 

(b) 	
High pressure sodium and flickering or flashing lights are prohibited, except identification lighting as may be required by the Federal Aviation Authority. 

(c) 	
All light fixtures designed to light the playing field area shall be a full cut-off shielded light fixture, aimed toward the playing field and shielded in directions away from the playing field so as to minimize glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties. 

(d) 	
The lighting system shall have a maintained average illumination (light level) complying with the foot-candle levels indicated for the specific play field type listed in the Table below or as otherwise limited by the Commission. 

(e) 	
Foot-candle measurements shall be measured horizontally three (3) feet above grade level and shall represent maintained lighting levels. 

(f) 	
The Commission shall specify the permitted hours of use: 

• 	
Approved school stadium playing field lighting hours shall in no case be permitted between the hours of 11:00 PM and 7:00 AM. 

• 	
Approved Industrial District sports field lighting hours shall in no case be permitted between the hours of 1:00 AM and 7:00 AM. 



(g) 	
Light poles shall be located outside of the of the perimeter fencing or at the mid­point between two adjacent fields if the perimeter area is shared. 

(h) 	
Limited appendages of a relative small size may be allowed to be attached to a light pole at the discretion of the Commission, provided such items are visually subordinate and colored to match the support pole.  Such items may include, but are not limited to, Wi-Fi hot spot devices and cameras. 

(i) 	
All lighting systems shall contain provisions for automatic shut off when the fields are unattended. 

(j) 	
Support pole coloring shall be a non-reflective, matte coloring. 




TABLE OF MAXIMUM AVERAGE ILLUMINATION (LIGHT LEVELS)  
Playing Field Type  Competitive Foot-candles (*)  Non-Competitive Foot-candles (*)  
Baseball/Softball Infield  60  50  
Baseball/Softball Outfield  40  30  
Field Hockey, Football, Soccer, Lacrosse  50  30  
Track and Field  30  30  
(*) Maximum average light levels within the play field shall not exceed one hundred and five (105%) percent of the listed foot-candle value.  

§6.2.3 Landscaping and Lighting Plan Requirements 
A. 	It is recommended, and may be required by the Commission, that a required landscaping plan be prepared by a Connecticut licensed landscape architect.  Lighting plans shall be prepared by a qualified professional based on the extent and complexity of the existing and proposed lighting facilities involved. 
B. 	Plans for landscaping shall include the following basic information, except as may be waived by the Commission if determined not applicable to the application under review: 
(1) 	
Location and boundaries of existing natural land features on the property, including exposed ledge and rock outcrops, hedgerows, trees twenty (20) inches or more in diameter at breast height (dbh), mapped significant habitat areas, stonewalls, wetlands and watercourses, and steep slopes in excess of fifteen percent (15%). 

(2) 	
Identification of all proposed changes to existing natural land features, including existing trees to be removed and existing trees to remain, as well as proposed measures and details thereof for their protection in the field during construction. 

(3) 	
Location of proposed landscaping keyed to a “Plant Schedule” indicating the proposed variety (common and scientific name), quantity installation size and root conditions, and any specialized planting or maintenance instructions). 

(4) 	
Landscaping operations and maintenance plan. 


C. 	Plans for lighting shall include the following basic information, except as may be waived by the Commission if determined not applicable to the application under review: 
(1) 	
Identification and description of any existing lighting to remain. 

(2) 	
Appropriate details and plans as required in Article 7 of these Regulations. 

(3) 	
Light operations and maintenance plan. 


§6.2.4 Landscape Buffers and Screening 
Landscape buffers shall be provided and maintained as follows: 
A. 	A front yard landscape buffer shall be provided across the width of the street frontage of the lot, except for permitted access driveways, pedestrian walkways or trails which may cross through to the interior portion of the lot, as well as accessory structures such as mailboxes, walls and fences, and signs as otherwise allowed by these Regulations: 
(1) 	
The minimum depth of the front yard landscape buffer for non-residential uses on lots in RF-1, RF-2 and RF-3 Districts and all uses in other residential districts shall be no less than applicable required front setback. 

(2) 	
The minimum depth of the front yard landscape buffer for lots in B-1, B-2 and LOR Districts shall be no less than twenty (20) feet. 

(3) 	
The minimum depth of the front yard landscape buffer for lots in all Industrial Districts shall be no less than the full depth of the required front yard setback. 


B. 	A side and rear yard landscape buffer of a minimum depth equal to the full depth of the required side and rear yard setbacks, respectively, shall be required for all such yards abutting any property within a Residential and Farming District. 
C. 	Required landscape buffers shall be consistent with the general landscaping design standards set forth in these Regulations as well as the following standards: 
(1) 	
Buffer landscaping shall include retention of existing vegetation, supplemented and augmented with new plantings.  Where, in the discretion of the Commission, sufficient natural vegetation exists, it may be substituted in total or portions in lieu of required new landscaping, provided said landscape buffer is effective in achieving the intent of these Regulations. 

(2) 	
Landscape buffers may consist of a combination of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs, fencing, walls, as well as constructed planted berms or natural landforms.  The species type and combination of plantings shall address long term provisions to maintain an effective buffer and/or screen as the plants grow and age (i.e., selection of evergreen trees and shrubs which remain full to the ground and inclusion of mid-size evergreen plantings combined with tree plantings to maximize understory protection as the trees mature and lower branches thin-out). 

(3) 	
Screening consisting of evergreen trees and shrubs shall be configured in staggered rows to provide maximized protection. 


D. 	In its discretion, the Commission may prescribe alternative buffer requirements, and/or waive or modify the particular requirements of these Regulations, in areas where required landscape buffers affect areas of regulated inland wetlands and watercourses in order to preserve and protect said resource areas consistent with the intent of the Connecticut General Statutes and laws and regulations of the Town of Monroe. 
§6.2.5 Pedestrian Walkways 
A. 	Pedestrian walkways, where included or required, shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide, allowing an additional thirty (30) inches on each side for overhanging of automobiles when included adjacent to parking spaces; a separating landscape bed is preferred. 
B. 	Pedestrian walkways shall be raised where appropriate, include handicap accessible ramps and preferably constructed of a different paving material than the parking pavement, such as brick, pavers or other porous or pervious decorative materials. Preferred curbing shall consist of durable materials such as granite, stone or block, or concrete. 
§6.2.6 Parking and Loading Area Requirements 
A. 	Off-street parking and loading areas shall be landscaped and suitably drained, graded, surfaced, curbed and maintained to ensure a safe and attractive parking facility as determined appropriate by the Commission. 
B. 	Landscaping for parking lots including fifty (50) or more off-street parking spaces shall be designed as follows: 
(1) 	
A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the area inside the perimeter of the parking area shall be landscaped and maintained with trees, shrubs and other plant materials, including the retention of existing natural landscaping as practicable or required by the Commission. 

(2) 	
Pedestrian walkways consistent with the standards of §6.2.5 of these Regulations shall be provided where required by the Commission to allow safe movement within the parking area, generally oriented perpendicular to and between parking bays.  A combination of trees, shrubs and groundcovers (other than lawn) should be planted adjacent to the walkways. 

(3) 	
Landscaping shall be designed so not to obstruct driver or pedestrian sight lines. 


§6.2.7 Landscaping and Lighting Compliance and Inspections 
A. 	The maintenance of all landscaping and lighting shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner.  Lack of maintenance in a proper, neat and functional condition shall be construed to be a violation of these Regulations and subject to the penalties provided by law. 
B. 	Landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. Dead or diseased landscaping shall promptly be replaced by the property owner consistent with the original landscaping requirements of these Regulations or according to the specifications and details of the landscape plan as approved by the Commission, as the case may be. 
C. 	Landscaping and lighting required by these Regulations and/or approved by the Commission as part of a Site Plan, Special Exception Permit or subdivision approval shall be subject to inspection by a designated agent of the Town, as well as investigation of complaints made by any official or private citizen concerning the maintenance of such. 
D. 	The Commission may require site and project specific inspections and reporting by an appropriate professional at the expense of an applicant to assess the efficacy of installed landscaping prior to and during the initial two (2) years following acceptance by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of completed landscaping. 

§6.3 Signs 
§6.3.1 Sign Permits 
A. 	No sign shall be established, erected, constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered without obtaining a Zoning Sign Permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer, which shall serve as a certificate of zoning compliance, unless otherwise exempted by these Regulations. New signage shall be included as part of a Special Exception Permit / Site Development Plan application and shall be reviewed and approved by the Commission as part of said application. 
B. 	Where a sign is subject to the provisions of the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code, a building permit shall also be required. 
C. 	No variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning any sign. 
D. 	If any sign does not conform to these sign standards, whether being preexisting nonconforming or by virtue of a granted Zoning Board of Appeals variance, and is discontinued, altered, reconstructed, enlarged, extended or moved, its replacement or the alterations shall conform to these sign standards.  No existing sign shall be altered, reconstructed, enlarged, extended or moved except in accordance with these sign standards.  However, the repainting or repair of existing signs and changing of tenant names is permitted. 
§6.3.2 Prohibited Signs 
A. 	All signs not specifically permitted are prohibited. Prohibited signs shall also include roadside signs, animated or moving signs, balloon signs, banners or streamers, beacons or search lights, billboards, festoons, flag signs, inflatable signs, flashing or intermittent signs (including vending machines and those inside a building that are visible from the road, a parking area or an adjacent property), roof signs, vehicular signs not used in the normal course of business, signs for an off-premises location (except an otherwise permitted free-standing sign on a private commercial street as set forth in §6.3.7A(3) of these Regulations.  Vehicles with signs painted on or attached thereto shall not be parked in visually conspicuous locations so as to function as a free standing sign. 
B. 	No vehicle shall be utilized as a sign and no registered vehicles with signs shall be allowed to remain in any given parking space, with the exception of a residential driveway consistent with and where permitted by these Regulations, for longer than a twenty-four (24)-hour period. 
§6.3.3 Exemptions 
A. 	The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section, except §6.3.4 and §6.3.9: Governmental, Name Plate, Political, Private Sale or Event. 
B. 	The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of §6.3.1A, but shall comply in all respects with all other provisions of §6.3: Agricultural, Construction, Home Occupation, Real Estate, Seasonal or Special Event. 
C. 	Such other signs as may be exempted elsewhere in these Regulations. 
§6.3.4 Height, Location and Number of Signs 
A. 	A single commercial/industrial tenant building may have one (1) sign attached to the building. A multiple commercial/industrial tenant building may have one (1) sign attached to the building per tenant space. However, except any individual retail commercial tenant with a storefront in excess of one-hundred (100) linear feet may allocate its total allowed wall sign area between multiple wall signs provided the cumulative area of all such wall signs does not exceed the total area permitted for said individual tenant. 
B. 	The length of a tenant wall sign on the front façade of the building may not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the length of the tenant’s front facade. 
C. 	A sign composed of a combination of individual characters and/or logos combined in context, shall be considered a single sign. 
D. 	No sign may be on a side or rear wall unless such wall faces a street or parking area, or is at least seventy-five (75) feet from any other commercial/industrial structure. 
E. 	Signs attached to a building shall not project above the exposed wall of the building upon which it is attached. No sign shall be displayed, located, mounted or attached to or on a roof. 
F. 	Signs attached to buildings may project into the area required for setbacks, provided that the sign does not project more than fifteen (15) inches from the building. 
G. 	A permitted freestanding sign shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from any property line or street line. 
H. 	No freestanding ground sign or monument sign shall exceed a height of 20 feet. 
I. 	On a corner lot of five (5) acres or more, one (1) freestanding sign may be permitted at the discretion of the Commission along each street, provided at minimum an access driveway is also provided from each street, and provided that the distance between the centerline of each driveway at the street line is no less than one-thousand-five-hundred (1,500) linear feet. 
§6.3.5 Obstructions 
No sign shall be so arranged that it interferes with traffic through glare, lighting arrangement, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks, or driveways, through confusion with a traffic control device (by reason of its color, location, shape or other characteristics or through any other means).  No sign shall be located or maintained so as to obstruct any door, window or fire escape or to cause any other hazard to the public health or safety. 
§6.3.6 Projected and Hanging Signs 
No sign shall project over any sidewalk, driveway, walkway, roadway, alley or right-of-way of any public or private street or highway. 
§6.3.7 Permitted Total Freestanding Sign Area 
A. 	Freestanding Signs in Nonresidential Districts: 
(1) 	
In the case of nonresidential use of a single lot where the principal building(s) has a total floor area of less than forty-thousand (40,000) square feet, the maximum sign area of a permitted freestanding sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in total sign area. 

(2) 	
In the case of nonresidential use of a single lot where the principal building(s) has a total floor area of forty-thousand (40,000) square feet or more, the maximum total sign area of a permitted freestanding sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in total sign area, except no individual user of said lot shall be permitted a sign area greater than forty (40) square feet. 

(3) 	
In addition to that permitted in Subsections (1) or (2) above, one (1) freestanding sign may be permitted within a private commercial street right-of-way at the intersection of a State Highway and an approved private commercial street, subject to the following: 

(a) 	
Such sign shall be for the sole purpose of identification of a lot(s) or tenant(s) of a lot(s) which meet the following criteria: 

• 	
The lot shall be 10 acres or more; 

• 	
The lot shall front solely of the private commercial street; and 

• 	
The lot shall be at least 350 feet from the midpoint of the intersection. 



(b) 	
Such sign shall not exceed a total sign area of fifty (50) square feet and no individual user sign panel shall exceed a sign area of twenty five (25) square feet. The total sign area shall be divided equally between the total number of panels to be located on the sign in order to create uniform panel sizes. 

(c) 	
Such sign shall be a ground sign (no pole signs) as defined in these Regulations. 

(d) 	
Such sign shall not be internally illuminated. 

(e) 	
Such sign shall be located within a planted landscaped area measuring a minimum of eight-hundred (800) square feet. Plantings shall provide seasonal variation. 

(f) 	
Any other freestanding sign on said lot(s) as otherwise permitted by these Regulations shall be a non-internally illuminated ground sign (no pole signs) only. 



(4) 	
No permitted freestanding sign of any size shall display more than eight (8) user names. Any name, whether an individual user or center name, shall count towards the total number of names allowed under these Regulations. However, the Commission prefers that permitted freestanding signs, particularly where multiple users occupy a single lot, display a single center name rather than individual user names. 

(5) 	
The property street number shall be included in all permitted freestanding signs within the body of the total sign area.  The street number shall be located at the top of said sign area. 

(6) 	
The following maximum and minimum character heights shall be required for all copy on permitted freestanding signs for the purpose of creating legible graphics which can be seen and responded to within safe distances to maneuver a car: 

(a) 
Maximum Character Height 	– No letter, number, character or other symbol shall exceed a height of three (3) feet for a single line of copy or two (2) feet for multiple lines of copy. 

(b) 
Minimum Character Height – No letter, number, character or other symbol shall be less than four (4) inches in height. 




B. 	Signs in Residential and Farming Districts: 
(1) 	
One freestanding sign per lot may be permitted.  Freestanding signs shall not exceed ten 

(10) square feet in area. The sign may be double facing. 

(2) 	
The total area of signs on any lot excepting freestanding signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area. 

(3) 	
On premises which are for sale or for rent, not more than two (2) signs which shall advertise only the premises, provided such a sign shall have an area not exceeding ten 


(10) square feet; however, only one (1) such sign is permitted along any given street frontage where that frontage shall be less than two-hundred (200) feet. All such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days following actual sale or lease of property. 
§6.3.8 Measurement of Sign Area 
A. 	The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs or symbols, together with any background different from the building, whether painted or applied, when it is designed as an integral part of, and obviously related to the sign; and when the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a building wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters or symbols. 
B. 	In the case of a freestanding sign or a sign that can be seen from both sides, the area shall be determined by multiplying the outside dimensions of the sign, not including the vertical, horizontal or diagonal supports which affix the sign to the ground, unless such supports are evidently designed to be part of the sign as defined herein. 
§6.3.9 Specific Regulations Pertaining to Permitted Signs by Type 
Type of Sign  Maximum Area  Maximum Height  Permit Required  Requirements  
Agricultural Sign  16 sf  8 feet  No  One permanent freestanding or wall agricultural sign per farm and farm stand is allowed. Sign shall not be illuminated.  
Business Identification, Freestanding Ground Sign Residential Districts Freestanding Sign Pole Sign Ground Sign Nonresidential Districts Freestanding Sign Pole Sign Ground Sign  10 sf 10 sf 10 sf 40 sf 40 sf 40 sf  8 feet 8 feet 8 feet 20 feet 20 feet 8 feet  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes  A minimum of 10 feet from the property line. For multiple tenant facilities, separate freestanding signs shall not be displayed by individual establishments. The style, design and construction shall be related and compatible with the architectural style and design of site buildings and other site structures and signs. Use of wood and other natural materials as well as external illumination are preferred. Only one type of such sign is permitted. Only one type such sign is permitted.  
Construction Sign, Freestanding Residential Districts Nonresidential Districts  16 sf 32 sf  8 feet 8 feet  No No  Restricted solely to the period of such construction. Shall not be illuminated.  
Directional Sign  4 sf, or as required by CTDOT  8 feet  No  Shall not include any advertising or name of establishment.  
Gasoline Price Sign, Freestanding  16 sf  8 feet  Yes  Pricing information if provided shall be incorporated into otherwise permitted freestanding signs on the premises. In addition, pricing signage above and attached to an individual fueling station may be permitted provided the area of each such sign does not exceed an area of two square feet each and shall not be internally illuminated.  
Home Occupation Sign  2 sf  One sign (freestanding or wall mounted). Shall not be illuminated.  
Menu Board Sign  32 sf  7 feet  Yes  May be freestanding or affixed to building. One Menu Board Sign is permitted per drive-thru use on a lot.  
Name Plate Sign  2 sf  N/A  No  Shall not be illuminated.  

Type of Sign  Maximum Area  Maximum Height  Permit Required  Requirements  
Political Signs, Freestanding  6 sf  4 feet  No  May be erected no sooner than 45 days prior to election. Must be removed within seven days after election. Shall not be illuminated.  
Portable Sign  Refer to §6.3.17 for standards.  
Real Estate Sign, Freestanding Residential Districts Nonresidential Districts  5 sf 8 sf  8 feet 8 feet  No No  One sign is permitted. All such signs shall be removed within seven days following actual sale or lease of property. Shall advertise on property only. Shall not be illuminated  
Seasonal Sign, Freestanding  32 sf  8 feet  No  One such sign per farm, farmstore, seasonal farmstand and agriculturally related use. Not to exceed 60 days in any given year. Said sign must be removed when the seasonal sale is over. Shall not be illuminated. Sign may be located no closer than 10 feet of a street line.  
Special Event Sign, Freestanding  32 sf  8 feet  No  Not to exceed 15 days in any three -month period. To be removed promptly at the end of such period. No sign or device held in the air by balloon or other means and no searchlights shall be permitted. Shall not be illuminated.  
Tag Sale Sign  6 sf  6 feet  No  Shall not be illuminated.  
Wall Sign Residential Districts Nonresidential Districts  10 sf where permitted 1 sf per 1 linear foot of building frontage*  Attach to Building Façade Attach to Building Façade  YES YES  *Measured as a straight parallel horizontal line across the tenant front façade of the building between exterior walls or between the center point of any shared party walls.  

§6.3.10 Hours of Use 
Illumination of any business identification sign not providing security lighting shall be extinguished at 
11:00 pm or at time of close of business, whichever is later. 
§6.3.11 Repair and Maintenance 
A. 	Signs shall be repaired by repainting, by replacement of lettering, wording and accompanying symbols and by repairing structural supports, and such repair shall not be considered an alteration within the meaning of these Regulations, provided that: 
(1) 
The outside dimensions of signs as measured above are not changed; 

(2) 
That the location, height and illumination of a sign is not changed; and 

(3) 
No substantial change in lettering, wording or symbols is made. 


B. 	Nothing in this section shall prevent a sign from being altered so as to become more conforming to the existing regulations, provided that a permit where required under §6.3.1 of these Regulations is obtained. 
C. 	All signs shall be maintained in such a condition so as not to become a nuisance, unsightly or unsafe. If a sign is not so maintained it shall be removed by the owner or tenant upon notice from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
§6.3.12 Removal 
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove or cause to be removed all nonconforming business signs or words, letters, figures, design, symbols and colors of a conforming sign within two months from the time the premises are vacated. 
§6.3.13 Replacement, Alteration or Relocation 
No sign shall be replaced, altered or relocated without conforming to the then existing requirements of these Regulations, as amended, at the time of such replacement, alteration or relocation, subject to a permit where required under §6.3.1 of these Regulations. 
§6.3.14 Uniformity of Signs 
In any district where there is more than one sign on a building or more than one sign in a multi-building complex, all signs shall conform to a uniform and coordinated sign program submitted by the owner or tenant and approved by the Commission. The scheme shall be a thematic concept to maintain aesthetic consistency with the architecture of the surrounding structure(s). 
§6.3.15 Sign Illumination 
A. 	No internally illuminated signs are permitted in the Residential Zones. 
B. 	Internal illumination shall be strictly limited to the illumination of text or graphic symbols only, that is, channel letter style or box signs with opaque background materials. Internally illuminated awnings are prohibited. Exposed neon tubing or bare-bulbs are prohibited. 
C. 	The face of any sign shall be constructed or colored in such a manner as to prevent glare from the internal illumination. White background materials are prohibited. Materials are to be of an opaque dense or solid character creating “positive contrast” legibility and visibility. 
D. 	Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall be carefully located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only onto the sign façade and shall not be aimed toward adjacent streets, roads or properties. Integrated external illumination is preferred (e.g. such as bar lighting or other lights concealed at the edges of the sign construction that wash light over the sign as opposed to a protruding light fixture which spots light towards the sign face). 
E. 	The light source (bulb) of light fixtures shall not be directly visible from adjacent streets, roads or properties. 
F. 	The average level of illumination on the vertical surface of the sign shall not exceed 3.0 foot-candles, and the uniformity ratio shall not exceed 2:1. 
G. 	Fixtures used to illuminate signs shall be top mounted, shielded and directed downward to the sign. 
H. 	Low lumen and shielded lights and fixtures may be located on the ground with four (4) concurring votes of the Commission. 
§6.3.16 Street Numbers 
All freestanding signs shall display the street number(s) of the premises. In the case of more than one (1) street number assigned to the premises, the range of numbers shall be displayed. All other street numbers shall be displayed in accordance with town ordinance. 
§6.3.17 Special Requirements for Portable Signs 
Portable signs shall be permitted in the Nonresidential Districts subject to the following requirements: 
A. Design Standards 
(1) 	
Only one (1) portable sign shall be permitted for an individual business or establishment and the sign content must be limited to the business, service, or goods of the establishment immediately adjacent to the sign, or to an establishment located on the upper floors of the building immediately adjacent to the sign. Each property shall be entitled to no more than one (1) portable sign for every seventy-five (75) feet of property frontage on a public street, regardless of the number of businesses on a given property. Properties on corner lots shall only be entitled to count the frontage of the street having the principal building frontage. 

(2) 	
The sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in total area based on the dimensions of a single side, and shall not be more than three (3) feet wide nor more than three (3) feet high. 

(3) 	
Signs shall be located on the property adjacent to the front property line, and shall not obstruct a sidewalk, where one exists. Signs shall not impede or obstruct vision of vehicles at intersections or points of egress from the property. Should a sign be so placed, it shall be subject to removal by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 

(4) 	
Signs shall be located with the message perpendicular to the street. 

(5) 	
Signs may be displayed only when the establishment is open for business and shall be removed when the business is closed. 

(6) 	
Signs must be constructed of durable, weatherproof materials, including wood, metal, or composite wood or synthetic materials. Glass, paper, laminated paper, PVC pipe frames or similar materials; balloons, streamers or similar devices are not permitted. 

(7) 	
Signs may not be illuminated. All portable signs shall be maintained in good repair including the sign frame structure, materials, and lettering and graphics. 

(8) 	
Signs shall be appropriately secured against movement from wind or water, but shall not be affixed, tethered or otherwise attached to any governmental sign or structure, or any utility pole or appurtenance. 


B. Permitting and Enforcement 
(1) 	
Anyone wishing to display a portable sign must file an application with the Zoning Enforcement Officer for an annual Portable Sign Permit. 

(2) 	
Anyone applying for a Portable Sign Permit shall provide written/signed consent from the owner of the property. 

(3) 	
Portable Sign Permits shall be issued for an operating period of one (1) calendar year, from January 1 to December 31 or portion thereof. 

(a) 	
The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue on an annual basis, subject to a renewal application, a Portable Sign Permit for the following year. 

(b) 	
Applications for renewals will be accepted between November 30 and December 30 of each year. 

(c) 	
New applications made after January 1 of each year shall expire December 31 of said year. 



(4) 
The Town reserves the right, acting through the First Selectman or a designee, to prohibit the use of a portable sign at any time because of anticipated or actual public emergencies, conflicts or similar problems along a highway right-of-way. These situations include but are not limited to festivals, parades, road races, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or hazardous weather conditions or other emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior written notice of the time period during which the prohibition is in effect, but failure to give notice shall not affect the right of the Town to prohibit portable signs at any time. 


§6.3.18 Violations; Removal 
Signs lacking permits from the proper authority, which have been placed within any highway or street right-of-way, may be confiscated by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and may result in the issuance of a citation. 

§6.4 Excavation and Filling 
§6.4.1 Excavations Permit Required; Exemptions 
An excavation/filling permit must be secured from the Commission before commencing the excavation or removal of gravel, topsoil, clay, sand, stone, loam, dirt or any other earth material on or from any parcel of land, except when such excavation or removal is limited to: 
A. 	Necessary foundation and trench excavation in connection with work on the premises for which a valid building permit is in effect. 
B. 	Removal of unsuitable material and depositing of suitable material, which removal and depositing shall not exceed a total of five-hundred (500) cubic yards of material, for the construction or reconstruction of sewage disposal systems, utility services, accessways, driveways and parking lots. 
C. 	Changes in contour in accordance with a Site Plan or Special Exception Permit approved by the Commission.  Such plan and change in contour shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this Section, unless otherwise conditioned under the provisions of Site Plan or Special Exception Permit approval. 
D. 	Necessary excavation and grading for a subdivision road for which plans have been approved by the Commission, provided that such excavation and grading shall be completed within five (5) years of the approval date.  If approval was granted over five (5) years prior to the beginning of the aforementioned work, then an approval must be obtained in accordance with all current regulations. 
E. 	The removal by or for the owner from one part of his property to another of topsoil or subsoil to a maximum of one-hundred (100) cubic yards per acre over a period of time not to exceed one 
(1) year, when such removal is for the purpose of landscaping and farming. 
F. 	In the case of exemptions specified in Subsections A through E above, said work shall be subject to the review of the Zoning Enforcement Officer in consultation with the Town Planner and Town Engineer, as deemed appropriate, to assure that appropriate safeguards for the conduct of such work are implemented so that such work will not have any unreasonable immediate or long-term adverse effect on adjoining properties. 
§6.4.2 Challenge of Exemption 
All exemptions listed in §6.4.1 shall be under the jurisdiction of the Commission or any agent so designated by the Commission.  Any individual serving in this capacity has the authority and responsibility of stopping questionable projects and referring them to the Commission. 
§6.4.3 Inland Wetland Approval 
If any excavation, removal or fill of gravel, topsoil, clay, sand, stone, loam, dirt or any other earth material is proposed on or from any parcel of land and is shown to be subject to regulation in accordance with Monroe Inland Wetland Regulations, the necessary approvals and/or permits must be obtained from the governing wetland authority pursuant to Title 22a of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision (current revision), prior to application.  This requirement shall also pertain to the exemptions specified in §6.4.1 above. 
§6.4.4 Excavation/Filling Permit Application Procedure 
Application for a permit to excavate or remove any of said earth materials shall be made to the Commission by the property owner or his authorized agent on forms provided by the Commission.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee and by a plan of operation prepared by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor and/or professional engineer, which plan of operation shall include the following maps, plans and specifications, except as may be waived consistent with the standards and procedures as set forth in §7.3.2 of these Regulations: 
A. 	A locus plan, at a scale of one (1) inch equals one-hundred (100) feet, showing all roads within a one (1) mile radius of the site; all zoning districts and the Town Line, if within five-hundred (500) feet of the subject parcel; erosion and sediment control plan; storm water quality and quantity control plan; restoration/reclamation plan, which may include a potential future site development plan. 
B. 	Location and limits of the premises and names of abutting property owners as listed on current town tax assessment records. 
C. 	Boundary survey and site topographic plans certified as Class A-2 and T-2 or a better or equal accuracy transit survey, with grading plan showing existing contours in the area to be excavated and proposed contours at two (2) foot intervals for the area after operations. Such plans shall include the area to be excavated, as well as surrounding area, if owned by the applicant, within one-hundred (100) feet of the excavation, and shall be drawn at a scale not to exceed one inch equals fifty (50) feet.  Also included shall be north-south and east-west traverse cross-section drawings at equal intervals from the outside extremities.  The distance between the traverse cross sections shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule within areas of excavation and deposition of material: 
(1) 	
Sites less than five (5) acres shall provide sections fifty (50) feet apart along with intermittent cross sections at points of vertical or horizontal changes in topography. 

(2) 	
Sites greater than five (5) acres but less than twenty (20) acres shall provide sections one-hundred (100) feet apart. 

(3) 	
All sites shall provide intermittent cross sections at points of vertical or horizontal changes in topography. 


D. 	An estimate of the amount of material to be excavated or removed. 
E. 	Existing and proposed drainage of the site, together with drainage easements and flowage rights. 
F. 	An estimate of the number and types of trucks and other machinery to be used on the site, hours of operation and the locations and types of any buildings to be erected. 
G. 	Proposed truck access and egress to and from the site upon any road within the bounds of the Town of Monroe. 
H. 	Details of final grading and planting of the site to prevent erosion of the site at the conclusion of operations or at such earlier times as may be required by the Commission. 
I. 	Existing ponds and watercourses on or adjacent to the premises. 
J. 	The location of wooded areas, all rock outcrops and existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
K. 	All dimensions to the hundredth of a foot and all bearings or angles on all property lines, easements and rights-of-way. 
L. 	Title, date, scale and North point. 
M. Dewatering facilities. 
N. 	Approval of the governing wetlands authority, if applicable (also see §6.4.3 of these Regulations). 
O. 	Anti-tracking measures and vehicle inspection and cleaning areas. 
P. 	Water and dust controls. 
Q. 	Such additional information as the Commission shall deem necessary in order to decide upon the application. 
§6.4.5 Map Preparation 
Maps and plans shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the mapping standards set forth in Article 7 of these Regulations. 
§6.4.6 Additional Information Required 
The following additional information shall be required: 
A. 	Proof that written notice of the proposed changes has been given to all mortgage holders. 
B. 	A written statement from the Tax Collector of Monroe certifying that all current taxes levied against the property have been paid in full and that there are no unreleased tax liens encumbering said property. 
C. 	An engineering report issued by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, stating that any artificial lake or pond has sufficient water flow to maintain the proposed level and to avoid stagnation. An engineering report issued by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, stating that the proposed change of contours will not adversely affect the water table. An engineering report issued by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut stating the volume of earth material (cut and fill) to be relocated, removed or added to the site. 
D. 	A reclamation plan. 
E. 	A blasting plan in conformance with related permits that may be required from the Fire Marshal or Building Department. 
§6.4.7 Fee for Excavation/Filling Permit 
An application fee as specified in Article 9 of these Regulations shall be required. 
§6.4.8 Requirements for Approval of Excavation and/or Grading Permit 
A. 	Before issuing an excavation/filling permit, the Commission shall hold a public hearing, duly advertised and conducted according to the Connecticut General Statutes.  The Commission, in considering and reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision, shall be guided by and take into consideration the public health, safety and general welfare and general effect of the same on the neighborhood, the duration of operations, future usefulness of the premises, the impact on vehicular traffic in the area and such other factors as may bear upon the harmonious physical development of the Town of Monroe. 
B. 	In addition thereto, the Commission shall satisfy itself that all conditions as set forth in §6.4.9 of these Regulations will be met and that the premises will be excavated and graded in conformity with the plan as approved.  Any deviation from the approved plan shall be a violation and cause for the Zoning Enforcement Officer to revoke the permit. 
C. 	When the above standards and conditions meet the satisfaction of the Commission, a permit may be issued pursuant to this Section and shall be valid for a period of two (2) years. The Commission may renew the permit for two additional years provided the applicant submits an updated grading plan and a written report by a Connecticut State licensed land surveyor or professional engineer certifying that the operation is in compliance with the permit approved by the Commission. A written request for the permit renewal shall be submitted to the Commission a minimum of forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the initial permit. Notice of an application for renewal shall be published as a legal notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town. The Commission may require a public hearing on any renewal application if it determines that there has been a significant change in circumstances. 
D. 	The Commission shall render its decision within sixty-five (65) days after a hearing, and said decision regarding issuance of the permit shall be published in a newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town of Monroe within fifteen (15) days of such decision date. 
E. 	No map may be signed as being approved until the Commission votes approval and a satisfactory bond is posted, and all applicable conditions of approval have been adequately addressed. 
F. 	Approval of the application shall become effective as a permit when the applicant files with the Town Clerk the approved plan signed by the Chairman of the Commission. 
§6.4.9 Conditions of Excavation and/or Filling or Grading Operation 
The plans as approved by the Commission shall become part of the excavation/filling permit, and the following conditions, except as may be waived by the Commission upon written request by the applicant in accordance with §6.4.23 of these Regulations, shall be met: 
A. 	The changes in contour shall conform to the plans approved by the Commission. 
B. 	No artificial slope greater than twenty-seven degrees (27°) to the horizontal (or maximum two 
(2) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical) shall be created. 
C. 	No change in contour shall be made within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line. 
D. 	No artificial slope greater than fourteen degrees (14°) to the horizontal (or maximum four feet horizontal to one foot vertical) shall be created within fifty feet of any property line. 
E. 	No artificial slope greater than fourteen degrees (14°) to the horizontal shall be created within fifty feet of any street line. 
F. 	At all stages of operations, proper drainage shall be provided to prevent the collection, stagnation or excessive runoff of water and to prevent harmful effects upon surrounding properties and watercourses. 
G. 	All artificial ponds and lakes created by any change in land contours shall have sufficient water volume, surface elevation, movement and temperature to maintain the proposed level and to avoid stagnation. 
H. 	The entire property, except for ponds and lakes, shall be graded to shed water without erosion and to avoid areas of standing water (ponding or puddles). 
I. 	Excavation below the level of an abutting property or street line shall be at a distance from said property or street line to be determined by the Commission in consultation with the Town Engineer in consideration of the proposed plans, which Commission, in establishing said distance, shall take into consideration the same provisions and guidelines as set forth in §6.4.8 of these Regulations. 
J. 	During the period of excavation and removal, proper barricades or fences shall be erected for the protection of pedestrians and vehicles. 
K. 	Truck ingress and egress to the excavation shall be so arranged and truck loads shall be so trimmed as to minimize danger to traffic on adjacent roads and nuisance to surrounding properties.  Limitations may also be placed as to the size and type of equipment used on the promises and as to the maximum axle-loading required to protect town roads. 
L. 	Proper measures shall be taken to minimize the nuisance of noise and flying dust or rock and lighting, if permitted. 
M. 	No operations shall be undertaken on the site except between the hours of 8:00 am and 5:00 pm Monday through Friday, except with approval of the Commission.  There shall be no blasting on the site except between the hours of 9:00 am and 5:00 pm Monday through Friday. No activity of any type shall be conducted on any legal holiday declared by the government of the State of Connecticut or the United States. 
N. 	No buildings or structures shall be erected on the premises except as may be permitted in these Regulations or except as temporary shelter for machinery and field office directly related to site operations, subject to approval by the Commission. In any case all such buildings or structures shall be removed from the site within sixty (60) days following the expiration or revocation of the permit or completion of the permitted work or the cessation of site operations, whichever occurs earlier. 
O. 	If, as part of an excavation operation, debris or trash or unsuitable material is encountered, the same shall be removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with applicable town regulations. 
P. 	No sorting, grading, crushing or other machinery for treatment or processing of material being removed or deposited shall be erected, maintained or operated on the premises for which a permit may be granted, except in an Industrial District or in all other districts where controlled rock crushing, screening and processing may be permitted by the Commission on a limited short duration basis as part of site development and construction preparation, provided: 
(1) 	
Such controlled activities will reduce construction traffic by use of materials onsite. 

(2) 	
Such controlled activities will not involve mining or excavation of more than necessary to achieve site preparation of an approved project. 


All permitted such activities regardless of permitted location shall not include, permit or involve materials from offsite locations.  Appropriate precautions, safeguards and impact abatement measures to address noise, dust and other related impacts from such activities shall be identified and appropriate plans proposed for review and approval by the Commission.  No such activities shall be permitted to occur within five-hundred (500) feet of any residential district or residential use. 
Q. 	When the approved excavation and removal operations or either of them are completed, or when required by the Commission, the excavation area shall be restored in accordance with the approved plan.  In no case will a permit be extended for more than a twelve (12) month period unless a substantial part of the area previously excavated has been properly graded and stabilized with approved landscaping. 
(1) 	
The top layer of topsoil for a depth of six inches shall be set aside on the premises and shall be re-spread in accordance with the approved contour lines within thirty (30) days following the expiration or revocation of the permit or completion of the work, whichever occurs earlier. In cases where onsite storage of such topsoil is not available, at the request of the applicant the Commission may permit off-site storage of topsoil. 

(2) 	
Within the sixty (60) days following the expiration or revocation of the permit or the completion of the changes in contour, the entire area disturbed from its natural state, including all truck access and other service roads, shall be suitably graded with suitable topsoil and landscaping as approved by the Commission so as to prevent soil erosion. 

(3) 	
All finished contours shall be established in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, or shall be a minimum of six (6) feet above any ledge or the natural water table, except in such cases where the original land condition showed ledge or water table at a depth of less than six (6) feet, in which case the existing conditions shall be maintained as a minimum or in a case where a pond or a lake has been approved. 


R. 	No sign of any nature, other than customary traffic control, safety and trespassing signs, shall be posted or erected in connection with the operation granted approval under these Regulations. 
S. 	The permittee shall provide engineering progress reports prepared by a Connecticut State licensed civil engineer on a quarterly basis. Additionally, the Commission may at any time during the permit duration require an engineering progress report from the permittee, to be made by a licensed civil engineer.  If such report is not received by the Commission within thirty 
(30) days from the date of such request, the Commission may engage a professional engineer or land surveyor to determine compliance with the terms of this regulation and all expenses in connection therewith shall be paid by the permittee. 
§6.4.10 Responsibilities of Permittee 
The permittee shall be responsible to the Town of Monroe through the Commission for compliance with all provisions of the excavation/filling permit and to the Town of Monroe for the following, as such responsibilities shall be reflected in the bond of §6.4.11. 
A. 	Damage caused to town roads by any equipment used in performance of the operations covered by an excavation/filling permit issued pursuant to these Regulations.  All necessary road repairs are to be made to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and Public Works Director. 
B. 	Supplying, placing and removing all highway warning signs and other safety devices as may be deemed necessary by the Monroe Police Department and/or the Commission. 
C. 	Removing all spillage by the permittee that may accumulate on the roadways in the Town of Monroe as it occurs. 
§6.4.11 Bond 
The applicant shall file with the Commission a bond posted with/to the Town of Monroe in the form and with surety acceptable to the Commission, in such amount as the Commission shall deem sufficient to ensure faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the conditions of approval (§6.4.9), the responsibilities of the permittee (§6.4.10) and revocation and suspension (§6.4.13). The applicant must comply with all Town requirements with regard to the provision of an official bonding agreement and other posting requirements as described in Article 9 of these Regulations. 
A. 	The term of such bond shall not extend more than sixty (60) days beyond the date of satisfactory completion of the work as may be determined by the Commission. 
B. 	No such bond shall be released nor shall the permittee be deemed to have complied with the conditions provided for herein until a written statement bearing the seal of a land surveyor or civil engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, certifying that the final contours meet the requirements of the permit has been submitted to the Commission, and until an inspection of the premises by an agent of the Commission has been completed to assure that all other conditions have been met. 
C. 	The Commission shall take steps to initiate action for the calling of the performance bond as soon as practical following the sixty (60) day restoration period allowed after completion of the project or expiration or revocation of the permit, unless all work has been satisfactorily completed or the Commission deems that extenuating circumstances warrant a limited extension of the restoration period, in which case the bond must be renewed for the same limited period. 
§6.4.12 Enforcement of Excavation/Filling Permit 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer or any special agent appointed by the Commission shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of any excavation/filling permit. 
§6.4.13 Duration, Renewal and Revocation of Excavation/Filling Permit 
A. 	Any permit issued by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with §6.4.9 of these Regulations shall cover operations for a stated period of time not to exceed two (2) years, and such permit shall be renewable for successive stated periods of time, none of which shall exceed two (2) years. 
B. 	The Commission shall not renew or extend any permit unless the operator is able to show, through the report of a Connecticut State licensed land surveyor and professional engineer that the excavation already completed conforms to the plan of operations as approved. 
(1) 	
If for any reason the operation of work on the promises ceases for six months, the permit shall be void and the owner or his agent must apply for a new permit and furnish such engineering data and bond as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 

(2) 	
If there is a question as to whether or not any of the conditions of any portion of this Section have been or are being violated, the Commission may at any time, upon at least five days written notice to the holder of any excavation/filling permit, require such holder to appear before the Commission on a day certain to be heard as to the alleged violations. If evidence that any of such conditions have been or are being violated is presented at such hearing and if the Commission finds that violations do in fact exist, the Commission may immediately revoke such permit and order operations suspended and direct appropriate action to remedy the violations. 

(3) 	
A permit may at the discretion of the Commission be suspended twenty-four (24) hours after the postmark of the above-stated written notice. 

(4) 	
Upon revocation of the permit, the entire area disturbed during the operation shall be made to conform to the provisions of §6.4.9B through H, N, O and Q(1) through (3) of these Regulations. 

(5) 	
Upon revocation of the permit, all time periods for completion of restoration, as provided in the sections referenced in Subsection B(4) above, shall commence on what would have been the first permitted day of operation if the permit had not been revoked. 

(6) 	
For each and every violation of the terms of the permit or if the prescribed conditions under which an excavation/filling permit is issued, the holder of such permit shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes. 

(7) 	
As necessary for inspection purposes, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or other Town agent shall have the right of access to all areas and operations for which excavation/filling permits have been issued or applied for. 


§6.4.14 Applicability to Existing Operations 
Any renewal permit shall be subject to the regulations in effect at the time said renewal permit is issued. 
A. 	Any existing excavation operation which was commenced prior to any regulation relating thereto and is presently being conducted without a permit may be continued, provided that said continued operation is carried on in accordance with these Regulations relating to grading, drainage, slopes and restoration provisions, and be subject to issuance of a permit under the requirements of this Section. 
B. 	In order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Monroe, any person or persons carrying on an existing excavation operation not covered by a permit issued by the Commission, which operations do not conform to the requirements set forth in Subsection A above, shall either correct such nonconformance within sixty (60) days of receipt of written notice of the same by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or shall terminate said excavation operations. 
§6.4.15 Fill Exemptions 
Any operation for clean land filling shall be carried on only pursuant to a permit from the Commission except as follows: 
A. 	Fill by or for the owner on part of his property may be allowed without such permit if the fill does not exceed five-hundred (500) cubic yards of earth material, or change of contour or elevation of two (2) feet or greater and such filling does not restrict any watercourse or drainage on the premises being filled or have an adverse effect on drainage on adjacent or surrounding property. 
B. 	Creating of stockpiles of material and removal of the same shall not be considered as a fill or excavation operation requiring a separate permit. However, the stockpiling of material is prohibited without a permit approval by the Commission. 
§6.4.16 Fill Permit Application Procedure 
Application for a permit to fill shall be made to the Commission by the property owner or his authorized agent on forms prescribed by the Commission.  Applications for permits to fill shall be accompanied by copies of any necessary State permits required pursuant to Public Act 72-155 or amendments thereto. All such applications shall be accompanied by the same engineering data and information applicable to an excavation operation as are set forth in §6.4.4 of these Regulations. 
§6.4.17 Requirements for Approval of Fill Permit 
Before issuing an excavation/filling permit, the Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of §6.4.8 of these Regulations. Prior to such hearing the applicant must submit an official bonding agreement to the Town. 
§6.4.18 Performance Bond for Fill Permit 
When a fill permit is granted, the applicant shall post a bond in accordance with the provisions in §6.4.11 of these Regulations. 
§6.4.19 Conditions of Fill Operation 
The Commission may approve the application and issue an excavation/filling permit for a period of stated duration, subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
A. 	Filling where the resulting grade shall be higher than an abutting property line or street line or have an effect on any existing watercourse or established floodplain shall be kept at a distance from said property or street line to be determined by the Commission, which Commission, in establishing said distance, shall take into consideration the same provisions and guidelines as set forth in §6.4.8 of these Regulations. 
B. 	All provisions of §6.4.8 of these Regulations relating to fixed equipment, temporary structures, drainage, barricading and fencing, truck access, stockpiling, noise and dust control, hours of operation and seeding and landscaping shall, to the extent that they are applicable, also apply to any filling operation conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the Commission. 
§6.4.20 Duration, Renewal and Revocation of Fill Permit 
All of the provisions as set forth in §6.4.13 of these Regulations shall be applicable to the duration, renewal and revocation of any excavation/filling permit. 
§6.4.21 Fee for Fill Permit 
A permit fee for an excavation/filling permit shall be required in accordance with the same provisions as contained in §6.4.7 of these Regulations. 
§6.4.22 Administrative Permit: Test Holes, Pits, Trenches 
A. 	In certain cases where test holes, pits and trenches are to be excavated and backfilled for the purpose of sewage disposal design, road design, building design, etc., a limited testing permit must be obtained from the Zoning Enforcement Officer; Inland Wetlands Agent in cases that involve activities within areas subject to regulation in accordance with the Town of Monroe Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations; and/or Sanitarian or Public Health District prior to excavation.  The purpose of the limited testing permit is to ensure testing is conducted in a manner protective of the environment, inland wetlands and watercourses, and of the public health, safety and welfare, as well as to assure the proper restoration of the affected area. 
B. 	Said permit will be issued for a period not to exceed one (1) month. An individual permit is necessary for each lot or parcel, including those of a proposed subdivision. 
C. 	The permittee is responsible for all work under the permit, and inspection of the work will be conducted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Town Engineer or Public Health District to assure compliance with accepted standards for such work. 
D. 	Limited testing exemptions.  The following site investigatory analysis and testing activities shall be exempt: 
(1) 	
Individual residential lot test holes, pits and trenches to be excavated and backfilled for purposes of sewage disposal design under the auspices of the Public Health District. 

(2) 	
Driveway design, building design or other repair and maintenance related activities associated with a developed individual residential lot as otherwise authorized by a Zoning Permit, except areas subject to the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations. 

(3) 	
Site investigatory analysis and testing of a non-invasive nature not involving any land alteration or disturbances. 

(4) 	
Minor disturbances limited to manual shovel tests, cores or other limited disturbances conducted by hand and manual shovel. 

(5) 	
Site investigation and testing of a non-physical nature, not involving any land alteration or disturbances, such as traffic studies; wetland delineations; flora and fauna inventories and observations; wildlife trapping pursuant to State and/or Federal authorized licensing; surface water sampling; or similar as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 


§6.4.23 Waiver 
The Commission may waive the application and permit standards of this section on a case by case basis, based on a written request by an applicant and provided said waiver would be no less protective of the environment or inconsistent with the intent and purposes of the regulations pertaining to excavation and filling activities. 
§6.5 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control §6.5.1 Activities Requiring a Certified Erosion and Sediment Control Plan 
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development. 
§6.5.2 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan 
A. 	To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available technology.  Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002), as amended, including the Low Impact Development Appendix to Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion (June 2011).  Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the Commission. 
B. 	Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to: 
(1) 	
A narrative describing: 

(a) 	
The development. 

(b) 	
The schedule for grading and construction activities including: 

(iv) 	
Start and completion dates. 

(v) 	
Sequence of grading and construction activities. 

(vi) 	
Sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. 


(vii) 	Sequence for final stabilization of the project site. 

(c) 	
The design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 

(d) 	
The construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 

(e) 	
The installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities; 

(f) 	
The operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 



(2) 	
A Site Plan map at a sufficient scale to show: 

(a) 
The location of the proposed development and adjacent properties. 

(b) 	
The existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses and water bodies. 

(c) 	
The existing structures on the project site, if any. 

(d) 	
The proposed area alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, road and, if applicable, new property lines. 

(e) 	
The location of and design details for all proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and storm water management facilities. 

(f) 	
The sequence of grading and construction activities. 

(g) 	
The sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. 

(h) 	
The sequence for final stabilization of the development site. 

(i) 	
The protection of dewatering, soil storage, stockpiling and staging areas. 

(j) 	
Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent(s). 




§6.5.3 Minimum Acceptable Standards 
A. 	Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these regulations using the principles as outlined in the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. 
B. 	The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended.  The Commission, the Planning Administrator, or the County Soil and Water Conservation District (when authorized by the Commission or its agent), may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented. 
C. 	The appropriate method from the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission. 
D. 	Other resource documents to be followed include the 2011 Low Impact Development Appendix to the 2002 Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control; the 2004 Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual; and the 2011 Low Impact Development Appendix to the Connecticut Stormwater Quality Manual. 
§6.5.4 Issuance or Denial of Certification 
A. 	The Commission, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the Fairfield County Soil and Water Conservation District (when authorized by the Commission or its agent), shall either find, verify or accept that the soil erosion and sediment control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation, advise or deny when the development proposal does not comply with these Regulations, or in the case of the Commission or Agent, deny the application. 
B. 	Nothing in these Regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
C. 	Prior to an approval, any plan submitted to the municipality may be reviewed by the Fairfield County Soil and Water Conservation District and/or the Southwest Connecticut Conservation District, which may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the receipt of such plan. 
§6.5.5 Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 
A. 	The estimated costs of measures required to control soil erosion and sedimentation, as specified in the certified plan, that are a condition of any Site Plan, Special Exception Permit, plan of improvements, grading plan, plan/ profile for road construction may be required to be covered in a performance bond, site restoration and stabilization bond or other assurance acceptable to the Commission in accordance with the provisions specified in the appropriate sections of the Zoning and Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe, as amended. 
B. 	Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is certified and approved and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and functional. 
C. 	Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled according to the certified and approved plan. 
D. 	All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the compliance of the approved plan. 
E. 	Revisions in control measures and facilities may be required and authorized in the field from time to time as conditions on or off site may dictate.  Written confirmation of such revisions shall be appended to the certified plan of record within forty-eight (48) hours of authorization by the inspection/enforcement authority. 
F. 	Any person engaged in development activities who fails to obtain approval of a soil erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with these Regulations, or who conducts a development activity except in accordance with provisions of a certified plan shall be deemed in violation of these Regulations and enforceable under the provisions of Article 9 of these Regulations. 
G. 	Written verification of the obtainment of all applicable State and/or Federal approvals pertaining to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, as well as Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection (CTDEEP)/NPDES permits for sites of one acre or larger shall be provided. 
H. 	Provide verification of all State and/or Federal erosion and soil control plans/permits and/or CTDEEP/NPDES permits for sites of one (1) acre or larger. 
§6.5.6 Inspection 
Inspections shall be made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Inland Wetlands Agent or Town Engineer during development to ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained.  The Commission may require the permittee to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the approved plan and are being operated and maintained. 

§6.6 Flood Damage Control 
§6.6.1 Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives 
A. 	Finding of Fact -Cause and Effect 
The flood hazard areas of the Town of Monroe are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
B. 	Statement of Purpose 
(1) Objectives 
It is the purpose of this Section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(a) 
To protect human life and health; 

(b) 
To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 

(c) 	
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 

(d) 	
To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 

(e) 	
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 

(f) 	
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 

(g) 	
To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 

(h) 	
To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 


(2) 	Methods of Reducing Flood Losses In order to accomplish its purposes, this Section includes methods and provisions for: 
(a) 	
Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 

(b) 	
Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 

(c) 	
Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 

(d) 	
Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood drainage; and 

(e) 	
Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 


§6.6.2 Applicability 
A. 	This Section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the Town of Monroe. 
B. 	The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Fairfield County, Connecticut, dated June 18, 2010, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated June 18, 2010, and other supporting data applicable to the Town of Monroe, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and are declared to be part of this Section.  Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this Section it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA.  The areas of special flood hazard include any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A and AE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM.  Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the FIS for a community.  BFEs provided on a FIRM are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location.  The Flood Insurance Study is on file in the office of the Monroe Town Clerk, Town Hall, 7 Fan Hill Road, Monroe, Connecticut. 
C. 	Compliance 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Section and other applicable regulations. 
D. 	Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 
This Section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this Section and another ordinance, regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E. 	Interpretation 
In the interpretation and application of this Section, all provisions shall be: 
(1) 	
Considered as minimum requirements; and 

(2) 	
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and, deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under the Connecticut General Statutes. 


F. 	Warning and Disclaimer of Liability 
The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood heights may be increased by development construction activities or natural causes.  This Section does not, imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Monroe, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
§6.6.3 Administration 
A. Establishment of Development Permit 
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §6.6.2B. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Town Planner, and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1) 	
Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 

(2) 	
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 

(3) 	
Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in §6.6.4B(2), and 

(4) 	
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 


B. Designation of Administrators 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Town Planner are hereby appointed to administer and implement this Section by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
C. Duties and Responsibilities of Administrators 
Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Town Planner shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1) 	
Permit Review 

(a) 	
Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this Section have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 

(b) 	
Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 

(c) 	
Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For purposes of this Section, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effects of proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, increases the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 



(2) 	
Use of Other Base Flood Data 


When base flood elevation data and or floodway data has not been provided in accordance with §6.6.2B, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Town Planner shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and or floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source in order to administer §6.6.4B(1). 
(a) 	
In “A” zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, require that no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 

(b) 	
Should data be requested and/ or provided, adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point along the watercourse. 


(3) 	
Information to be Obtained and Maintained 

(a) 	
Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures. 

(b) 	
For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 

(i) 	
Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level), and 

(ii) 	
Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §6.6.3A(3) of these Regulations. 



(c) 	
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance. 



(4) 	
Alteration of Watercourse 

(a) 	
Notify adjacent communities and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 

(b) 	
Require that maintenance is provided within the altered area or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 



(5) 	
Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries 


Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).  The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §6.6.3D. 
D. Variance Procedure 
(1) 	
Appeal Board 

(a) 	
The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Town of Monroe, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Section. 

(b) 	
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Town Planner in the enforcement or administration of this Section. 

(c) 	
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as provided in the Connecticut General Statutes. 

(d) 	
In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Section, and: 

(i) 	
Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 

(ii) 	
Danger to life and property due to flooding and erosion damage; 


(iii) 	Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(iv) 	
Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 

(v) 	
Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 

(vi) 	
Availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damages; 


(vii) 	Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(viii) 	Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area; 
(ix) 	
Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 

(x) 	
Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 

(xi) 	
Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 



(e) 	
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (i-xi) in §6.6.3D(1)(d) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 

(f) 	
Upon consideration of the factors of §6.6. 3D(1)(d) and the purposes of this Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals deems necessary to further the purposes of this Section. 

(g) 	
The Zoning Enforcement Officer or Town Planner shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 



(2) 	
Conditions for Variances 

(a) 	
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 

(b) 	
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 

(c) 	
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 

(d) 	
Variances shall only be issued upon: 

(i) 	
A showing of good and sufficient cause; 

(ii) 	
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 


(iii) 	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in §6.6.3D(1)(d) or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 

(e) 	
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 




§6.6.4 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
A. General Standards 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(1) 	
Anchoring 

(a) 	
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 

(b) 	
All manufactured (mobile) homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 

(i) 	
Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured (mobile) home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations with mobile homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1) additional tie per side; 

(ii) 	
Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points with manufactured (mobile) homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 




(iii) 	All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four­thousand-eight-hundred (4,800) pounds; and 
(iv) 	Any additions to the manufactured (mobile) home be similarly anchored. 

(2) 	
Construction Materials and Methods 

(a) 	
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 

(b) 	
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 

(c) 	
All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/ or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 



(3) 	
Utilities 

(a) 	
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 

(b) 	
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 

(c) 	
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 



(4) 	
Subdivision Proposals 

(a) 	
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 

(b) 	
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 

(c) 	
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 

(d) 	
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least ten (10) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less. 




B. Specific Standards 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in §6.6.2B or §6.6.3C(2) of these Regulations, the following provisions are required: 
(1) 	Residential Construction 
New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation. 
(2) 	Nonresidential Construction 
New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
(a) 	
Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 

(b) 	
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 

(c) 	
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.  Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §6.6.3C(3)(b) of these Regulations. 


(3) 	Manufactured (Mobile) Homes 
Manufactured (Mobile) homes shall be anchored on a securely anchored permanent foundation in accordance with paragraph A above. All manufactured (mobile) homes to be newly placed, undergoing a substantial improvement or repaired as a result of substantial damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation (BFE).  This includes manufactured (mobile) homes located outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing park which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood.  All manufactured (mobile) homes within a SFHA shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage with adequate access and drainage provided. 
(4) 	Recreational Vehicles 
Recreational vehicles placed on sites within areas of special flood hazard shall either be on the site for fewer than one-hundred-eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licenses and ready for highway use, or meet all the elevation and anchoring requirements of §6.6.4A(1) of these Regulations.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
C. Floodways 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §6.6.2B are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1) 	
Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification, with supporting technical date, by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating, through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 

(2) 	
If the provisions of §6.6.4C(1) of these Regulations are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §6.6.4 of these Regulations. 

(3) 	
Prohibit the placement of any manufactured (mobile) homes. 


D. Equal Conveyance 
Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice, that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels (base flood elevation).  Work within floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. 
E. Compensatory Storage 
The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain, storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the one-hundred (100) year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality. 
F. Aboveground Storage Tanks 
Aboveground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure if and where permitted elsewhere in these Regulations must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water. 
G. Portion of Structure in Flood Zone 
If any portion of a structure lies within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA.  The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone.  The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 
H. 	Structures in Two Flood Zones 
If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the more restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE).  The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure.  (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.) 
I. 	No Structures Entirely or Partially Over Water 
New construction, substantial improvements and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility. 
J. 	No Enclosed Areas Below Base Flood Elevation 
Fully enclosed areas below the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) (including floodable areas utilizing flood vents) are not permitted to be constructed. 

§6.7 Alcoholic Beverages 
§6.7.1 Regulation 
The sale of alcoholic beverages associated with any use permitted in these Regulations shall be regulated in accordance with State of Connecticut General Statutes. Permits for such sale are regulated and issued by the State of Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes. 
§6.7.2 Location of Sale Limited 
The location of the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises shall be subject to the standards outlined below, which shall be considered as part of the Site Plan application and/or Special Exception Permit application, as applicable. 
A. 	The Commission shall find that the proximity of the premises to churches, schools or any places frequented by minors shall not be such as to constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood 
B. 	The entrance to any premises having a permit for the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer or wine for consumption off the premises (package stores, pharmacies, and similar uses) shall be more than one-thousand-five-hundred (1,500) feet from the property line of the premises for which a like permit is requested.  Such measurement shall be from the property line of the premises to the property line of the premises for which a like permit is requested. No on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted unless sold by the permittee having the permit approval of the Commission. 
C. 	Any premises or establishment having a permit for the sale of alcoholic liquor and/or beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises shall be limited to premises where food and beverage full service is provided to persons seated at tables having a minimum of fifty (50) indoor seats, including accessory bar seating, by a person employed by the establishment. 
D. 	Grocery stores are exempt from the provisions of this section for the sale of beer only. 
E. 	Brew pubs are exempt from the provisions of §6.7.2(C). 

§6.8 Wireless Communication Facilities §6.8.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to make provisions to permit the location of wireless communication facilities within the town of Monroe while protecting the public, protecting neighborhoods, and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless communication facilities. More specifically, the purposes are: 
A. 	To accommodate the need for wireless communications towers and antennas while not unreasonably regulating their location and number; 
B. 	To encourage the joint use of any existing or new towers; 
C. 	To encourage creative design measures to minimize adverse visual effects; 
D. 	To provide standards for design, siting and vegetative screening to minimize adverse visual effects; 
E. 	To reduce the number of antennas and towers needed in the future. 
§6.8.2 Location Preferences 
The order of preferential ranking for siting the equipment associated with wireless communication facilities shall range from one (1) as the most desired to seven (7) as the least desired as listed below: 
A. 	On existing structures such as buildings, water towers, and utility poles. 
B. 	On existing approved towers. 
C. 	On towers proposed to replace existing towers. 
D. 	On new towers less than eighty (80) feet in height located in Non-Residential Districts. 
E. 	On new towers eighty (80) feet or greater in height located in Non-Residential Districts. 
F. 	On new towers less than eighty (80) feet in height located in Residential Districts. 
G. 	On new towers eighty (80) feet or greater in height located in Residential Districts. 
§6.8.3 Location Restrictions 
A. 	Siting on the following properties is specifically prohibited: Wolfe Park,Great Hollow Lake, Lanes Mines Park, Webb Mountain Park, and the Discovery Zone, including all associated parcels and open space designated lands to these properties as well as any other property classified or designated as park or open space lands. 
B. 	No land or structure in a Historic District shall be used for wireless communication facility siting with the exception of a Town of Monroe owned structure or facility. 
§6.8.4 Special Standards 
A. 	No lights shall be mounted on towers unless required by the FAA.  Strobe lighting shall be avoided where possible. 
B. 	Towers not requiring special FAA painting or marking may be galvanized, painted a non-contrasting blue, gray, or other neutral color, or other such color as needed to blend into its location. 
C. 	Towers may not be used to exhibit any signage or advertising. 
D. 	Towers shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for two additional users if the proposed antenna is over one-hundred 
(100) feet in height; if over fifty (50) feet in height, it shall be designed to accommodate one additional comparable antenna. 
E. 	Towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to their height.  The Commission may waive this requirement when there is adequate documentation that the tower structure has been designed to collapse in a manner which will not impact adjacent properties. 
F. 	Antennas or equipment buildings/boxes mounted to or on buildings or structures shall to the greatest degree possible blend with the color and/or design of such structure/building. 
G. 	Unless waived by the Commission, dish antenna shall comply with the following: 
(1) 
All dish antenna shall be of a mesh design. 

(2) 
Dish antennas shall not exceed two (2) feet in diameter in Residential Districts. 

(3) 
Dish antennas shall not exceed six (6) feet in diameter in Non-Residential Districts. 


The Commission may waive the above requirements when there is satisfactory documentation that such antennas are screened from view from adjacent lots and from public streets. 
H. 	Accessory buildings, to be used for housing telecommunications equipment only are permitted. Such buildings shall not exceed seven-hundred-fifty (750) square feet in area and shall be architecturally designed to blend into the neighborhood.  Such buildings shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet. 
(1) 	
A fence of appropriate design and height shall enclose the ground equipment and any support tower.  This requirement may be waived when the design of the facility does not warrant a fence, e.g., a flag pole design or a similar stealth design.  Landscape buffers shall be provided around the perimeter of the facility as provided for in §6.2 of these Regulations, except when determined by the Commission that existing suitable vegetative cover will remain. 

(2) 	
No proposed wireless communications facility shall be designed, located, or operated so as to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications. 

(3) 	
The design and operation of the wireless communication facility shall comply with the FCC standards regulating non-ionizing electromagnetic emissions. 

(4) 	
All utilities to serve the facility shall be installed underground unless otherwise approved by the Commission. 

(5) 	
Generators, if utilized, shall comply with all State and local noise regulations. 


§6.8.5 Permits 
Wireless Communications Facilities shall be permitted in all Zoning Districts subject to the following: 
A. 	Use Permits 
Where the Commission determines that an antenna proposed on an existing structure or building meets the criteria of Subsections (1), (2) and (3) below, such antenna and wireless facilities shall be allowed when issued a Use Permit by the Commission and subject to submission of Site Plan in accord with the requirements of Article 7 of these Regulations. 
(1) 	
An omni-directional or whip antenna with a length of twenty (20) feet or less and Seven 

(7) inches or less in diameter, provided its material and/or color blends with the exterior of the structure. 

(2) 	
A directional or panel antenna six (6) feet in height and two (2) feet or less in width provided its location and appearance blends with the exterior of the structure. 

(3) 	
A satellite and microwave dish antenna six (6) feet or less in diameter provided the building or rooftop mount is located or screened so it is not visible from abutting public streets. 


B. 	Special Exceptions 
Wireless Communication Facilities which do not qualify for Use Permits under §6.8.5A above may be permitted only after the approval of a Special Exception Permit as provided for in Article 8 of these Regulations.  Such use may be approved only after a finding that the use will comply with the standards of §8.2, and the special standards of this Section. 
§6.8.6 Application Requirements 
In addition to complying with other application requirements of these Regulations, all applications for Wireless Communication Facilities shall include the following: 
A. 	A map showing the extent of planned coverage within the town and adjacent communities, and the location and service area of the proposed facility.  This map shall be accompanied by a report which documents the need for the wireless communications facility.  At the minimum, this report will document that the facility is needed to provide acceptable capacity and coverage for wireless communication. 
B. 	A statement containing a description of the siting criteria and the process by which other possible sites were considered.  Where applicable, said statement shall explain in detail why the most preferred locations ranked in §6.8.2 above should be eliminated from consideration. 
C. 	Architectural renderings and/or photo simulations of views of the tower from nearby properties, including alternatives to minimize visual impacts such as monopoles containing all antennas and cabling to the interior of the monopole, simulated trees and other stealth techniques as deemed appropriate by the Commission. 
D. 	A report from a qualified radio frequency engineer that the proposed facility will meet the Federal Communication Commission requirements for radio frequency radiation at the time that the facility will be operating at maximum capacity. 
E. 	A report from a qualified radio frequency engineer that the proposed facility will not interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications. 
F. 	When required by the Commission, additional reports from independent technical experts on the potential impacts from the proposed wireless communication facility shall be submitted. The cost of such reports shall be the applicant’s responsibility. 
§6.8.7 Removal 
A Wireless Communication Facility not in use for twelve (12) consecutive months shall be removed by the owner. This removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the end of such twelve (12) month period. Upon removal, the site shall be restored to its previous appearance and, where appropriate, re-vegetated to blend with the surrounding area. The Commission may require that a bond be submitted as surety. 

§6.9 Accessory Apartments 
§6.9.1 Standards 
A. 	An apartment may be established only accessory to a permitted dwelling. The apartment unit shall have common wall(s) and/ or floor(s) to the livable floor area of the principal dwelling. The outward appearance of the accessory dwelling shall be consistent with the design and character of the principal dwelling in its construction, materials and finish treatment.  The outward appearance shall not change the single-family character in any visible manner. There shall be no more than one (1) apartment accessory to a permitted dwelling. 
B. 	Living area of an accessory apartment shall contain a minimum of four-hundred (400) square feet and shall not exceed a maximum of eight-hundred (800) square feet; there shall be no more than one (1) bedroom in such apartment. In no case shall the floor area exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the gross livable floor area of the total structure. 
C. 	An accessory apartment shall be so located upon a lot to comply with all dimensional requirements of the zoning district for new construction.  An apartment located within the perimeter of an existing nonconforming dwelling, shall not be subject to such requirement.  No apartment shall be located in a basement or cellar unless such basement or cellar constitutes a walk-out basement that is not below an established flood plain elevation.  Additions for the purpose of an accessory apartment shall be made only above or to the side or rear of the principal dwelling. 
D. 	An accessory apartment shall have a minimum of one (1) separate external door access from the principal dwelling. 
E. 	An accessory apartment shall contain separate from the principal dwelling: kitchen facilities, full bath and electric panel with separate disconnect and separate access to same. 
F. 	The provisions of §6.1 of these Regulations notwithstanding, two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for an accessory apartment in a designated location on the premises.  Such spaces shall be on an area prepared to accommodate vehicle parking. Such spaces shall be an area constructed for such purpose with a surface treatment equal to the driveway, shall provide suitable vehicle turnaround onsite and shall not conflict with access or parking for the principal dwelling. 
§6.9.2 General Provisions 
A. 	Either the principal dwelling or accessory apartment shall be occupied by the owner of the premises at all times. 
B. 	Nothing shall prevent the owner of the premises from deed restricting aspects of the use of the apartment as long as such restrictions legally conform to any local, State or Federal law or regulation. 
C. 	There shall be no limitation on age of structure, time of ownership, or construction of additions to establish an accessory apartment, except as provided in this Section. 
D. 	All provisions of the State of Connecticut Basic Building Code (as amended), including the securing of requisite building permits and certificates of occupancy, together with the requirements of all other applicable construction codes or regulations, shall be met to establish an accessory apartment. 
E. 	The Fire Marshal shall review and approve any proposal to establish an accessory apartment to assure adequate fire safety. 
F. 	The Sanitarian shall review and approve any proposal to establish an accessory apartment to assure the premises conforms to the minimum requirements of the Public Health Code for sewage disposal. 
G. 	Written rental agreements (leases) shall be provided to tenants. 
H. 	The following provisions shall apply to the establishment of an accessory apartment. 
(1) 	A person seeking to establish an accessory apartment shall file an application for zoning 
compliance certificate together with a request for “ertificate of Use of !ccessory !partment” (ertificate) on a form prescribed by the ommission. Such request shall be 
accompanied by complete floor plans, elevations, and interior layout drawn to scale; including alterations to be made to the exterior of the existing dwelling; photographs of the exterior of the existing dwelling. The request shall be reviewed for conformance and bear the signatures of approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector, Sanitarian, and Fire Marshal. 
(2) 	
Upon the completion of improvements, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect the premises and shall indicate his/her approval by issuance of a Certificate of Compliance. 

(3) 	
The owner shall file upon the Land Records of the town, the Certificate which shall cause the approval of such accessory apartment to become effective. Such Certificate shall run with the title unless invalidated at some future date by the action of the then current property owner placing a notice on the Land Records to formally abandon the use. 


I. 	In the interest of furthering the goals of providing increased affordable housing stock, it is desirable that accessory apartments be established meeting the affordability guidelines established by “The Greater ridgeport Region !ffordable Housing ompact.” Owners are encouraged to establish units in consideration of such guidelines. 
J. 	Any accessory apartment type unit remaining uncertified after July 1, 1992 shall be deemed to be illegal and in violation of these Regulations and subject to such enforcement action and penalties which the law may prescribe. 

§6.10 Site Appearance Requirements §6.10.1 General Requirements 
A. 	All principal use activities, unless otherwise permitted, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
B. 	Satellite dishes shall be screened so they are not visible from public streets or adjacent residential zoned properties.  Neon tubing or similar lighting shall not be allowed. 
§6.10.2 Facades and Exterior Walls of Principal Nonresidential and Residential Multifamily Buildings 
A. 	Principal building facades shall include a repeating pattern of at least two (2) of the following elements or transition by some other architectural features.  At least one (1) of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than thirty (30) feet. The Commission may also require same on accessory buildings to ensued continuity and to minimize expanse of plain facades. 
(1) 
Color change. 

(2) 
Texture change. 

(3) 
Material module change. 

(4) 
Expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than twelve 


(12) inches in width, such as an offset or reveal. 
B. 	Materials and Colors: 
(1) 
Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality materials such as brick, wood, native stone, textured concrete masonry units or clapboard type boards, glass. 

(2) 
Façade colors shall be low reflectance. 	The use of high intensity colors, sharp contrasting or fluorescent colors are prohibited. 


C. 	Shopping Cart Management 
Any business that uses shopping carts outside of the building shall have a cart management plan.  The management plan must specify the operation's cart management program, which may include cart corrals, to prevent accumulation of carts in the parking lot. Shopping carts shall not be stored outside overnight, except in designated corrals. 
D. 	Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection, and Loading Areas: 
(1) 
Areas for truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading docks/doors, or other such uses shall not be visible from abutting streets or adjacent residential zoned properties. 

(2) 
No part of a loading dock zone or space shall be located within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential zone boundary. 

(3) 
Loading docks,	 receiving areas, truck parking, trash/recycling collection, trash/recycling compaction, and other service functions shall be designed as an integral part of the building suitably screened with walls, fencing, landscaping or a combination thereof to address visual and acoustic impacts of these functions, out of view from adjacent properties, public streets, and pedestrian sidewalks. 

(4) 
All dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad, contained within a gated enclosure and suitably screened with trees, shrubs, fencing, or by other appropriate means. 



§6.11 Community-Wide Event 
§6.11.1 Community-Wide Event Permit 
A. 	A Community-Wide Event Permit may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, subject to the following: 
(1) 	
An application for a Community-Wide Event shall be in a form as prescribed by the Planning and Zoning Department together with the supporting materials as listed below. All materials shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer in a timely manner to provide sufficient time for their evaluation prior to the date of the event. 

(a) 	
Site plan sketch including: 

• 	
Site location and containment of event, including identification of entrances and exits to the temporary event grounds and facilities. 

• 	
General layout of the temporary event vendors and activities. 

• 	
Location of any stage, tents or other temporary structures. 

• 	
Location of event management and public safety / first aid station. 

• 	
Emergency access provisions. 

• 	
Location and type of any temporary exterior lighting. 

• 	
Vendor and event parking areas. 

• 	
Provision and location for adequate sanitary facilities and refuse disposal. 



(b) 	
Plan for traffic, crowd and parking control, which shall include security personnel or police officers as needed. 

(c) 	
Sign off on permit application indicating review and approval, as necessary by the First Selectman (if on Town owned land), Fire Marshal, Health Department, Parks and Recreation Director (if on Town owned parkland), Police Department and Building Official. 



(2) 	
The following conditions must be met: 

(a) 	
The Community-Wide Event Permit shall be prominently posted near the main entrance of the event premises. 

(b) 	
Event Duration and Hours of Operation. 

• 	
Maximum of twelve (12) events within any twelve (12) month span for the same property. 

• 	
Maximum duration of ten (10) days per event. 

• 	
Event hours limited to 8:00 am to 12:00 am (midnight). 



(c) 	
The event shall provide for adequate off-street parking on site or shall demonstrate an alternative method of accommodating event parking demands. All event-related vehicles shall be safely and adequately accommodated on the premises or within the designated off-street parking provisions for the event. 

(d) 	
The event shall not emanate objectionable light, noise, odor or other nuisances. 

(e) 	
Temporary structures such as tents shall not extend into a street right-of-way or interfere with the visibility of street sight lines.  All such structures shall be safely anchored to the ground, subject to the acceptance and inspection of the Fire Marshal and Building Inspector. 

(f) 	
Temporary signs related specific to the event may be permitted but shall not extend into a street right-of-way or otherwise conflict, block or hinder the visibility of street lines and official street control signs. 

(g) 	
Adequate provisions for refuse containment and disposal shall be addressed. 

(h) 	
Any participating Mobile Food Vendor shall also comply with supplemental standards set forth in §6.12 of these Regulations. 



(3) 	
No Community-Wide Event shall commence prior to the issuance of a Community-Wide Event Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.  The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall approve the Community-Wide Event Permit application if it meets all of the following standards and criteria: 

(a) 	
The proposed temporary event shall be located, operated, and maintained in a manner consistent with the provisions of these Regulations. 

(b) 	
The specific location reasonably accommodates the temporary event, given the particular nature, size, and duration of the event. 

(c) 	
No permanent building or site alterations or permanent signs shall be authorized or installed unless a separate permit approval as may be authorized by these Regulations is obtained. 

(d) 	
No aspect of the temporary event shall violate any applicable condition of approval that applies to the principal use(s) on the site. 

(e) 	
The operation of the event at the location proposed and within the time period specified shall not create significant adverse impacts, including but not limited to environmental, visual, glare, traffic, noise, or odor impacts, on adjacent properties, or improvements on adjacent properties, or in the surrounding area. 

(f) 	
The operator provides and/or mitigates for any needed police, fire, trash removal, maintenance or other public services demands. 



(4) 	
Authority for Reasonable Conditions of Approval. 

(a) 	
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall consult and coordinate with the Planning and Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of any Community-Wide Event Permit. 

(b) 	
A Community-Wide Event Permit shall state the specific permitted duration and hours of operation authorized for a specific event, location and date.  All structures and materials related to the temporary event shall be appropriately removed and disposed of in a proper manner within the authorized time period as set forth herein above. 

(c) 	
The Zoning Enforcement Officer may impose conditions reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the standards in this Subsection, to ensure that operation and maintenance of the Community-Wide Event mitigate potential adverse impacts on existing uses and adjoining properties and in the surrounding area, and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.  Conditions may address, but are not limited to, provisions for adequate parking, storage, and lighting; provisions for security, traffic safety, fire and life safety; conditions limiting hours of operation; provision for adequate sewage disposal; and any other health and safety concerns the Zoning Enforcement Officer may deem necessary to comply with the standards set forth herein above. 





§6.12 Mobile Food Vendor Permits Required 
§6.12.1 Community-Wide Event 
A mobile food vendor participating in a community-wide event (such as a carnival, festival or other short term, single special event which may span a few hours, one day or over the course of several consecutive days) may be permitted subject to the supplemental standards set forth in §6.11, §6.12.5 and §6.12.6 of these Regulations, and the prior issuance of a Community-Wide Event Permit as issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
§6.12.2 Resident Private Function 
A mobile food vendor participating at a private function on private residential property within a RF-1, RF-2 or RF-3 District not open to the general public and where the food and/or beverages served are not sold directly or indirectly to function participants, shall be permitted without a Mobile Food Vendor Permit, provided such mobile food vendor complies with §6.12.5 and §6.12.6 below. 
§6.12.3 Single-Day Event Associated with a Non-Residential Use 
A mobile food vendor on a non-residential zoned property may be permitted for a Single-Day Event related specifically to the subject premises, subject to the supplemental standards set forth in §6.12.5 and §6.12.6, and the prior issuance of a Mobile Food Vendor Permit as issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
§6.12.4 Accessory to a Principal Brew Pub Use 
A mobile food vendor may be permitted as a temporary accessory use to a principal brew pub use, subject to the supplemental standards set forth in §6.12.5 and §6.12.6, and the prior issuance of Site Development Plan Approval as issued by the Commission and a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for the implementation of such.  Subsequent use or uses of such shall require the prior issuance of a Mobile Food Vendor Permit as issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
§6.12.5 Other Required Permits 
All mobile food vendors shall be responsible for obtaining and maintaining compliance with all permits, licenses or approvals required by the Town of Monroe and the State of Connecticut. At the time of application, the applicant shall provide verification of a current Monroe Health Department approval. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may refuse or deny an application as incomplete if the applicant has not first obtained all other requisite municipal licenses, permits and/or approvals.  A copy of all related approvals shall be maintained with the mobile food vendor and proof of compliance shall be presented to the Zoning Enforcement Officer or other duly authorized Town agent upon request. 
§6.12.6 Supplemental Standards 
A. Operational Use 
(1) 	
Written permission from the property owner shall be included in all applications for a mobile food vendor location and use. 

(2) 	
The mobile food vendor operator or designee shall be present at all times, except in cases of an emergency. 

(3) 	
Drive-up service to the mobile food vendor shall be expressly prohibited. 

(4) 	
Offerings shall be limited to food and/or non-alcohol beverages only; no general merchandise, goods or other services shall be provided or offered. 

(5) 	
The mobile food vendor location shall be maintained and kept clean of waste at all times. Adequate waste receptacles shall be provided, which shall be maintained during operations and removed following use.  Collected waste, including excess liquids, shall be disposed of in a proper and legal manner. 


B. Location 
(1) 	
Shall not be sited or parked within a public or private street right-of-way or within any travel lane of the site; nor shall be operated in manner that impedes, endangers, or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 

(2) 	
Shall not be located within a required setback yard or landscape buffer as required elsewhere in these Regulations. 

(3) 	
Mobile food vendors at a Brew Pub site shall not occupy parking spaces which are required to fulfill the minimum requirements of the principal use(s) of the subject lot, except where the use of parking spaces is demonstrated that the hours of operation of other principal uses of the subject lot do not coincide with the times and duration for which the mobile food vendor would be present.  In the event the hours of use of the other principal use(s) change so as to coincide with the permitted hours of operation by the mobile food vendor, the mobile food vendor shall no longer be permitted to occupy said spaces and shall be required to obtain approval of an alternative location to continue operations at the property. 


C. Duration 
Each issued Mobile Food Vendor Permit shall state the specific permitted duration and hours of operation authorized for a specific location and date, subject to the following: 
(1) 	
Community-Wide Event – Permitted duration and hours of operation shall coincide with that allowed for the associated Community-Wide Event. 

(2) 	
Single-Day Event Associated with a Non-Residential Use 

(a) 	
There shall be no more than two (2) single day events at one location in any consecutive twelve (12) month period. 

(b) 	
Permissible hours of operation (including setup and takedown) shall be limited to the hours between 9:00 am to 10:00 pm. 



(3) 	
Accessory to a Principal Brew Pub Use 

(a) 	
Hours of operation shall occur during the permissible hours of the associated principal brew pub. 

(b) 	
The mobile food vendor shall be removed during impermissible hours of operation and shall not otherwise be stored, parked or left overnight on the premises. 




D. Prohibited External Apparatus 
(1) 	
A mobile food vendor shall be self contained, with no external connection to any power, water, sewer or other utility source, not including self contained generators temporarily used by the mobile food vendor, provided same is contained and controlled to prevent unauthorized access thereto. 

(2) 	
The mobile food vendor shall not include any exterior lights which are not otherwise integral to the mobile food vendor. Permitted lights shall project light downward and shall be compliant with the light standards set forth on Article 6 of these Regulations. 

(3) 	
The mobile food vendor shall not include any audio amplification system. 

(4) 	
The mobile food vendor shall not setup or provide exterior seating (this does not include outdoor seating as may otherwise be permitted and approved by the Commission separately under these Regulations). 

(5) 	
No external signage, including temporary or portable signs per Article 6 of these Regulations, except that which is duly affixed to the mobile food vendor shall be permitted. 

(6) 	
There shall be no outside or external storage, display or presentation of items associated with the mobile food vendor, except appropriate waste receptacles as required herein above. 



§6.13 Accessory Outdoor Dining 
§6.13.1 Purpose and Intent 
The purpose and intent of this section is to permit and regulate outdoor dining, as an accessory use, in conjunction with and adjacent to a principal building containing a restaurant or other use serving food and beverages for the consumption on the premises, provided that such outdoor dining is designed, utilized and maintained in a manner which protects and enhances the rural character of the community. 
§6.13.2 Applicability 
This section shall apply to any principal or accessory restaurant use, or other use approved to serve food and beverages for consumption on the premises, located in any zoning district, notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of Article 1, Non-Conforming Uses of these Regulations.  An application for Site Development Plan approval shall be required for all proposals for, or amendments and alterations to, outdoor dining facilities. 
§6.13.3 Operational Use 
An outdoor dining facility shall be operated by the related principal or accessory restaurant or other food service use, shall have all food and beverages prepared inside the related principal or accessory restaurant or other food service use, and shall be utilized solely for the consumption of food and beverages prepared, served and sold on the premises. 
§6.13.4 Location 
A. 	Permitted locations. Areas devoted to outdoor dining shall be located directly adjacent to and in common with the related principal building on a stable base, such as a constructed deck, porch, terrace, or patio area.  Said area shall be designed in compliance with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and shall provide direct access to and from the facilities of the related principal or accessory restaurant use or other food service use.  All features and elements of an outdoor dining facility shall be in compliance with the lot and bulk standards applicable to the underlying zoning district and related principal or accessory restaurant or other food service use. 
B. 	Prohibited locations. All outdoor dining facilities shall be prohibited in the following site areas: 
(1) 	
Parking areas. 

(2) 	
Sidewalks and walkways. May be permitted on portions of sidewalks or walkways not needed to otherwise provide pedestrian or ADA access to and from buildings, between uses or stores/offices, parking facilities, service areas or other pertinent facilities; clear and safe sidewalk and walkway access must be provided and maintained at all times. 

(3) 	
Minimum landscape buffer areas pursuant to the requirements of the underlying zoning district and that applicable to the related principal or accessory restaurant or other food service use, whichever is more restrictive. 

(4) 	
Minimum required yard setback areas pursuant to the requirements of the underlying zoning district and that applicable to the related principal or accessory restaurant or other food service use, whichever is more restrictive. 

(5) 	
Required landscaping areas, areas devoted to septic disposal or water supply, or as otherwise determined inappropriate by the Commission. 


§6.13.5 Maximum Area 
An outdoor dining area shall not exceed an area of twenty-five (25%) percent of the total gross floor area of the inside seating area. 
§6.13.6 Containment, Separation and Protection 
All related outdoor dining facilities shall be contained, separated and protected from parking and site driveways by a combination of decorative fencing, stone walls, structured landscaping, and/or building and architectural features (trellises, awnings).  Protective structural elements shall be incorporated to adequately and suitably provide appropriate protection from traffic and other identifiable hazards for the specific location. The above design features and architectural improvements shall be integrated with site buildings and that of the surrounding community.  Additional structural and landscape screening may be required to buffer adjacent properties and streets from visual, lighting, noise, odor and other potential associated environmental/site impacts as deemed warranted by the Commission. 
§6.13.7 Accessory Components 
A. 	Associated apparatus. The use of portable umbrellas, heating units and other similar elements for the purpose of weather protection may be permitted but shall be properly maintained in a neat and good working condition and compliant with all applicable building, fire and health code standards and laws. Said features shall be shown to be adequately stored when not in use with appropriate containment. 
B. 	Utilities. Outdoor dining facilities shall be permitted only where evidence of sufficient water supply and sewage disposal capacity for all indoor and outside facilities at full occupancy can be provided. 
C. 	Sound systems prohibited. Sound amplification and public address systems and equipment shall be prohibited.  Areas approved for outdoor dining shall not be utilized for live performances, or recorded audio or video transmissions. 
D. 	Lighting. Lighting shall be consistent with the requirements set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations.  Lighting shall be minimized and designed to match the design and scale of principal facilities and the surrounding neighborhood character.  Lighting shall be directed downward and inward to the site and the outdoor dining area, so that the light source is not visible from adjacent property or land uses.  Shields and timing devices shall be utilized on light fixtures to control and direct the illumination pattern of said light fixtures, and to prevent spillage of light emissions horizontally and/or across property lines. Notwithstanding the above, low wattage ambient accent lighting which may be visible on the horizontal plane may be permitted by the Commission as determined suitable for the specific location and setting. 
§6.13.8 Off-Street Parking 
Accessory outdoor dining facilities with eight (8) seats or less shall not require additional parking. Facilities with more than eight (8) seats shall provide off-street parking spaces proportionally to the total gross floor area and maximum permitted outdoor seating capacity as set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations, and which may be subject to shared or joint use parking as determined appropriate by the Commission. 
§6.13.9 Hours of Operation 
Permissible hours of operation and use of permitted outdoor dining facilities shall be 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 
p.m. daily. 


ARTICLE 7 SITE PLAN REVIEW 
§7.1 Site Plan Approval Procedures 
§7.1.1 Site Plan Approval Required 
A. 	The purpose of Site Plan review and approval is to ensure that new or amendment development plans meet the stated objectives and standards of the Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development, are consistent with these Regulations, and provide for the appropriate siting of buildings, structures, uses, access, parking, landscaping and other site development features. 
B. 	No land shall be used or changed in use, nor shall any building, structure or other site improvement be used, reused, changed in use or constructed, erected, placed, enlarged, moved, expanded, altered, visually changed or replaced prior to obtaining Site Plan approval by the Commission, unless exempt under §7.1.2 of this Article.  Site Plan review and approval shall be required in accordance with the procedures and requirements specified in this Article prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit, Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy.  Such administrative permits and approvals shall be consistent with and in accordance with the Commission’s Site Plan approval. 
C. 	An approved Site Plan shall be revised, altered or amended in accordance with the standards and procedures established in this Article for the approval of such Site Plan. 
D. 	Except where otherwise specifically required, the use of land on abutting properties with one or more owners may be consolidated for development purposes under a coordinated Site Plan meeting all of the requirements of these Regulations.  Buildings, structures and other site improvements may be constructed and used individually or collectively provided that each separate owner shall have granted to each other owner in the consolidated Site Plan, by deed, easement or condominium agreement, recorded in the Monroe Land Records, such permanent access for ingress and egress, utilities, use of parking and loading, open space and/or other factors as may be required to assure the integrated development, use and maintenance of approved improvements and uses as per the consolidated Site Plan. 
E. 	Development of an approved Site Plan may be implemented in sections or phases as may be authorized by the Commission.  The extent and content of each section or phase shall be clearly articulated and mapped on the Site Plan, including any conditions required during the interim period between sections or phases. Development of a Site Plan under sections or phases shall not extend the time period to complete the total scope of all sections or phases. 
F. 	All Site Plans shall comply with all applicable standards and requirements set forth in these Regulations and the specific requirements of the underlying zoning district in which the Site Plan property is located. 
G. 	The continued validity of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be subject to continued conformance with an approved Site Plan and any requirements of approval. 
§7.1.2 Exempt from Site Plan Approval 
The following uses shall be exempt from obtaining prior Site Plan approval by the Commission: 
A. 	Single-family detached dwellings and associated accessory structures and uses as permitted in the RF-1, RF-2 and RF-3 Districts. 
B. 	Special Exception Permit uses otherwise subject to the requirements and standards set forth in Article 8 of these Regulations. 
C. 	Alteration or expansion of a single-family detached dwelling lawfully existing prior to the effective date of these Regulations within a non-residential district, where permitted, except those established under a Special Exception Permit. 
D. 	Signs in accordance with §6.3 of these Regulations when it is the only action or improvement. 
E. 	Ordinary maintenance and repair activities “in kind” (substantially identical). 
F. 	Interior alterations of lawfully existing buildings and structures provided no new uses or changes in use, or expansion of use is involved. 
G. 	Changes in use involving a change of ownership or proprietor where such change relates to the same use or a change in use within the same use category for the underlying zoning district, and which involves only interior alterations and/or the changing of lawfully existing exterior signs in kind with regard to their location, size, design and lighting thereof.  Any other related changes shall not be exempt. 
§7.1.3 Minor Application 
The following actions shall be deemed to be minor in nature and subject to the processing procedures for a Minor Application as established herein: 
A. 	Changes where no new building or building addition is proposed. 
B. 	Changes of use of a building, landscaping, storm drainage facilities which do not necessitate more than minimal changes to a site, where new site disturbances do not exceed two-thousand­five-hundred (2,500) square feet in area. 
C. 	Alterations to an existing building or structure appearance, elevation, roofline or other similar alterations to an existing building or structure, which do not result in an increase in the useable gross floor area of such building or structure. 
D. 	Changes to the parking layout such that they are within existing paved limits. 
§7.1.4 Standard Application 
All other uses and actions subject to Site Plan approval as specified in §7.1.1 shall be subject to the processing procedures for a Standard Application as established herein. 
§7.1.5 Application Review Procedures 
A. General Procedures 
(1) 	
For the purposes of calculating statutory time frames for processing applications, the date of receipt of any application to the Commission shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission of an application to the Planning and Zoning Department or thirty-five (35) days after submission, whichever is sooner. 

(2) 	
In evaluating applications, the Commission may: 

(a) 	
Seek the advice and opinion of other officials, boards or commissions to assist in evaluating applications; and 

(b) 	
Retain an engineer, land surveyor, architect, landscape architect, professional land use planner, land use attorney or other consultant to review, comment and guide its deliberations on any application, subject to the requirements for an escrow account as may be required by the Commission in accordance with §9.7.2 of these Regulations. 




B. Pre-Application Meeting 
Prior to formal submission of an application, an applicant shall meet with the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Town Engineer and other town support staff to informally discuss the proposed application and obtain general guidance relative to specific requirements, needed data/information or supporting assessments, other related permits, and the overall application process and timing thereof.  Said guidance shall be for the convenience of applicants and shall not be construed to be a replacement or instead of obtaining the guidance and advice of the applicant’s own consultants and professionals, nor as exclusive guidance or comment relative to an applicant’s compliance with the requirements of these Regulations. 
C. Submission of Application 
An application shall not be considered complete until all the information required by these Regulations and the Commission has been provided. 
(1) 	
Applications shall be in a form prescribed by the Commission together with a fee in accordance with Article 9 of these Regulations and other application materials as required in these Regulations. The application shall be signed by the applicant, and if the project is proposed by an applicant other than the owner of the property, the application shall also be signed by the owner or accompanied by a notarized letter authorizing the applicant and application as proposed. 

(2) 	
An application involving an activity regulated pursuant to CGS 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission no later than the day such application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Department.  The applicant shall provide documentation of said filing. A planning and zoning decision on the application shall not be rendered until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted its report in accordance with the standards of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, which report shall be given due consideration. 

(3) 	
An application involving lands within a public watershed area, the applicant shall submit notice to the public water authority and State Commissioner of Public Health in accordance with the standards set forth in CGS §8-3i, as amended, no later than seven (7) days from the date such application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Department.  The applicant shall provide documentation of said noticing. 

(4) 	
An application shall be accompanied by the following supporting materials, in a quantity as determined by the Planning and Zoning Department: 

(a) 	
Site Plans in accordance with §7.3 of this Article. 

(b) 	
Project narrative.  A project narrative shall be provided describing the existing and proposed site conditions and uses, including details describing how the requirements and standards of these Regulations will be complied with by the proposed action. The project narrative shall also detail the proposed action’s consistency with the Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development. Project specific analyses and reports prepared by qualified professionals may be required, the scope of which shall be subject to prior Commission review and acceptance. 

(c) 	
Agency Approvals. The applicant shall provide a list of local, regional, State and Federal agency permits and approvals anticipated to implement the proposed action, as well as any applicable requirements thereof affecting the design, site layout, construction or other aspect of the proposed action. The securing of such agency approvals may be required as a prerequisite to Commission endorsement of approved final plans. 

(d) 	
The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application. 

(e) 	
The applicant shall also submit application and application presentation documents in an electronic format in accordance with Planning and Zoning Department requirements and specifications. 



(5) 	
An incomplete application or an application filed without the required fee as specified in Article 9 of these Regulations may be deemed as reason for denial of said application. 

(6) 	
All application support documents, plans and materials shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department no less than five (5) business days prior to the day of a Commission meeting at which the application is scheduled.  Nothing shall prohibit the Commission, in the exercise of its discretion, from receiving evidence at any time prior to the close of a meeting, public hearing or other statutory period but the Commission may refuse to consider such if not submitted in a timely fashion as set forth herein should the Commission determine that it, its staff or consultants, and/or the public would not have sufficient time to review same properly or thoroughly before the end of any aforesaid time or statutory period.  The Commission, nor its staff or consultants, are responsible for providing notification of new submission received. 


D. Application Review Team (ART) Meeting 
Following submission of an application, the Application Review Team (ART), consisting of the Town Engineer, Town Planning and Zoning Administrator, Zoning Enforcement Officer, representative of the Health District, representative of the Police Department, Fire Marshal and Chief Building Inspector, shall review the application to determine whether it will be processed as a “Minor” or “Standard” application, as specified in this Article. ART will also discuss the application in an attempt to coordinate concerns and facilitate the effectiveness of individual review comments. 
E. Minor Application Process 
Following ART review, individual ART members may issue comments on the application to the applicant. The applicant shall then submit revised application materials, in a quantity as determined by the Planning and Zoning Department, addressing ART comments for distribution to the Commission and review at a regular meeting of the Commission. The intent is for the Commission to initiate its review of a “Minor” application within thirty-five (35) days from the date of official receipt of such application, unless otherwise arranged through mutual agreement with the applicant, in compliance with applicable standards of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
F. Standard Application Process 
Following ART review, individual ART members may issue initial comments on the application to the applicant. The applicant shall then submit revised application materials, in a quantity as determined by the Planning and Zoning Department, addressing ART comments for a second ART review.  The ART may then issue subsequent review comments to the applicant on the revised application materials. The applicant shall then submit further revised application materials, in a quantity as determined by the Planning and Zoning Department, addressing the current ART comments for distribution to the Commission and review at a regular meeting of the Commission. The intent is for the Commission to initiate its review of a “Standard” application within sixty-five (65) days from the date of official receipt of such application, unless otherwise arranged through mutual agreement with the applicant, in compliance with applicable standards of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
G. Applicant Representation at Commission Meetings 
The applicant and/or its authorized representatives shall be present at the meetings of the Commission at which their application is reviewed.  The property owner is recommended particularly in cases where an applicant is limited in their authorization to represent the interests of the owner or in making decisions regarding the alteration of the premises under review. 
H. Review by Other Agencies 
The Planning and Zoning Department and/or Commission may forward copies of an application for review and report to such officials and agencies of the Town as it deems appropriate, and shall establish a reasonable time limit for receipt and review by such agencies. The applicant shall, in addition and where required, forward copies to the Greater Bridgeport Regional Planning Association, and to the clerk of any abutting municipality, as may be required by the Connecticut General Statutes or as determined appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Department or Commission. 
I. Public Hearing for Any Type of Site Plan Application, Optional 
The Commission may require a public hearing as it deems necessary or appropriate, which hearing shall be noticed and held in accordance with the standards and requirements set forth in §8.1.4 of these Regulations. 
J. Commission Review and Determination 
(1) 	
Applications shall be approved, disapproved, or approved with modifications. 

(2) 	
No application for any property on which there exists a zoning violation shall be approved, unless such application and approval will remedy such violation. 

(3) 	
Approval shall be applicable only for the use and improvements specified in the application and approval. 

(4) 	
The Commission may impose modifying conditions and safeguard restrictions to any application approval, which in its judgment are reasonable and necessary to protect or promote: public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound planning and zoning principles; improved land use, site planning and land development; or to achieve a better overall neighborhood compatibility. 

(5) 	
When the Commission approves a Site Plan with modifying conditions and safeguard restrictions, each and all of said conditions and safeguard restrictions shall be an integral part of the Commission's decision. Any condition or safeguard restriction attached to a Site Plan approval shall remain with the property as long as the use is still in operation, and shall continue in force and effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property.  Should any of the conditions and safeguard restrictions on appeal from such decision be found to be void or of no legal effect, then the conditional approval is likewise null and void.  An applicant may reapply with another application for review. 

(6) 	
A notice of decision shall be completed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 

(7) 	
As a condition of approval, the right of entry with reasonable notice for inspection by Town of Monroe officials shall be provided in order to determine compliance with the conditions of such approval. 



§7.2 General Criteria and Standards for Application Review 
The following criteria and standards shall be used by the Commission in reviewing all applications.  In doing so, the Commission may require the submission of alternative design and layout proposals to ensure the creation of well designed, functional and attractive development. The intent is to ensure that the development and use of land does not have an adverse effect on the environment, adjacent lands and land uses, or on the historic and cultural character of the community, among other factors. These Regulations are designed to: 
A. 	Protect the community from traffic congestion and conflicts, noise, lighting, odor and other forms of pollution; 
B. 	Avoid inappropriate site and building design, including "strip" commercial development, flooding, and excessive soil erosion; and 
C. 	Ensure that proposed uses will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the Zoning District in which such is proposed, and that its impacts can be mitigated by compliance with reasonable conditions. 
§7.2.1 General Criteria 
The criteria below are intended to establish a framework within which the designer of the site development will utilize creativity, invention and innovation to provide a sensible and sustainable plan compatible with the Town’s planning goals and objectives, as expressed in the its Plan of Conservation and Development, while recognizing and thereby protecting the Town's rural, historic, cultural, natural and scenic landscapes and qualities. 
A. 	The intended activity or proposed use, buildings or other structures shall not be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare and property values of the neighborhood and will be in harmony with and conform to the orderly development of the Town. 
B. 	Due attention by the applicant shall be given to the goals, objectives and the stated general land use policies for the Town and the specific area in which the development is proposed. 
C. 	The streets serving the proposed use shall be adequate to accommodate prospective traffic, and provision shall be made for entering and leaving the property in such a manner that no traffic hazards will be created.  Adequate off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided. 
D. 	The structural base material and surface treatment of any areas used for off-street parking and loading facilities, for maneuvering of vehicles or for outside storage and display of vehicles and materials shall be as determined suitable and adequate for their intended purpose. 
E. 	Properties shall be suitably landscaped and the intended activity, use, design of buildings, signs and other structures shall be such as to preserve the appearance and character of the neighborhood. 
F. 	The site on which the use is proposed to be established shall be of sufficient size and adequate dimension to allow construction of all buildings and structures and to conduct the use in such a manner as will not be detrimental to the neighborhood. 
G. 	Adequate fixed and shielded lighting shall be provided for the intended use and shall not constitute a nuisance, traffic hazard or spillage onto neighboring properties, or be detrimental to the neighborhood. 
H. 	The character, purpose and nature of the Site Plan approval shall be such that the proposed use will be in harmony with the orderly development of the Zoning District in which it is located. 
I. 	Proposed development shall meet all other requirements and performance standards as established in these Regulations. 
J. 	Proposed development shall be adequately protected from casualty by fire as may be determined by the Town Fire Marshal, subject to review by the Commission. 
§7.2.2 Ecological Considerations 
A. 	Site and building development shall cause minimal degradation of unique or irreplaceable land types and minimal adverse environmental impact upon critical areas such as streams, wetlands, areas of aquifer recharge and discharge, steep slopes, highly erodible soils, areas with a high water table, floodplains, areas of mature vegetation, and extraordinary wildlife nesting, feeding or breeding grounds. 
B. 	Development shall conform to existing geological and topographic features to the end that the most appropriate use of land is encouraged. 
C. 	Site uses shall have the capacity to provide for the on-site handling, disposal and/or storage in a safe, sanitary and harmless manner as prescribed by all applicable Federal, State and local laws, rules or regulations pertaining to sewage, solid or liquid waste, toxic or hazardous substances, or any chemicals or by-products produced, kept, made, generated or used or to be used on the premises. If any such sewage, solid or liquid waste, toxic or hazardous substances, or chemicals or by-products are not to be handled, stored or disposed of on-site, then the manner of their handling, disposal and/or storage shall be disclosed including proof of compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws, rules and regulations. 
§7.2.3 Landscape and Lighting 
A. 	Natural and existing topographic patterns, which contribute to the beauty and character of a development, shall be preserved where practicable in its natural state.  Tree and soil removal shall be avoided and minimized to the greatest extent practicable. If development of the site necessitates the removal of established trees, special attention shall be given to the planting of replacements or other landscape mitigation treatments. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. 
B. 	Landscaping or the landscape treatment shall provide, in the judgment of the Commission and in a reasonable time, the required amenities or visual barrier between different land uses. 
C. 	Grades of driveways, walks, parking areas, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting appearance. 
D. 	Landscaping shall dominate a site and shall integrate the various elements of site design, preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site, including architectural features, scenic vistas and visual corridors.  Landscaping shall provide shade, visual interest and vertical relief. 
E. 	Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color, and in consideration of its ultimate growth pattern. Plants shall be used which are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design, and exhibit a good appearance. 
F. 	In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices. 
G. 	Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped islands, trees and shrub plantings, and other landscaping consistent with the requirements and standards in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
H. 	Screening of service yards, refuse containers, and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these, with all such enclosures being compatible in material, texture and color with the buildings of the site. 
I. 	Landscaping shall be designed and maintained so as not to create a hazardous condition. 
J. 	Exterior lighting shall be in accordance with Article 6 of these Regulations and shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. 
K. 	The number of exterior lights, and the intensity of such lighting shall be the minimum necessary to illuminate the location for safety, without glare or light spillage to adjoining properties. 
§7.2.4 Relationship of Proposed Structures to Environment 
A. 	Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to themselves, the terrain and to existing buildings and roads in the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed structures. The achievement of such harmonious relationship may include the enclosure of space in conjunction with other existing buildings or other proposed buildings and the creation of focal points with respect to avenues of approach, terrain features or other buildings. 
B. 	Proposed structures shall be so sited as to minimize any adverse impact upon the surrounding area and particularly upon any nearby residences by reason of: 
(1) 
Building location, height, bulk and shadows. 

(2) 
Location, intensity, direction and times of use of outdoor lighting. 

(3) 
Likelihood of nuisances. 

(4) 
Other similar considerations. 


C. 	Site Plans proposed for nonresidential uses adjacent to a residential district or residential uses shall be reviewed with regard to the impact of the development on that district or use. 
D. 	Site design shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition from the streetscape, and to provide for adequate landscaping, screening and buffering to adjacent sites and lands uses, and to provide adequate but not excessive off-street parking. 
E. 	The Commission shall encourage the use of a combination of common materials, landscaping, buffers, screens and visual interruptions in order to create attractive transitions between buildings of different architectural styles. 
F. 	Parking shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings primarily so as to not interfere with the landscape treatment and streetscape. 
G. 	Textures of buildings, structures and paved areas shall be sufficiently varied to prevent a massive or monolithic appearance, particularly areas of asphaltic paving for parking. 
§7.2.5 Scenic, Historic, Archaeological and Landmark Sites 
A. 	Scenic, historic, archaeological and landmark sites and features that are located on or adjacent to the proposed development shall be preserved and protected insofar as practicable. Specific requirements regarding such sites and features are contained in Chapter 310 (Historic Districts) and Chapter 430 (Scenic Roads) of the Code of the Town of Monroe. 
B. 	Recognized scenic and/or historic districts within the vicinity of the proposed development shall be embraced in the Site Plan design, including the use of traditional building forms and layouts which are evidence of the distinctive historical development of the area. 
§7.2.6 Buildings and Structures 
A. 	Buildings and structures shall be integrated with each other and with adjacent buildings and structures, providing convenient access to and from adjacent uses. Buildings and structures shall be designed and clustered in a compact form with due regard to environmentally sensitive features. 
B. 	The design of buildings and structures shall make appropriate recognition of compatible building forms, styles and character indigenous to New England, and in particular, the Town of Monroe. 
C. 	Components such as windows, rooflines, doors, eaves and parapets shall have well-designed proportions and relationships to one another and be compatible with the historic and vernacular architectural styles of the Town of Monroe. 
D. 	The height and scale of buildings and structures shall be compatible with its site and existing, or anticipated, adjoining buildings. 
E. 	Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony with traditional building materials. 
§7.2.7 Stormwater Management 
A. 	Proposed development shall be designed so as to provide for proper surface water management through a system of controlled drainage that, wherever practicable, preserves existing natural drainage patterns and wetlands, enhances groundwater recharge areas, and protects other properties and existing natural and artificial drainage features from the adverse effects of flooding, erosion and the depositing of silt, gravel or stone, uncontrolled dispersal of debris, trash and runoff pollutants such as from deicers, fertilizers, herbicides, insecticides and pesticides. 
B. 	Proposed development shall conform to all Federal, State and local requirements and guidelines, including provision of Best Management Practices, regarding stormwater quality and quantity control and erosion and sediment control as set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
§7.2.8 Traffic, Circulation, Parking and Pedestrian Safety 
A. 	Proposed development shall not cause adverse traffic impacts to abutting roads, nearby entrances on adjacent properties or on the road network serving the surrounding area. 
B. 	All entrance and exit driveways shall be located with due consideration for traffic flow and so as to afford maximum traffic safety consistent with the standards set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations. In general, all such entrances and exits shall be located and designed in accordance with Chapter 260 (Driveway Construction) of the Code of the Town of Monroe, and the following: 
(1) 	
Conform to sight line requirements for restricting direct obstructions at corners (in addition to Federal, State, AASHTO and local sight line guidelines). 

(2) 	
Achieve maximum practicable distance from street intersections and from existing and proposed access connections from adjacent properties. 

(3) 	
Minimize left-hand turns and prohibit backing movements. 

(4) 	
Discourage the routing of vehicular traffic to and through local residential streets. 

(5) 	
Provide adequate offset centerline striping and entrance/exit site radii to accommodate appropriately sized trucks to service existing and proposed uses without encroachment into opposing traffic both on and offsite. 

(6) 	
Encourage the shared use and interconnection of driveways. 


C. 	The location, width and layout of interior drives shall be appropriate for the proposed interior circulation. 
D. 	The location and layout of accessory off-street parking and loading spaces shall provide for efficient circulation and the safety of pedestrians and vehicles. Provision shall be made for unobstructed access by police, fire and emergency vehicles. 
E. 	The location of parking areas shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures or from the appearance of the existing neighboring buildings, structures and landscape. 
F. 	Pedestrian circulation shall be separated from motor vehicle circulation and from loading activities. Safe and convenient pedestrian circulation, including appropriate sidewalks, shall be provided on the site and its approaches, to provide interconnectivity between the road frontage and parking areas and buildings onsite. The pedestrian circulation plan shall be designed to minimize adverse effects of vehicular traffic upon adjacent sidewalks and bicycle paths by providing wider walkways or paths, and appropriately designed control features such as changes in pavement material, texture and/or color, as well as physical barriers, landscaping, guiderails, fencing, signs and other means of protection. 
§7.2.9 Utility Services 
A. 	Proposed development shall be adequately served by all applicable utilities, including water and septic systems. 
B. 	Electric, telephone and other wire-served utility lines and service connections shall be underground insofar as feasible and subject to State Public Utilities Regulations. Any utility installations remaining above-ground shall be located and screened so as to have a harmonious relationship to neighboring properties and to the site. 
C. 	Mechanical equipment such as air conditioners or other utility hardware located on roofs, the ground, or buildings, shall be designed in an architecturally integrated fashion and/or screened from view with materials harmonious with the building, specified as to construction, material and color so as to blend with its surroundings, or located so it is not visible or conflicting with site landscaping and pedestrian and vehicular access. 
§7.2.10 Waste Disposal 
A. 	Adequate provision shall be made for the sanitary sewer needs of the proposed development in compliance with State and local Health District requirements. 
B. 	There shall be adequate provision for the disposal of all solid, liquid and gaseous wastes and for all recyclable materials, as well for the avoidance of odors and other air pollutants that may be generated at the site. All applicable Federal, State and local pollution control standards shall be observed, as well as the standards of Chapter 440 (Sewage Disposal) and Chapter 452 (Solid Waste) of the Code of the Town of Monroe. 
C. 	All dumpsters or other covered containers designed to be emptied into a truck shall be placed on a concrete pad within an adequate solid board fence or architectural walled enclosure screened with landscaping. 
D. 	Enclosures shall be designed, installed and maintained so as to minimize noise, odor and other adverse effects. 
§7.2.11 Noise 
A. 	All applicable Federal, State and local Regulations dealing with the control of outside noise which is expected to be generated at the site shall be complied with. 
B. 	Use of noise reducing barriers or other control measures shall be incorporated as may be required by the Commission. 
§7.2.12 Outdoor Signage 
A. 	The size, location, height, design, color, texture, lighting and materials of exterior signs shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures or of the surrounding properties.  Signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall be modified to conform to the criteria for all signs within the Town of Monroe in conformance to the requirements contained in Article 6 of these Regulations. 
B. 	Signs and supporting structures and devices shall be well proportioned and compatible in design and visual relationship to buildings, structures and surroundings, and shall not be predominate to the overall visual impact of the project. 
C. 	Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates. 
D. 	The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and shall be harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
E. 	The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 

§7.3 Application Requirements 
§7.3.1 General Requirements for All Applications 
A. 	All applications and accompanying maps, plans, documents, reports and data shall be in writing and in a quantity as required by the Planning and Zoning Department.  Said applications shall include all the information required by the Commission and as specified in the application form and these Regulations. 
B. 	All maps, plans, documents, reports and data as may be submitted with an application shall be current (completed within the previous six (6) months) and include an original (live) signature and embossed or wet stamp seal certification by the individual State of Connecticut licensed professional(s) responsible for their preparation. If multiple professionals are responsible for their preparation, each shall include appropriate certification. 
C. 	The maps and plans required by these Regulations shall be coordinated into individual collated, bound and folded sets of uniform size not to exceed 24” x 36” drawn at a maximum scale of one inch equals forty (40) feet, unless otherwise authorized by the Commission, and numbered in sequence (X of a total of Y sheets). The cover sheet shall include a prominent listing of the project name and a list of all included sheets by title, origination date and common revision date, as well as a location map showing the subject lot, surrounding lots, named streets and the zoning classifications of the shown area drawn at a scale of one (1) inch = eight-hundred (800) feet. 
D. 	Each plan sheet shall include a coordinated Title Block including the following minimum information: 
(1) 	
Sheet title and number, and sheet sequence numbering. 

(2) 	
Property address and assessor identification (Map and Lot number). 

(3) 	
Name, address and signature (on Final Plans) of the applicant and property owner. 

(4) 	
Name, address, signature and seal of the professional(s) preparing the plan. 

(5) 	
Origination date of preparation and date of revision, if any. 

(6) 	
Written and graphic scale and north arrow. 


E. 	The plans shall include the following minimum information consistent with all applicable requirements and standards of these Regulations: 
(1) 	
EXISTING CONDITIONS SURVEY (A-2 and T-2, or equivalent) 

(a) 	
Appropriate certification statement including reference maps, origin of property layout, purpose of drawing, and specific certification and clarifications of information shown. 

(b) 	
Accurate boundary and boundary markers. 

(c) 	
Delineation and dimension of all abutting private or public streets rights-of-ways and edges of pavement. 

(d) 	
Location of adjoining properties identifying owners and the map and lot numbers of same based on current Town of Monroe Assessor information, including those located across abutting streets. 

(e) 	
Existing zoning designation of the property and adjoining properties, including listing of past Site Plan, Special Exception Permit and/or Zoning Variance approvals. 

(f) 	
Location and dimensions of existing buildings, structures, access drives, fences, stone walls, guiderails, exterior signs and lights, landscaping, screening, buffers, parking and loading areas and sidewalks on the subject property and connections thereto with adjoining properties. 

(g) 	
Existing right-of-ways, easements, other encumbrances or restrictions, including a listing of recorded maps and description of any existing deed restrictions or covenants affecting the subject property. 

(h) 	
Location and delineation of wetlands, watercourses, ponds, lakes, vernal pools and other water related resources and their associated upland review areas. The qualified delineator and date or delineation shall be noted. 

(i) 	
Location of principal wooded areas, exposed ledge and rock outcroppings, significant trees with a diameter at breast height of twenty (20) inches or more (identified as to scientific and common name, size and health condition). 

(j) 	
Existing topography of the subject property with a minimum 2-foot contour interval, based on United States Geologic Survey data, with the source of the contours and the location of benchmarks noted. 

(k) 	
The required yard setbacks and other zoning lot area and bulk standards of the underlying Zoning District(s). 

(l) 	
Locations, dimensions, grades and flow direction of existing sewers, culverts, waterlines and other underground utilities within the property, to the extent known or relevant, and location of all utilities in the adjacent street and connections to structures on the premises. 

(m) 	
Boundaries of any site area subject to flooding or stormwater overflows, including flood hazard areas as defined in Article 6 of these Regulations and as established by the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA). Local areas susceptible to flooding that are not within determined flood zones shall also be indicated. 



(2) 	
SITE PLAN 

(a) 	
Delineation of all applicable zoning lot area and bulk standards, off-street parking and loading requirements, and other setback or buffer requirements. 

(b) 	
Location, layout and dimension of proposed buildings, structures, fences, walls and other site features proposed to be constructed, expanded, or altered. 

(c) 	
Location, layout, dimension and surface treatment and specifications of access and internal drives, parking areas, service and loading areas, sidewalks and pathways, and other non-building or vegetative areas and features. 

(d) 	
Known or approximate location of existing buildings, septic systems, water supply wells, utility lines and other structural or utility features within one-hundred (100) feet of the site lot lines. 

(e) 	
Location, design and proposed screening of outdoor storage areas, including proposed provisions for refuse storage and collection. 

(f) 	
Zoning Compliance -Analysis in tabular format of conformity to all applicable use, lot area and bulk standards, including any variances sought. 




Zoning Requirement  Zoning Standard  Existing Conditions  Proposed Conditions  Resultant Conditions  



Zoning Requirement – Applicable requirement (i.e., yard setback, building height). 
Zoning Standard – (i.e., 30 feet, 15%). 
Existing Conditions – Existing condition relative to the requirement. 
Proposed Conditions – Proposed condition of new feature relative to the requirement. 
Resultant Conditions – Existing/proposed condition relative to compliance with standard. 

(g) 	Off-Street Parking and Loading Compliance – Analysis in tabular format of conformity to applicable off-street parking and loading requirements. 
Use  Size GFA  Zoning Standard  Required Spaces  
Off-Street Parking  


Total Off-Street Parking Required  
Total Proposed  

Off-Street Loading  


Total Loading Spaces Required  
Total Proposed  

Use – Existing or proposed site/building use(s) (i.e., office, retail, manufacturing). 
Size – Dimension of floor area devoted to each individual use (i.e., 1,765 sf). 
Zoning Standard – Applicable standard or ratio (i.e., 4 spaces / 1,000 sf) 
Required Spaces – Calculated based on standard rounded up to whole number. 
Total Required – Sum of separate uses. 
Total Proposed – Total number of spaces proposed on Site Plans. 

(3) 
GRADING / UTILITY / STORMWATER PLAN 


(a) 	
Existing and proposed minimum two (2) foot contours and spot elevations, including existing contours (Class D data or better) extending a minimum of fifty (50) feet beyond the boundaries of the site. 

(b) 	
An area topographic plan showing drainage basins, source and destination of drainage or water flows. 

(c) 	
Location of any test holes, test pits and borings. 

(d) 	
Areas of rock excavation or blasting. 

(e) 	
Location, size and design of proposed water supply, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, valves, hydrants, fuel tanks and other utility facilities, both above-and below-ground, with all relevant engineering data. 

(f) 	
Proposed stormwater drainage systems with engineering details of swales, pipes, storm drains, catch basins, dry wells, stormwater quality control structures, retention basins, weirs and other related facilities, including invert and top elevations at each manhole, inlet, outlet, headwall, limits of headwaters, or other appurtenant drainage structure. 

(g) 	
Location and spot grades at the top and bottom of curbs, retaining walls and other such improvements. 

(h) 	
Proposed water quality treatment measures to achieve reductions in nitrogen, phosphorus, sediments, hydrocarbons and other pollutant loading factors. 



(4) 	
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

(a) 	
Erosion and sediment controls, measures and devices to be employed during site disturbance and construction including any phasing thereof, pursuant to the requirements of Article 6 of these Regulations. 

(b) 	
Details of Best Management Practices and long term permanent erosion and sediment controls. 



(5) 	
LIGHTING 

(a) 	
Exterior site lighting (existing to remain and proposed) for the premises, buildings and structures, showing the location, number and type of lights. 

(b) 	
Architectural design specifications including shielding, pursuant to the requirements of Article 6 of these Regulations. 

(c) 	
Photometric plan for all exterior lighting. 



(6) 	
SIGNS 

(a) 	Location, type, size, design, construction, finishes, color and illumination of all signs, pursuant to the requirements of Article 6 of these Regulations. 

(7) 	
LANDSCAPING 

(a) 	
Indication of all existing vegetation to be retained and the methods to be used to protect such vegetation during the course of construction. 

(b) 	
Plans and details for proposed landscaping, including the variety (scientific and common name), size, quantity and location of plants and other landscaping materials to be used, pursuant to the requirements of Article 6 of these Regulations. 



(8) 	
ARCHITECTURAL FLOOR PLANS and ELEVATIONS 

(a) 	
Location and dimensions (length, width, floor elevations and height in feet and stories) of proposed structures, with a detailed breakdown of all proposed floor space by floor level and use (gross floor area devoted thereto). 

(b) 	
Perspective architectural renderings and elevations showing the existing and proposed building architectural style, design details, construction materials and colors, roofing finish, and height conformance. Such drawings shall be sufficiently detailed to assure conformance with these Regulations and to detail lighting, signs, utility and mechanical equipment attached on or adjacent thereto. 



(9) 	
OTHER DATA INFORMATION 

(a) 	
Cut and Fill Analysis including an estimate of the quality, volume and consistency of materials to be imported or removed from the subject property. Drainage calculations shall address runoff entering the site for a fully developed watershed and for the site itself after proposed development. 

(b) 	
Boring information, soil descriptions, and water depth records and bearing capacities. 

(c) 	
For non-residential uses, the proposed number of employees for which the buildings are designed. 

(d) 	
Traffic analysis and details of proposed traffic and safety measures, including pavement and lane markings, directional signage, sight distance information and any associated clearing or improvements relating thereto. 

(e) 	
Provisions for handicap accessible parking and access, pursuant to all applicable Federal, State and local law and regulations. 

(f) 	
Where lands proposed to be developed involve the subdivision of land, a plan of subdivision shall be prepared in conformance with the Monroe Subdivision Regulations, approved by the Commission, recorded on the Monroe Land Records, and authorized for construction prior to issuance of a related Zoning Permit. 

(g) 	
Where public improvements are proposed, same shall conform to all applicable Federal, State and local standards and requirements in addition to these Regulations.  All roads and improvements intended to be dedicated to or accepted by the Town of Monroe for public use shall conform to all Town rules and Regulations and standard specifications in effect at the time of approval. 

(h) 	
Bond estimate including item descriptions, units, quantities, cost per unit, ten percent (10%) contingency, and totals for all public work improvements and site stabilization and restoration measures, including siltation and erosion control, anti-tracking pads, topsoil and turf reestablishment, plantings for erosion control, drainage and runoff management, invasive plant removal and measures to prevent dumping. 




§7.3.2 Waiver of Application Submission Requirements 
A. 	The Commission upon request by an applicant may waive certain application submission requirements as deemed inappropriate or unnecessary to a particular application or application site due to unique and special conditions specific to same, provided such waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of such submission standard, the Plan of Conservation and Development or any of these Regulations. All requests for waiver shall be in writing, stating the requested waiver with citation to the specific provision and section number, circumstances of such and the reasons why said waiver would be appropriate. 
B. 	No waiver may be deemed approved or granted by implication.  The grant of any such waiver shall be accompanied by a written finding that compliance with the requirement is either not requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare or inappropriate to the particular site or application. 
C. 	The Commission may, in granting a waiver, incorporate such reasonable conditions as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the requirements so waived. 

§7.4 Endorsement of Final Plans, Construction and Property Maintenance 
§7.4.1 Endorsement of Approved Final Plans 
A. 	An approved Site Plan shall become effective upon the endorsement of final plans. 
B. 	Following approval of an application for Site Plan by the Commission, the applicant shall submit final plans in accordance with said approval for endorsement by the Commission Chair. The applicant shall also be required to record an original copy of the Site Plan approval document in the Monroe Land Records, which copy will be provided by the Planning and Zoning Department in accordance with the Commission’s approval of the Site Plan. 
C. 	The applicant’s failure to obtain the authorized endorsement of the final plans and record the approval document within ninety (90) days of a Commission approval, unless an extension is granted by the Commission, shall render the approval of such expired, null and void. 
D. 	A request for an extension of time to obtain endorsement of final plans shall be made in writing to the Commission a minimum of forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of a Site Plan approval. The Commission may grant one or more extensions not to exceed an additional ninety days or less each, provided there are unusual or extenuating circumstances that warrant such extension. 
§7.4.2 Construction 
A. 	No site improvements or changes of use may be implemented, and no Zoning Permit, Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued, except in compliance with an approval as issued by the Commission.  All construction shall be in accordance with the approved final plans as signed by the Commission Chair. 
B. 	Prior to commencement of any site preparation or construction of the premises, the following shall be required: 
(1) 	
Posting of any required bond. 

(2) 	
Recording of any associated map and/or legal instruments on the Monroe Land Records. 

(3) 	
Issuance of Zoning Permit, Building Permit and any associated Wetlands Permit or other Town of Monroe administrative permit or approval. 

(4) 	
A pre-construction meeting shall be held with the applicant and/or general contractor, engineer and architect, and with the land use and building officials of the Town of Monroe.  Additional construction meetings may be called as deemed necessary throughout construction of the project. 


C. 	Use and/or occupancy of approved site buildings, structures, site improvements and uses shall not be authorized until the applicant/owner obtains a Permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Building Department Certificate of Occupancy/Completion. It shall be the applicant’s/owner’s responsibility to coordinate and request all inspections, and to request and obtain a Permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Building Department Certificate of Occupancy/Completion. No permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy/Completion for a building, structure, site improvements or use subject to Commission approval shall be issued until: 
(1) 	
Applicable requirements of such approval and any condition or safeguard attached thereto have been met. 

(2) 	
Evidence of acceptance of completed work by all other involved agencies has been filed with the Planning and Zoning Department. 

(3) 	
All approved improvements have been completed in accordance with the Commission’s Resolution of Approval, the approved plans, specifications and applicable Regulations, unless incomplete improvements are covered by a performance bond assuring completion within six (6) months, or within a time period otherwise specified by the Commission, upon written request and the approval of the Commission.  The Commission may agree to extend the six (6) month limitation for a specific period of time. 

(4) 	
An As-Built plan, prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or surveyor, is submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department.  Said plan shall be based on a field survey and show the location of all site improvements as constructed.  The As-Built plan shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Department, and be found to be in compliance with the approved final plan as signed by the Commission Chair.  An As-Built plan found not to be in compliance shall be subject to review and approval in accordance with the same procedures required for the initial application. 


§7.4.3 Property Maintenance 
A. 	It shall be the duty of every property owner to maintain their property in conformity with these Regulations, the provisions of Chapter 405 (Property Maintenance) of the Code of the Town of Monroe and any Commission approval.  Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of these Regulations and any approval relating thereto. 
B. 	The maintenance of all buildings, structures, landscaping, landscape treatment, public improvements and protective safeguards shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 

§7.5 Expiration of Approval 
§7.5.1 Expiration 
A. 	Commission approval of an application shall expire unless any and all requirements and conditions of approval have been met and final plans have been submitted for signature by the Commission Chair within one-hundred-eighty (180) days of the date of adoption of the Commission’s Resolution of approval. 
B. 	Commission approval shall expire unless all approved improvements associated with such have been completed within five (5) years of the effective date of such approval as evidenced by the issuance of a permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy/Completion. 
C. 	Failure to strictly adhere to the terms, conditions, modifications, safeguards, documents and final plans as approved by the Commission shall be a violation of these Regulations subject to the revoking of an associated Commission approval and/or any associated administrative permits or approvals relating thereto. 
D. 	Failure to complete all work within the period of approval including any extension as may be granted, if any, shall result in an automatic expiration of the Commission approval.  An expired approval for any reason shall be considered null and void. 
§7.5.2 Extensions 
A. 	The Commission may grant one or more extensions of the time to obtain endorsement of final plans and/or to complete all or part of the work in connection with a Commission approval, provided the specific circumstances thereof warrant an extension and provided that the total time for completion shall not exceed ten (10) years from the original date of such approval. 
B. 	Any request for an extension shall be submitted to the Commission in writing in a timely manner prior to the date of expiration (recommended forty-five (45) days in advance of expiration) in order to provide the Commission sufficient time to review and act at a regularly scheduled meeting.  Such request shall state the reasons and circumstances for the requested extension. In considering any such request, the Commission may require a public hearing. 
C. 	The Commission may condition the approval of an extension on, among other things, a determination of the adequacy of the amount of the bond or other surety furnished in accordance with these Regulations. 


ARTICLE 8 SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMITS 
§8.1 Special Exception Permit Procedures 
§8.1.1 Purpose 
A. 	The purpose of requiring a Special Exception Permit is to review proposed new or amendment development plans of an applicant to assure that they meet the stated objectives and standards of the Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development, these Regulations, and provide for necessary public facilities or services, preserve community character, topographic and vegetative features, protect historical and archeological factors, and are compatible with adjacent properties and land uses not requiring a Special Exception Permit, through appropriate design considerations and siting of buildings, structures, uses, access, parking, landscaping and other site development features. 
B. 	In all cases where these Regulations require approval of a Special Exception Permit or an amendment thereto, no Zoning Permit, Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Building Permit shall be authorized or issued, until approval of the required Special Exception Permit has been obtained from the Commission authorizing such administrative permits and approvals. All such administrative permits and approvals shall be consistent with and in accordance with such Commission approval. 
C. 	Notwithstanding the above, a Special Exception Permit shall not be required for interior renovations or modifications of space within a structure previously approved by the Commission for use by a particular Special Exception Permit use under these Regulations, provided that there is no change in the approved special exception use; there are no exterior alterations to the structure or the site; and there are no additional requirements for off-street parking, loading, sanitary sewage disposal, water supply or other features involving physical alteration, upgrading or alteration of buildings, structures, the site and utility systems serving same.  Such renovations or modifications shall require a Zoning Permit. 
§8.1.2 Construal of Special Exception Uses 
The special exception uses for which conformance to additional standards is required by these Regulations shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject to the satisfaction of all requirements and standards prescribed by this Article and the granting of a Special Exception Permit by the Commission for such uses. 
§8.1.3 Application Requirements 
A. 	Applications for a Special Exception Permit shall be in a form prescribed by the Commission together with a fee in accordance with Article 9 of these Regulations and other application materials as required in these Regulations.  The application shall be signed by the applicant, and if the project is proposed by an applicant other than the owner of the property, the application shall also be signed by the owner or accompanied by a notarized letter authorizing the applicant and application as proposed. 
B. 	For a Special Exception Permit application involving an activity regulated pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes §22a-36 to §22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission no later than the day such application is filed with the Commission. The applicant shall provide documentation of said filing.  The Commission shall not render a decision on the application until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted to it a report in accordance with the standards of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, which report shall be given due consideration by the Commission in making its decision. 
C. 	For a Special Exception Permit application involving lands within a public watershed area, the applicant shall submit notice to the public water authority and State Commissioner of Public Health in accordance with the standards set forth in Connecticut General Statutes §8-3i, as amended, no later than seven (7) days from the date such application is filed with the Commission. The applicant shall provide documentation of said noticing. 
D. 	An application for a Special Exception Permit shall be accompanied by the following additional supporting materials, in a quantity as determined by the Planning and Zoning Department: 
(1) 	
Special Exception Permit Site Plans.  All plans shall be consistent with the requirements for Site Plan as set forth in Article 7 of these Regulations. 

(2) 	
Project narrative.  A project narrative shall be provided describing the existing and proposed site conditions and uses, including details describing how each of the Special Exception Permit general standards and supplemental standards of these Regulations will be complied with by the proposed action.  The project narrative shall also detail the proposed action’s consistency with the Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development. The applicant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that any applicable Special Exception Permit standards in these Regulations are addressed.  Project specific analyses and reports prepared by qualified professionals may be required, the scope of which shall be subject to prior Commission review and acceptance. 

(3) 	
Agency Approvals. The applicant shall provide a list of all local, regional, State and Federal agency or department permits and approvals required to implement the proposed action, as well as any applicable requirements thereof affecting the design, site layout, construction or other aspect of the proposed action.  The securing of such agency approvals may be required as a prerequisite to Commission endorsement of any final plans for an approved Special Exception Permit application. 

(4) 	
The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application. 

(5) 	
The applicant shall also submit application documents in an electronic format in accordance with Planning and Zoning Department requirements and specifications. 


E. 	An incomplete Special Exception Permit application may be deemed as reason for denial of said application. 
§8.1.4 Public Hearing and Notification 
A. 	A public hearing shall be required for a Special Exception Permit. Such hearing shall commence within sixty-five (65) days from receipt of a complete application and shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after such hearing commences, except as otherwise may be required or permitted in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. An applicant may also agree to an extension of one or more of these time periods not to exceed a cumulative maximum of an additional sixty-five (65) days.  All decisions shall be rendered not later than sixty-five (65) days after the close of the public hearing. 
B. 	Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of Monroe at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days or less than ten (10) days and the last not less than two (2) days before the date set for the public hearing. 
C. 	An applicant shall send a copy of the notice of public hearing, as provided by the Planning and Zoning Department, to all property owners within one-hundred (100) feet. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested not later than ten (10) days before the public hearing to be held in relation thereto. A copy of the associated Certified Mail Receipts shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Department prior to or at the commencement of the public hearing. 
§8.1.5 Determination of Commission 
A. 	Following the required public hearing, the Commission shall approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications the proposed Special Exception Permit application. 
B. 	The Commission shall not approve any application for Special Exception Permit for any property on which there exists a zoning violation, unless such Special Exception Permit application will remedy such violation. 
C. 	In approving a Special Exception Permit, the Commission shall determine: 
(1) 	
That the application, including all accompanying site plans and associated site development information, data and application documentation, is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations. 

(2) 	
That the proposed use will be in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations, and will function and exist in harmony with the surrounding area and adjacent land uses. 

(3) 	
That the proposed use will not adversely affect the health, safety, convenience and property values of the public in general and of the residents of the neighborhood in particular. 

(4) 	
That the general standards and supplemental standards for specific uses enumerated in §8.2 of these Regulations, as applicable, are satisfactorily met. 


D. 	Approval of a Special Exception Permit shall be applicable only for the use so specified in the application.  Any proposed change in use to a different use or a different Special Exception Permit use shall require submission for approval of a new application subject to all of the requirements and procedures specified herein.  A Special Exception Permit may also be amended or modified in a like manner, except that an amendment or modification found to be of a minor nature or which does not materially alter the Special Exception Permit, as determined by the Commission, may be authorized with Commission review and approval only without the need for a public hearing. 
E. 	Due to the variety and peculiarities of each Special Exception Permit use, the Commission may impose conditions and restrictions to any such use which in its judgment are required to protect adjacent uses and the neighborhood in general including a limitation on hours of operation.  The Commission may stipulate such modifications and/or conditions as are reasonable and necessary to protect or promote: public health, safety or welfare; property values; the environment; sound planning and zoning principles; improved land use, site planning and land development; or to achieve a better overall neighborhood compatibility. 
F. 	When the Commission approves a Special Exception Permit with modifications and/or conditions, each and all of said modifications and/or conditions shall be an integral part of the Commission's decision.  Any modification, condition or safeguard attached to the approval of a Special Exception Permit shall remain with the property as long as the Special Exception Permit use is still in operation, and shall continue in force and effect regardless of any change in ownership of the property.  Should any of the modifications and/or conditions on appeal from such decision be found to be void or of no legal effect, then the conditional approval is likewise void. An applicant may reapply with another application for review. 
G. 	A notice of decision shall be completed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
H. 	As a condition of all Special Exception Permits, right of entry for inspection with reasonable notice shall be provided for to determine compliance with the conditions of said permit. 
§8.1.6 Endorsement of Approved Final Plans 
A. 	An approved Special Exception Permit shall become effective upon the endorsement of final plans and the filing of a copy thereof in the Monroe Land Records. 
B. 	Following approval of an application for Special Exception Permit by the Commission, the applicant shall submit final plans in accordance with said approval for endorsement by the Commission Chair. The applicant shall also be required to record an original copy of Special Exception Permit approval document in the Monroe Land Records, which copy shall be provided by the Planning and Zoning Department in accordance with the Commission’s approval of the Special Exception Permit. 
C. 	Commission approval of an application shall expire unless any and all requirements and conditions of approval have been met and final plans have been submitted for signature by the Commission Chair within one-hundred-eighty (180) days of the date of adoption of the Commission’s Resolution of approval. 
D. 	A request for an extension of time to obtain endorsement of final plans shall be made in writing to the Commission a minimum of forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of said approval. The Commission may grant one (1) or more extensions not to exceed an additional ninety (90) days or less each, provided there are unusual or extenuating circumstances that warrant such extension. 
§8.1.7 Expiration; Time to Complete Project Improvements 
A. 	Failure to strictly adhere to terms, conditions, modifications, safeguards, documents and final plans as approved by the Commission shall be a violation of these Regulations subject to the revoking of an approved Special Exception Permit. 
B. 	Construction and consideration of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Certificate of Occupancy/Completion associated with a Special Exception Permit shall follow the same procedures and standards as set forth in §7.4.2 of these Regulations. 
C. 	Failure to complete all work within the period of approval, including any extension as may be granted, if any, shall result in an automatic expiration of the approval of a Special Exception Permit.  An expired Special Exception Permit for any reason shall be considered null and void. 
D. 	The approval of any Special Exception Permit shall expire unless all approved improvements associated with such Special Exception Permit have been completed within five (5) years of the date of such approval, as evidenced by the issuance of a permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance and Certificate of Occupancy/Completion. 
§8.1.8 Extension to Complete Project Improvements 
A. 	The Commission may grant one or more extensions of the time to complete all or part of the work in connection with an approved Special Exception Permit, provided the specific circumstances thereof warrant an extension and provided that the total time for completion shall not exceed ten (10) years from the original date of such approval. 
B. 	Any request for an extension shall be submitted to the Commission in writing in a timely manner prior to the date of expiration (recommended forty-five (45) days in advance of expiration) in order to provide the Commission sufficient time to review and act at a regularly scheduled meeting.  Such request shall state the reasons and circumstances for the requested extension. In considering any such request, the Commission may require a public hearing. 
C. 	The Commission may condition the approval of an extension on, among other things, a determination of the adequacy of the amount of the bond or other surety furnished in accordance with these Regulations. 

§8.2 Standards for Special Exception Permit Uses 
§8.2.1 Construal of Standards 
All Special Exception Permit uses are declared to possess characteristics of such unique and distinct form that each specific use shall be considered an individual case which shall be required to meet, in addition to all other applicable requirements of these Regulations, the general standards specified in §8.2.2 of these Regulations and any supplemental standards for such specific use specified in §8.2.3 of these Regulations, which standards collectively shall be the minimum conditions for approval of such use. 
§8.2.2 General Standards 
Prior to approving a Special Exception Permit, the Planning Board shall determine the conformity of such Special Exception Permit use and the proposed development thereof with the applicable conditions and standards as set forth in these Regulations. The general standards for Special Exception Permit approval are as follows: 
A. 	That the location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations and traffic involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to the type, arrangement and capacity of streets giving access to it and the hours of operation are such that the proposed use will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is located. 
B. 	The proposed use is consistent with the Plan of Conservation and Development. 
C. 	That the location, nature and height of buildings and the nature and extent of the landscaping and screening on the site, as existing or proposed, are such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings. 
D. 	That the operations of the proposed use will not be objectionable by reason of noise, fumes, smoke, dust, vibration, glare, intensity or flashing of lights. 
E. 	That safe, sanitary sewage disposal will be provided by means of a public sewer line, treatment plant or subsurface sewage disposal system subject to approval by state and/or local authorities. 
F. 	That the parking areas to be provided will be of adequate capacity for the particular use, properly located and suitably screened from adjoining residential uses and abutting properties; and that the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to achieve maximum safety and acceptable level of service. 
G. 	That the comments and recommendations of town staff and consultants, as well as other involved commissions, boards, committees and agencies have been duly considered. 
H. 	That, where applicable, verification of all approvals of other governmental agencies, commissions or boards have been secured by the applicant, as evidenced by certification by such agencies, commissions or boards. 
I. 	That the proposed use will not require such additional public facilities or services or create such fiscal burdens upon the Town greater than those which characterize uses which do not require a Special Exception Permit. 
§8.2.3 Supplemental Standards 
A Special Exception Permit use shall conform to the individual supplemental standards and requirements below, where applicable, in addition to the general standards set forth above and all other regulations for the zoning district in which the Special Exception Permit use is located. In all cases, whichever regulations are more restrictive shall apply. 
A. 	Group Residences for More than Six (6) Persons, pursuant to State of Connecticut General Statutes, Chapter 124, Section 8-3e, and Safe Homes Licensed by the State of Connecticut 
(1) 	
No such community residence or child-care residential facility shall be established within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any other such community residence or child-care residential facility without Zoning Board of Appeals approval. 

(2) 	
All off-street parking shall be to the rear of the principal residence building or in garages. 

(3) 	
All refuse containment shall be screened with durable decorative fencing and landscaping. 

(4) 	
No exterior storage dissimilar to that of a single-family residence shall be permitted. 

(5) 	
The architectural style, bulk and roof design shall be compatible and consistent with single-family residential development and the single-family residences in the surrounding neighborhood. 

(6) 	
Screening, buffers and site landscaping shall be provided as deemed appropriate and acceptable to the Commission. 


B. Riding Academy, Barns and Stables for Boarding as a Business Use 
(1) 	
Shall be located on a lot of at least five (5) acres in area. 

(2) 	
Any barn, stable or other building or structure used for such riding academy or the boarding and stabling of horses shall be located not less than one-hundred (100) feet from any property or street line. 

(3) 	
No more than two (2) horses shall be allowed for every one (1) acre of land. 

(4) 	
An animal waste management area shall be provided. Such area shall be setback at least one-hundred (100) feet from any property line and one-hundred (100) feet from any wetland, stream or water body. Said area shall be designed to provide the following minimum measures: a permanent impervious and structurally sound foundation pad; screening and buffering from adjoining properties consisting of a combination of fencing and landscaping; odor abatement measures; and adequate control of stormwater runoff. 

(5) 	
Appropriate measures and vector controls shall be provided and detailed. 

(6) 	
Adequate site landscaping, as well as screening and buffering of adjacent properties shall be provided as determined appropriate and acceptable to the Commission. 

(7) 	
Off-street parking shall be provided in quantity and location which adequately and safely accommodates the parking needs of the type and intensity of site operations, including parking and storage of horse trailers.  Adequate vehicle turnaround and emergency access shall be provided.  All parking and loading shall be onsite.  The Commission may permit non-paved parking areas provided adequate provisions for maintenance and stormwater management are provided.  For pervious parking areas, adequate provision of the demarcation of parking spaces shall be provided. Handicap accessible parking shall be paved and include required signage and adequate access. 

(8) 	
Truck deliveries or pickups of supplies or products associated with the site use operations, as well as hours of operation for patron visitation, may be restricted by the Commission. 

(9) 	
Exterior lighting shall be provided in accordance with the standards for lighting in these Regulations and shall be consistent in type, intensity and style with traditional farm and single-family development. 


C. Home-based Businesses 
(1) 	
There shall be no more than two nonresident persons or employees engaged in the conduct of the business on the premises. 

(2) 	
No outside storage of goods, supplies or materials shall be allowed. No dumpsters shall be permitted. 

(3) 	
The floor area for the conduct of the occupation shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the habitable floor area on the premises. 

(4) 	
The occupation must clearly be secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, does not change the residential character of the dwelling in any visible manner, does not create objectionable noise, odor, vibrations, or unsightly conditions noticeable off the premises; does not create interference with radio, television and/or other telecommunications reception in the vicinity, and does not create a health or safety hazard. 

(5) 	
Off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate the parking needs of the home business based on number of employees and anticipated customers. The off-street parking area should provide for vehicle turnaround, as necessary. 

(6) 	
Landscaping and screening shall be provided along the boundaries of adjoining residential property and to buffer parking. 

(7) 	
Customers may visit the premises only between the hours of 8:00 am and 6:00 pm. 

(8) 	
Truck deliveries or pickups of supplies or products associated with the business activity are allowed only between 8:00 am and 5:00 pm. Vehicles used for delivery and pickup are limited to those normally serving residential neighborhoods. 

(9) 	
A home business permit must be renewed yearly on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the initial permit. The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to renew the permit, provided that the requirements of this Regulation are being met. 


D. Town of Monroe Owned Telecommunications Sites and Facilities 
(1) 	
Use of the site is specifically limited to telecommunication purposes only, using the electromagnetic spectrum as regulated by the Federal Communications Commission or Federal government agency regulating telephone services of certain Federal agencies. 

(2) 	
The minimum parcel size shall be ten (10) acres under contiguous ownership with a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet along a public road. 

(3) 	
The mean elevation of the parcel shall be five-hundred-fifty (550) feet above sea level based upon U.S. Geological Survey datum. 

(4) 	
Transmission/reception towers, satellite dish antennas and other antennas in support of communications may be erected.  Unattended accessory buildings for automated communications relay and similar activity may be constructed. 

(5) 
Notwithstanding any other provision of these Regulations, the following schedule shall pertain to structures regulated under Subsection E above. 


Towers/Antennas  Buildings  
Minimum Setback from parcel  Equivalent to height  50 feet  
perimeter boundary  of structure from  
grade at base (+) 10%  

Maximum Height 	80 feet 20 feet 
Maximum Stories (Structure) 	N/A 1 
(6) 	
No on-site disposal of sewage shall be permitted, except where located on a parcel with other public accessible uses and buildings. 

(7) 	
All service utilities shall be under ground. 

(8) 	
The parcel shall be minimally accessible by gravel/stone accessways throughout as may be required, except shall provide a paved apron at site intersections with an abutting street. 

(9) 	
All related facilities shall be so designed to require no on-site use or occupancy by personnel other than periodic or occasional maintenance, construction, security. 

(10) 	
The entire parcel shall be secured from access by all persons other than the municipality, actual users or their authorized personnel. The base of a tower and any ground equipment shall be secured to prevent non-authorized users access by enclosure in a building or fenced compound. Fencing shall be designed as non-climbing and landscape screening shall be provided. 

(11) 	
Any trash or debris generated by activities on the site shall be removed once-weekly by those generating same. 

(12) 	
Signage shall be limited to public safety instruction, along with emergency contact information. No sign shall exceed a size of three (3) square feet in area. 

(13) 	
Exterior lighting shall be provided in accordance with the standards for lighting of these Regulations and shall be consistent in type, intensity and style with single-family development. Lighting shall be limited to low intensity incandescent security lighting at the base of the towers and on structures not exceeding twelve (12) feet from finished grade, also, such other lighting as may be required by state or federal agencies in the interest of public safety. 

(14) 	
Suitable vegetative ground cover shall be maintained at all times to restrict and control soil erosion and sedimentation as prescribed in §6.5 of these Regulations. 

(15) 	
A tower shall be designed to blend into its surroundings through measures such as a monopole tower with interior antenna mounting, earth tone coloring of support tower structure and attachments, and use of accessory ground structures resembling typical farm and residential outbuildings or sheds. 

(16) 	
No outside storage of materials, equipment or vehicles shall be permitted except in direct relation to ongoing construction, repair or maintenance activities. 

(17) 	
No interference in publicly received television, cable television or radio signals will be permitted from users of the site.  Should interference be generated, it shall be remedied by the user(s) by whatever means as may be found necessary. 


E. Safe Homes for Foster Children Licensed by the State of Connecticut 
(1) 	
Each lot shall meet the minimum standards of its respective zone. 

(2) 	
The maximum capacity shall not exceed twelve (12) resident children. 

(3) 	
Parking shall be provided on-site in a ratio of one (1) space per four (4) children of rated capacity. A vehicle turnaround area shall be provided on the site. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) or portion thereof of the required spaces shall either be garaged or placed to the rear of the structure. Exterior parking shall not block access to the building or garage spaces. Adequate site landscaping, including screening and buffering of adjacent properties shall be provided as determined appropriate and acceptable to the Commission. 

(4) 	
Play areas shall be located to the rear of the structure but no closer than thirty (30) feet to a property line and screened by decorative solid fencing and landscaping. 

(5) 	
The services at a Safe Home shall at all times operate pursuant to a contract with the State of Connecticut subject to minimum standards conforming to State licensing guidelines. 

(6) 	
The Safe Home shall not display any physical identification as such. 


F. Automobile Service Shop, Automobile Body Shop and/or Gasoline Stations 
(1) 	
Temporary storage of facility and customer repair vehicles: 

(a) 
In a B-2 District, no vehicles shall be stored outside with the exception of one (1) facility service vehicle and no more than seven (7) customer vehicles scheduled for repair or service. 

(b) 
In an I-2 District, facility service vehicles and customer vehicles scheduled for repair or service, on premises for more than seven (7) days, shall be stored in a designated area as set forth on the approved development plan, which area shall not be forward of the principal building closest to the street and shall be screened from abutting streets and properties.  No more than twenty-four (24) such customer vehicles shall be permitted to be temporarily stored at any given time. 

(c) 
Designated temporary storage of facility and customer repair vehicles shall be in addition to required minimum off-street parking spaces. 



(2) 	
An automobile body shop is not permitted, except in an I-2 District. 

(3) 	
No inoperable, non-registered or disassembled automobile, or portions thereof, shall be stored or parked outside for any period except in an area designated and approved by the Commission subject to appropriate screening and buffering.  A maximum number of such vehicles shall be specified by the Commission. 

(4) 	
Car washes shall be permitted as an accessory use only where all wash water effluent is collected and recycled within the car wash building.  Retail car washes shall not be permitted except in a B-2 District. 

(5) 	
Gasoline and motor fuels sold may be dispensed by self-service or a station attendant at a location designed and approved for such use. 

(a) 	
In a LOR District, fuel pumps, canopies over fuel pump dispensers, and storage tanks shall not be located within 350 feet from any residential district. 

(b) 	
In a LOR District, canopy structures over fuel pump dispensers shall not be located within the front yard setback. 



(6) 	
There shall be no outdoor display or sale of products or merchandise. 

(7) 	
The rental or sale of vehicles at a gasoline station shall be prohibited. 

(8) 	
The rental or sale of vehicles at an automobile service shop or automobile body shop may be permitted, subject to the following limitations: 

(a) 
The rental of vehicles, except as loaners to a customer while their vehicle is being serviced or repaired, shall be prohibited. 

(b) 
The sale of new vehicles shall be prohibited. 

(c) 
In a B-2 District, the sale of used vehicles as an accessory land use shall be permitted pursuant to an appropriate State of Connecticut license authorizing the selling of used automobiles.  Said license shall be limited, which limitations shall be specified on the associated approved Certificate of Location pursuant to §9.1.3(F) of these Regulations for any new, amended or renewal State of Connecticut license application, as follows: 

• 	
Authorized used vehicles shall be stored in a designated area as set forth on the approved development plan. 

• 	
No more than three (3) used vehicles shall be permitted at any given time. 



(d) 
In an I-2 District, the sale of used vehicles as an accessory land use shall be permitted pursuant to an appropriate State of Connecticut license authorizing the selling of used automobiles.  Said license shall be limited, which limitations shall be specified on the associated approved Certificate of Location pursuant to §9.1.3(F) of these Regulations for any new, amended or renewal State of Connecticut license application, as follows: 

• 	
Authorized used vehicles shall be stored in a designated area as set forth on the approved development plan, which area shall not be forward of the principal building closest to the street and shall be screened from abutting streets and properties. 

• 	
The visible display of used vehicles shall be prohibited. 

• 	
No more than six (6) used vehicles shall be permitted at any given time. 



(e) 
Designated	 storage of permitted loaner or used vehicles shall be in addition to required minimum off-street parking spaces. 



(9) 	
Appropriate plans shall be detailed providing for the environmentally sound temporary storage and disposal or recycling of wastewater, oil and gasoline products, or discharges of same. 

(10) 	
All service and repair activities, other than minor short duration servicing, such as the changing of tires, wiper blades, lights, adding of fluids (not changing of such), and other similar items shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building (shall not be construed to mean that the service or garage doors to any automobile or body shop must be kept closed at all times). 

(11) 	
Canopy structures over fuel pump dispensers are permitted with gasoline stations, provided their design and construction are consistent with the design and construction of the principal building, both of which shall utilize pitched roof designs. All lighting, fire suppression equipment and roof drainage shall be concealed within the canopy structure. 

(12) 	
Grooved concrete pavement shall be utilized at all gasoline station pump dispensers. 

(13) 	
Outdoor audio and video advertisement or entertainment systems shall be prohibited (does not preclude a small integrated pump dispenser screen providing fueling and transaction instructions). 

(14) 	
Separate from required minimum off-street parking spaces, an area measuring a minimum of ten (10) feet by eighteen (18) feet shall be provided for each air and vacuum facility. 


G. 	Boat and Trailer Sales and Service, Automobile Salesrooms, Automobile Service and Repair Garages 
(1) 	
All automobile, tractor, boat, trailer and accessory vehicular repair work, with the exception of emergency work, shall be conducted wholly within a building. 

(2) 	
Automobiles, boats and/or trailers shall not be displayed outside a building. 

(3) 	
No entrance or driveway to any building within which such a use is conducted shall have less than twenty-four (24) feet of clear width at any point. 

(4) 	
No entrance or driveway to any premises on which any such use is conducted shall be situated within a radius of two-hundred (200) feet from a lot used or reserved to be used for a college or school, a hospital, public playground or park, a church or public library; however, no such use shall be deemed to be nonconforming by reason of the subsequent erection or development of any such college, school, hospital, playground, park, church or library. 


H. Public Utility Service Center 
(1) 	
This use permits a State of Connecticut Licensed Public Utility Operations Center for electrical transmission. 

(2) 	
The following uses may be conducted as part of this use: general office use, customer service, maintenance of utility service operations, vehicle maintenance, and accessory uses as contained in these Regulations. 

(3) 	
The use must be located on a property with a minimum acreage of thirty (30) acres under one (1) ownership. 

(4) 	
Such use shall be maintained a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet from residentially-zoned property. 

(5) 	
Outside storage of materials for utility service is permitted, only as approved by the Commission, and for active storage only within designated areas. 

(6) 	
Equipment, vehicles, and materials related to an approved site use stored on site shall be screened from public roads and residential properties to the satisfaction of the Commission, and there shall be no refuse visible on site. 

(7) 	
Outdoor parking of utility company service vehicles is allowed, providing they are registered and operable and located within mapped areas approved by the Commission. 

(8) 	
There shall be no transformers or hazardous materials stored on site. 


I. Mixed Use Landmark Property Developments 
(1) 	
The purpose of this use is to allow mixed use development under carefully regulated conditions to facilitate reinvestment in and the renovation of older structures to ensure their continued existence where the uses permitted by right may no longer be the highest and best uses to achieve that purpose. 

(2) 	
A property may be developed as a Mixed Use Landmark Property provided such property and development satisfy all of the following criteria: 

• 
The proposed landmark property has a minimum lot area of five (5) acres; 

• 	
The proposed landmark property includes a principal building with a minimum gross floor area of 5,000 square feet; 

• 	
The principal building is located within 1,500 feet of Route 25 or Route 111 as measured from the existing structure to the street line; 

• 	
A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the existing principal building gross floor area was constructed at least 50 years prior to the date of the Mixed Use Landmark Property Special Exception Permit Application; 

• 	
The principal building was constructed to a size and of materials that together render it architecturally unique in the Town of Monroe; and 

• 	
The subject property and principal building thereon are determined by the Commission to be suitable for mixed use development and landmark status. 



(3) 	
In addition to the underlying permitted and special exception uses of the underlying zoning district, the following additional uses, including a combination thereof, may also be permitted: 

(a) 	
Offices (including general and professional offices, and medical and dental offices only) in an existing principal building with a gross floor area of less than 20,000 square feet. 

(b) 	
Multifamily dwelling units with a maximum development density not to exceed three (3) bedrooms per acre. 



(4) 	
General Provisions 


In addition to the foregoing, the following restrictions shall apply to any special exception permit for mixed use Landmark Property development: 
(a) 	
An existing structure may be modified to add garages or other structural additions provided that the additions do not cumulatively exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area of the existing principal building on the property at the time of special exception permit approval. The total area that can be used for multi-family dwelling units cannot exceed the gross floor area of the existing principal building at the time of the initial special exception permit application. All applications to modify a structure shall be referred to the Architectural Review Board for review and recommendation in accordance with the provisions set forth in §9.6 of these Regulations. 

(b) 	
For any structure located within 500 feet of Routes 25 or 111, measured from the existing structure to the street line, other than the addition of a porch, entrance vestibule or veranda, no additions or new structures shall be located between the front of an existing structure and Routes 25 or 111, thereby preserving the existing streetscape setback. 

(c) 	
Any addition to or modification of an existing structure, or any new structure on the property, shall be compatible with and complement the existing structure with regard to design, scale, general appearance, architectural style and character, fenestration, finish, and the materials used. 

(d) 	
Any addition to an existing structure, or any new structure, and any site improvement to the property, shall have a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet from all side and rear property lines and be buffered and screened to the satisfaction of the Commission. 

(e) 	
Any new separate (detached) building or structure on the property will be treated as an accessory structure limited to accessory use only. 

(f) 	
No advertising for the use of the structure shall be visible outside of the structure, except an announcement sign as may be provided for in Article 6 of these Regulations. 

(g) 	
There shall be no objectionable noise, odor, vibrations, or unsightly conditions created by the development plan. 

(h) 	
The renovation and use of an existing structure shall not create a health or safety hazard. 

(i) 	
On-premise parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of these Regulations. Parking shall be designed in a manner to compliment the natural landscape features of the property.   Landscape features, elevation changes, hedgerows and islands shall be incorporated into the design to separate and break up the mass of the parking area. 

(j) 	
Mechanical units placed on the ground shall be placed on appropriate footing pads and adequately screened with hardscape, building features and/or landscaping. 


J. Accessory Drive-Through and/or Exterior Window Services 
The development standards in this section are intended to supplement the standards in the underlying zoning district for uses proposed to include drive-through and/or exterior window services. In the event of conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district standards, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(1) 	
Drive-Through Lanes 

(a) 	
Drive-through lanes shall be separated from other internal site circulation lanes and shall include appropriately located and designed bypass lanes. 

(b) 	
Drive-through lanes and associated required bypass lanes shall be designed to prevent circulation congestion, both on site and on adjacent streets. The design of such lanes shall be integrated with the on-site circulation pattern, and shall not enter or exit directly into a public street. 

(c) 	
Drive-through lanes shall not encroach into required minimum yard and landscape buffer areas, and shall be designed in a manner that minimizes impacts on adjacent properties from noise, exhaust fumes and vehicle headlights from vehicles as they queue to wait for drive-through services. 

(d) 	
Drive-through lanes shall not encroach, impede or obstruct access into or out of parking spaces, pedestrian walkways or loading and service areas. 

(e) 	
Drive-through lanes shall be clearly delineated from internal circulation traffic aisles, other stacking lanes and parking areas with striping, curbing, landscaping and the use of alternative paving materials or raised landscaped medians. The beginning of the drive-through lanes shall be clearly marked with appropriate signage and/or line striping. 

(f) 	
Drive-through lanes shall be designed and placed to minimize their crossing of pedestrian walkways or otherwise impeding pedestrian access. Where pedestrian walkways cannot be avoided crossing drive-through lanes, the walkways shall have clear visibility and shall be delineated by physical and visual separation between the two, such as textured and colored paving. 

(g) 	
Drive-through lanes shall not interfere with or obstruct loading and refuse storage areas, and loading and refuse operations shall not impede or impair vehicular movement through drive-through lanes. 

(h) 	
Drive-through lanes shall not be located adjacent to permitted and approved outdoor dining or seating areas. 

(i) 	
Drive-through lanes shall be designed with the minimum standards: 



(2) 	
Queuing or Stacking Spaces 

(a) 	
Drive-through and exterior service window lanes shall be constructed with the necessary vehicle queuing or stacking capacity so that vehicles do not overflow into on-site parking aisles or into abutting street right-of-ways. 

(b) 	
All queue spaces shall be provided only on the lot for the use to be served and shall not extend into any street right-of-way. 

(c) 	
A minimum number of queuing or stacking spaces shall be provided for the specific related principal use in accordance with the standards set forth in §6.1.3 of these Regulations. 

(d) 	
The provision of drive-through service facilities shall not justify a reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces for the accompanying use. 

(e) 	
Each queuing or stacking space shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length and ten (10) feet in width. 



(3) 	
Exterior Service Windows and Menu Boards 

(a) 	
Exterior service windows and menu boards shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residential district (measured at the nearest residential property line). 

(b) 	
Any speakers, intercom systems, or other audible means of communication shall not play continuous or prerecorded audio or video. Related speaker systems shall emit no more than 55 decibels and at no time shall any speaker system be audible above daytime ambient noise levels beyond the subject property. The system shall be designed to compensate for ambient noise levels in the immediate area. 

(c) 	
Menu boards shall be fixed and not incorporate or include any flashing, rotating or otherwise moving or changing lights, displays or messages. 

(d) 	
Lighting of menu boards and service windows shall not include neon or unshielded light sources. 



(4) 	
Hours of Operation. When located on a site within 100 feet of any residential property (measured from the nearest property lines), hours of operation for the drive-up/drive­through service shall be limited from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily. If the use is located greater than 100 feet from a residential use, the hours of operation may also be limited or restricted by the Commission as deemed warranted based on the site location and neighboring land uses. 


Minimum Drive-Through and/or Exterior Window Service Aisles  
Standard  Unit (feet)  
Minimum Interior Radius at Curves  10  
Minimum Aisles Width  12  
Minimum Distance of Lane Entrance to Street Access Intersection (1)  50  
(1) Measured from the center point of the lane entrance to the center point of the street access intersection along the street right-of-way line.  

K. Commercial Vehicle or School Bus Parking Facility 
(1) 	
A school bus parking facility may include a private or municipal (Town of Monroe) owned and/or operated facility for the parking of school buses, to provide transportation of children to and from school or in connection with school activities, when not in use or between times of active service deployment. 

(2) 	
No parking facility shall be permitted abutting a residentially zoned parcel. 

(3) 	
All vehicles parked on the premises shall be registered with the Connecticut State Department of Motor Vehicles. 

(4) 	
Accessory uses may include facility dispatch offices, limited minor repair and service maintenance facilities, and onsite fueling provisions. 

(5) 	
Fueling Facilities 

(a) 	
All fuel storage and dispensing facilities and devices shall be detailed on the application site plans. 

(b) 	
Fueling facilities shall be located and designed to provide separate and safe access circulation for facility and fuel delivery vehicles.  Access to such facilities shall not interfere with other site facilities, driveway aisles, parking areas or parking maneuvers. 

(c) 	
Adequate fire protection measures and pollutant prevention controls for fuel storage and dispensing facilities shall be provided and detailed on the application site plans, subject to the satisfaction of the Commission and the Monroe Fire Marshal. 



(6) 	
Minor Repair and Maintenance Servicing 

(a) 	
Minor vehicle repairs may include incidental body or fender work; minor painting; upholstery repair and replacement; and replacement of any part or repair of any part that does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential. 

(b) 	
All vehicle servicing and maintenance, including washing of vehicles, shall be conducted within an enclosed building or under cover, except non-engine related service maintenance work such as windshield wiper replacement, tire rotation and repair, window repair and replacement, and other activities not involving disturbance to or the removal/addition of fluids. 

(c) 	
Any washing of vehicles shall be conducted with an appropriate collection system for all wastewater in accordance with CT DEEP requirements. 

(d) 	
All vehicles parked on the premises shall be mechanically operable at all times, except during temporary periods of onsite servicing; no inoperable vehicle undergoing permitted onsite service maintenance shall be stored on the premises in excess of 72 hours. 

(e) 	
Permitted service maintenance and repair work and vehicle washing shall be limited to stored fleet vehicles only, no service or vehicle washing shall be permitted upon non-facility vehicles. 




L. Commercial Self-Storage Structures for Rental of Space 
(1) 	
The use of the premises is restricted solely to the use of storage of goods or possessions, but specifically excluding any hazardous or flammable chemicals. 

(2) 	
The use of the premises is restricted to interior use of the structures. 

(3) 	
The site shall have direct access to a State Highway or Town commercial street meeting the minimum pavement width specified in Article 8 of these regulations. 

(4) 	
No two similar uses/sites shall be located within one-thousand-five-hundred (1,500) feet on a direct line from each other. 

(5) 	
No exterior wall of any storage structure or security fencing shall be visible from any public road or from any adjacent property at a distance of less than two-hundred (200) feet from the property line.  Such compliance may be achieved through the use of earthen and/or vegetative buffers; the use of fencing for same is not permitted. 

(6) 	
Exterior wall surfaces shall be finished in neutral or soft pastel colors to minimize negative visual impacts on the environment. 

(7) 	
The owner of the premises shall maintain suitable security measures to protect the integrity of the site and reasonably assure that the use of the premises is being conducted within the limits of all applicable local, State and Federal laws. 

(8) 	
The owner of the premises shall at all times maintain reasonable insurance against damage, injury and liability to protect the premises and surrounding properties from casualty or loss.  The owner shall annually file a certificate of insurance with the Commission, on or before the anniversary date of zoning approval. 


M. 	“SEP (1)” Use in Industrial District 3 
The following supplemental standards shall apply to the Special Exception Permit uses identified as “SEP (1)” in the Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District as set forth in Article 10 of these Regulations: 
(1) 	
One or more of the uses identified as “SEP (1)” in the Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District may be developed on a single lot, subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Subsection. 

(2) 	
Lot area. The minimum lot size shall be twenty (20) acres and the maximum lot area shall not exceed eighty (80) acres.  The lot shall be in existence as a single lot at the time of application to the Commission to ensure an integrated development. 

(3) 	
Lot frontage. The lot shall have a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet of street frontage on Main Street (Route 25) or on an approved private commercial street servicing a Business or Industrial District, and said lot shall be located within six-thousand-five-hundred (6,500) feet of a limited access highway. 

(4) 	
Lot buildings. 

(a) 
The development may contain one (1) or more buildings. 

(b) 
Building height shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet excluding parapets and decorative facades. 

(c) 	
Buildings shall be set back a minimum of three-hundred (300) feet from Main Street (Route 25).  All other setbacks, buffers, landscape requirements and other relevant provisions of these Regulations shall apply. 

(d) 
A minimum gross floor area of one-hundred-thousand (100,000) square feet shall be provided consisting of retail and personal service businesses. 

(e) 
No single building shall exceed a gross floor area of fifty-thousand (50,000) square feet unless such building is set back at least one-thousand (1,000) feet from Main Street (Route 25). 



(5) 	
Building coverage.  Coverage of buildings and structures shall not exceed a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area. 

(6) 	
A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the site shall be landscaped and/or preserved as undeveloped open space. 

(7) 	
Off-street parking. The proposal must demonstrate that the parking requirements set forth in Article 6 of these Regulations have been met, including any outdoor merchandise display areas which shall be calculated as retail use. 

(8) 	
Outdoor storage shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Article 6 of these Regulations and the following supplemental standards: 

(a) 
All outdoor storage areas shall be screened by a building or a solid wall of brick or split face block or similar, and/or decorative fencing, providing a minimum height of six (6) feet. Landscaping shall be provided to complement and soften the enclosure structure. 

(b) 
The forgoing shall not apply to the outdoor display of garden or nursery merchandise for retail sale.  However, all outdoor display of garden or nursery merchandise for retail sale must be contained within specific areas to be approved by the Commission and must be marked and controlled via permanent signage, bollards, fencing segments, landscaping, or other means to achieve obvious, safe, and aesthetically pleasing sectioned off areas. 



(9) 	
An area for a maintenance facility shall be designated on the Site Plan and suitably screened from adjacent properties and entrance roads. 

(10) 	
Any roof top mechanicals shall be visually screened and buffered to minimize noise pollution. 

(11) 	
Drive-up windows shall be limited to banks and pharmacies. 

(12) 	
Lighting shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Article 6 of these Regulations and the following supplemental standards: 

(a) 	
Flood lights are prohibited. 

(b) 	
Building mounted light fixtures shall not be mounted to a roof, parapet or above the wall façade it is attached to. 

(c) 	
All lights shall be turned off at the close of business with the exception of security lights. 

(d) 	
The up-lighting of buildings and signs shall not be permitted. 

(e) 	
Any property adjacent to a residential district shall provide that no direct unshielded light source be visible at the property line. 



(13) 	
The site design and building construction shall be encouraged to incorporate green building standards similar to those established by the United States Green Building Council, as appropriate for the site. 


N. Firewood Processing Facility 
(1) 	
The location, containment and screening of all outdoor operations, including but not limited to the intake, processing, waste disposal, packaging and finished material staging and storage areas shall be detailed on the application site plans to the satisfaction of the Commission. 

(2) 	
Notwithstanding the limits of permitted outdoor storage as set forth in §4.3.8 of these Regulations, the total permitted percentage of lot coverage by outdoor operations of a firewood processing facility may be greater as approved by the Commission.  However, no outdoor operations shall be permitted in any required setback yard area, landscape buffer, or within 25 feet of any property line, whichever is greater. 

(3) 	
The design and layout of outdoor operations of the facility shall provide adequate separation between buildings, parking areas, processing facilities and stockpile areas to ensure safe vehicle and pedestrian access and circulation throughout the facility. 

(4) 	
The method of containment, screening, and heights of processing and storage piles shall be detailed.  Outdoor processing and storage piles shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet. 

(5) 	
All wood waste not otherwise burned in any kiln drying operation shall be removed from the site and disposed of at an approved facility.  No wood wastes shall be buried or otherwise disposed of within the limits of the subject property. 

(6) 	
The location, type and means of operation of any kiln or other wood drying facility shall be shown to be located and designed with adequate separation from other site facilities, and to include adequate fire protection and emission control measures, subject to the satisfaction of the Commission and the Monroe Fire Marshal.  At minimum, details of proposed fire protection and emission control measures shall comply with all USDA requirements regulating this type of facility. 


O. Landscaper or arborist. 
(1) 	
Business administrative offices of the applicant must be located on the premises within a permanent fully enclosed building. 

(2) 	
There shall be no outdoor display or sale of products or merchandise. 

(3) 	
All motor vehicles parked on the premises shall be registered with the Connecticut State Department of Motor Vehicles. No inoperable or dissembled motor vehicle, or equipment, or portion thereof, shall be stored or parked on the premises. 

(4) 	
All equipment and materials shall be stored inside a fully enclosed building or within a designated accessory outdoor storage area as may be permitted by these Regulations. Accessory outdoor storage shall not interfere with site access driveways, parking or other onsite circulation of vehicles and pedestrians. 

(5) 	
No service, maintenance, repair (except minor maintenance such as replacing light bulbs, windshield wipers, or similar) or washing of motor vehicles or equipment, or processing of any materials, shall be permitted on the premises. 

(6) 	
No fuel or oil dispensing facilities shall be permitted. Any chemical storage shall be within a fully enclosed building in a quantity and manner acceptable to the Fire Marshal. 

(7) 	
Adequate off-street parking as approved by the Commission shall be provided onsite for all motor vehicles and trailers parked or stored in connection with the business operations. Such parking shall be in addition to that otherwise required by these Regulations. 

(8) 	
Vegetation within a required landscape buffer area as required by these Regulations shall consist of permanent landscaping; not materials stored of containerized for either short or long-term storage. 

(9) 	
Access driveways shall be laid out in such a manner that connection with abutting streets are located and designed so as to avoid unsafe conditions. 




ARTICLE 9 ENFORCEMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS 
§9.1 Planning and Zoning Commission 
§9.1.1 Organization and Rules of Procedure 
There shall be a Planning and Zoning Commission, herein referred to as “the Commission,” as provided 
for in the Charter of the Town of Monroe, subject to the provisions of §8-4a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Commission shall adopt bylaws, which shall be the official rules of procedure for the Commission. 
§9.1.2 Membership 
The number and term of regular and alternate Commission members shall be as set forth in the Charter of the Town of Monroe and the bylaws of the Commission. 
§9.1.3 Powers and Duties 
The Commission shall have all the duties and responsibilities delegated to it by the General Statutes of Connecticut, including the following: 
A. Plan of Conservation and Development 
At least once every ten (10) years the Commission shall review and adopt or amend a Plan of Conservation and Development for the Town of Monroe. Such Plan of Conservation and Development shall: 
(1) 	
Be a statement of policies, goals and standards for the physical and economic development and conservation of the Town; 

(2) 	
Provide for a system of principal thoroughfares, parkways, bridges, streets, sidewalks, multipurpose trails and other public ways as appropriate; 

(3) 	
Be designed to promote, with the greatest efficiency and economy, the coordinated development of the municipality and the general welfare and prosperity of its people; 

(4) 	
Recommend the most desirable use of land within the municipality for residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, conservation and other purposes; 

(5) 	
Recommend the most desirable density of population in different parts of the Town; and 

(6) 	
Make provisions for the development of housing opportunities and promote housing choice and economic diversity in housing. 


B. Subdivision of Land 
No subdivision of land shall be made within the Town of Monroe until a plan for such subdivision has been approved by the Commission, pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Monroe. 
C. Site Plans 
The Commission shall have the authority to review and decide upon applications for Site Plan approval, pursuant to Article 7 of these Regulations. 
D. Special Exception Permits 
The Commission shall have the authority to review and decide upon applications for Special Exception Permits and shall hold a public hearing on such applications, pursuant to Article 8 of these Regulations. Whenever the Commission grants or denies a Special Exception Permit, it shall state upon the record the reason for its decision. 
E. Zoning Map, Zoning Regulations and Subdivision Regulations 
The Commission shall have the authority to propose and/or review and decide upon an application to establish and/or amend the official Zoning Map and boundaries of existing Zoning Districts, and the adoption or amendment of the Zoning Regulations or Subdivision Regulations, pursuant to its own authority or pursuant to an applicant petition. 
F. Motor Vehicle Location Certification 
The Commission shall have the powers and duties pursuant to §14-54, §14-55, §14-321 and §14­322 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, concerning local authority approvals required for the location and operation of auto dealers and repairers, and the establishment of gasoline and motor oil sales. In acting on such applications, the Commission shall consider the relationship of the proposed use or operation with respect to schools, churches, theaters, playhouses or other places of public gathering; traffic conditions, intersecting streets, width of highway, and effect on public travel, and in general, that such use at such proposed location will not imperil the safety and welfare of the public, or have a detrimental effect on the value of nearby properties or development thereof. 
G. Alcoholic Beverages 
The Commission shall have the authority to review and decide upon an application establishing, relocating or altering the location and premises for the sale and/or consumption of beer and alcoholic beverages consistent with Connecticut General Statutes and these Regulations. 
H. Administrative Rules and Bylaws 
The Commission shall have the authority to adopt or amend administrative rules, procedures and bylaws to assist in its administration of the Zoning Regulations and Subdivision Regulations. 
I. Waiver of Zoning Regulations 
The Commission shall have the authority to review and decide upon the granting of waivers as may be authorized in the Zoning Regulations. 
J. Flood Damage and Prevention Permits 
The Commission shall have the authority to review and decide upon the granting of Flood Damage and Prevention Permits as set forth in these Regulations. 
K. Excavation and Fill Permits 
The Commission shall have the authority to review and decide upon the granting of Excavation and Fill Permits as set forth in these Regulations. 
L. Other Permits and Duties 
The Commission shall have the authority to review and decide upon the granting or permits, and shall have the authority to perform other duties, as set forth and authorized by these Regulations. 
§9.1.4 Procedural Requirements 
Actions by the Commission shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 124 and 126 of the State of Connecticut General statues, as amended, and as enumerated in these Regulations. 

§9.2 Amendment of Zoning Regulations and District Boundaries 
§9.2.1 Authority 
The Commission may, on its own motion from time to time, adopt, amend or repeal the provisions and boundaries established by these Regulations.  Any person, firm or corporation desiring an amendment or change in the Zoning Regulations and/or Official Zoning Map of the Town of Monroe, may submit a petition application proposing such amendment or change.  No change in the regulations, restrictions, or boundaries shall become effective until after notice and public hearing is held by the Commission, at which time parties-in-interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.  All amendments shall be considered in accordance with and subject to the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
§9.2.2 Zoning Amendment Petition Requirements 
A petition application shall not be considered complete until all the information required by these Regulations and the Commission has been provided: 
A. 	Petition applications shall be in a form prescribed by the Commission together with a fee in accordance with §9.7 of these Regulations and other application materials as required in these Regulations. The petition shall be signed by the applicant, and if the project is proposed by an applicant other than the owner of the property, the application shall also be signed by the owner or accompanied by a notarized letter authorizing the applicant and application as proposed. 
B. 	A petition application shall be accompanied by the following supporting materials, in a quantity as determined by the Planning and Zoning Department: 
(1) 	Zoning Text Changes 
All proceedings to change the zoning text of these Regulations, including any change in punctuation or wording, shall be instituted by application in writing to, and in a form prescribed by, the Commission. The petition shall precisely set forth the existing provisions, the specific provisions to be changed and the provisions to be substituted, deleted or added. Deletions shall be stricken out and additions shall be bold double underlined. 
(2) 	Zoning Boundary Changes 
All petitions to change the zoning district boundaries shall describe the existing and proposed zoning district boundaries of the property involved and within five-hundred (500 feet thereof, and shall provide a metes and bounds description of the property on the map and separately, along with the identification by Assessor Map and Lot Number of the lots, or parts thereof to be included in the zoning district boundary change. Any proposed 
zoning boundary change map shall be certified to Class “D” or better survey standards. 
(3) 	Zone Change Narrative 
All petition applications shall be accompanied by a Zone Change Narrative explaining the need for the proposed amendment and identifying any benefits to the Town. Said narrative shall include an analysis of the following in site specific terms: 
(a) 	
Description of existing and proposed conditions, land uses, including details describing how the requirements and standards of these Regulations will be complied with by the proposed zone change action. 

(b) 	
Identification of affected surrounding land uses and their physical relation in regards to development, topographic and vegetation conditions, as well as potential visual connections. 

(c) 	
Details of the proposed action’s consistency with the Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development. 

(d) 	
Limitations hindering the current use and development of a subject parcel as presently zoned. 

(e) 	
Comparison of potential positive and negative aspects between rezoning or not. 

(f) 	
Suitability of lands proposed to be rezoned for future development purposes in comparison to the existing zoning classification, including identification of any land or natural resource limitations (i.e., steep slopes, wetlands or watercourses, ledge or bedrock, etc) to such development potential. 

(g) 	
Suitability analysis (utilizing both text and graphic formats) of a subject parcel and surrounding area to support the land demands, development components and other location characteristics associated with the functional and operational aspects of the change in zoning. 

(h) 	
Assessment of how the proposed zone change is consistent with the purposes and recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development, including the identification and discussion of specific recommendations pertinent to the subject parcels and surrounding neighborhood area. Such consistency assessment shall also address the overall goals and recommendations of the underlying existing or proposed zoning classification and requirements, as well as any differences or similarities in regard to resulting transportation, development aesthetics and community character considerations. The assessment shall also address potential issues resulting from zone fragmentation and potential for spot zoning. 

(i) 	
Project specific analyses and reports prepared by qualified professionals may be required, the scope of which shall be subject to prior Commission review and acceptance. 


(4) 	Abutters Names and Addresses 
A list of names and addresses of all current property owners as shown on the Monroe Tax Assessor records as of the date of application submission located in and within five-hundred (500) feet of any proposed zoning text amendment or zoning district boundary amendment shall be submitted. 
(5) Area and Existing Conditions/Land Use Map 
A map at a scale of no more than one-hundred (100) feet to the inch showing all existing lots, dimensions, property lines, streets, rights-of-way, existing land uses, existing buildings and structures, delineated wetlands, water courses and regulated upland review areas consistent with the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Monroe, existing contours at a contour interval not to exceed two (2) feet, flood boundary lines and/or mean high water lines, identification of current owners, existing and any proposed zoning district boundary lines in appropriate markings, north point, graphic scale, date, and the name of the owner and applicant (if different). This map shall show the above required information for the area included in and within five-hundred (500) feet of area affected by the petition. 
(6) Proposed Zoning Change Map 
A map at a scale of no more than one-hundred (100) feet to the inch showing all existing lots, dimensions, property lines, streets, rights-of-way, the existing and proposed zoning district boundary lines in appropriate markings, the north point, graphic scale, date, the name of the owner and applicant (if different). This map shall show the above required information for the area included in and within five-hundred (500) feet of area affected by the petition. 
(7) Additional Information 
The Commission may require the submission of additional information as deemed necessary to make a reasonable review of the application and to determine compliance with the intent and purpose of these Regulations. 
(8) Electronic Copy 
The applicant shall also submit application and application presentation documents in an electronic format in accordance with Planning and Zoning Department requirements and specifications. 
C. 	A petition application shall be deemed to be complete if it is in proper form and is accompanied by all the application material required by these Regulations. The official date of receipt of a formal petition shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, immediately following the date of submission to office of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
D. 	All application support documents, plans and materials shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department no less than five (5) business days prior to the day of a Commission meeting at which the application is scheduled. Nothing shall prohibit the Commission, in the exercise of its discretion, from receiving evidence at any time prior to the close of a meeting, public hearing or other statutory period but the Commission may refuse to consider such if not submitted in a timely fashion as set forth herein should the Commission determine that it, its staff or consultants, and/or the public would not have sufficient time to review same properly or thoroughly before the end of any aforesaid time or statutory period. The Commission, nor its staff or consultants, are responsible for providing notification of new submission received. 
E. 	An incomplete application or an application filed without the required fee as specified in §9.7 of these Regulations may be deemed as reason for denial of said application. 
F. 	No petition shall be required to be entertained or heard relating to the same changes, or substantially the same changes, more than once in a period of twelve (12) months. 
§9.2.3 Referrals 
Petition applications shall be referred as followed: 
A. 	Town Clerk Filing 
A copy of such proposed regulation or boundary amendment shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten (10) days before such public hearing. 
B. 	Inland Wetlands Commission 
An application involving lands regulated pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes §22a-36 to §22a-45, inclusive, the applicant shall submit an application for a permit to the Inland Wetlands Commission no later than the day such application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Department. The applicant shall provide documentation of said filing.  A planning and zoning decision on the application shall not be rendered until the Inland Wetlands Commission has submitted its report in accordance with the standards of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, which report shall be given due consideration. 
C. 	Conservation and Water Resources Commission 
(1) 	
A copy of all applications for Special Exception Permit, Site Development Plan, Excavation/Filling Permit, Permit Amendment Modification, Subdivision, Zone Boundary Change and Regulations Amendments by or to the Commission shall be referred to the Monroe Conservation and Water Resources Commission for its advisory review. The Conservation and Water Resources Commission may make advisory comments and/or recommendations as deemed warranted, and present same to the Commission in regard to matters consistent with the Town Charter and Connecticut State Statutes. 

(2) 	
The Commission at its discretion may refer any other planning, zoning or agenda item to the Conservation and Water Resources Commission for its advisory review and comment. 

(3) 	
The Conservation and Water Resources Commission shall submit its comments and/or recommendations to the Commission in writing for consideration as part of the 


Commission’s application review process. 
D. Public Watershed 
An application involving lands within a public watershed area, the applicant shall submit notice to the public water authority and State Commissioner of Public Health in accordance with the standards set forth in Connecticut General Statutes §8-3i, as amended, no later than seven (7) days from the date such application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Department.  The applicant shall provide documentation of said noticing. 
E. Regional Planning Agency and Abutting Municipalities 
(1) 	
Any petition proposing to establish or change a zone or any regulation affecting the use of a zone any portion of which is within five-hundred (500) feet of the boundary of another municipality, the Commission shall give written notice of the proposal to said municipality and to the regional planning agency serving said municipality. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or as otherwise permitted pursuant to Connecticut State Statutes, not later than thirty (30) days before the public hearing to be held in relation thereto. A copy of the associated Certified Mail Receipts shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Department prior to or at the commencement of the public hearing. 

(2) 	
Any response report of said municipality or regional planning agency shall be purely advisory. 


F. Abutting Neighbors 
An applicant shall send a copy of the notice of public hearing, as provided by the Planning and Zoning Department, to all property owners within five-hundred (500) feet.  Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested not later than ten (10) days before the public hearing to be held in relation thereto. A copy of the associated Certified Mail Receipts shall be provided to the Planning and Zoning Department prior to or at the commencement of the public hearing. 
§9.2.4 Public Hearing 
No zoning regulation or boundary amendment shall be established, changed or effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto. A public hearing shall be held and noticed in with the time periods and standards set forth in §8.1.4 of these Regulations.  The applicant may consent in writing to an extension of the time periods in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes. 
§9.2.5 Determination of Commission 
A. Commission Action 
Within sixty-five (65) days following the close of the required public hearing, the Commission shall approve or disapprove the proposed petition.  Whenever the Commission adopts any change of zone or amendment to the regulations, it shall state upon its records the reason why such change was made. 
B. Determination 
In approving a zoning regulation or boundary amendment petition, the Commission shall determine: 
(1) 	
That the petition application, including all accompanying supporting documentation is in conformance with the applicable provisions of these Regulations. 

(2) 	
That the proposed change will be in harmony with the purposes and intent of these Regulations, and will function and exist in harmony with the associated area affected, and existing neighborhood and environmental patterns. 

(3) 	
That the proposed change will not adversely affect the health, safety, convenience and property values of the public in general and of the residents of the neighborhood in particular. 

(4) 	
That the proposed changes are consistent with the goals, objectives and 
recommendations of the Plan of Conservation and Development. 



C. Effective Date and Approval / Map Recording 
Approved changes or amendments to these Regulations and the zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Monroe shall become effective at such time as may be fixed by the Commission, pursuant to the Connecticut General Statutes, provided that a copy of such regulation, boundary or change shall be recorded in the Monroe Land Records in the Office of the Town Clerk, along with an original copy of the Commission approval document, and a notice of the decision of the Commission shall have been published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town before such effective date. 
D. Notice of Decision 
A notice of decision shall be completed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 

§9.3 Duties of Zoning Enforcement Officer 
§9.3.1 Zoning Enforcement Officer 
A. 	The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Monroe so appointed by the Commission is hereby designated as the officer with full power to enforce these Regulations. 
B. 	In carrying out the zoning enforcement duties, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall work under the guidance of the Commission. 
C. 	The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized, while a provisional certificate of zoning compliance is in effect, to cause any land, building, structure or premises to be inspected and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of these Regulations. 
D. 	The Zoning Enforcement Officer is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected any land or any building or structure on which work is in progress and to order in writing the discontinuance of any use of property or building, or structure or work being done in violation of any provision of the Zoning Regulations. 
E. 	The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected such premises after work is completed and shall not issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance until such final inspection has been made and all work is completed and compliant with these Regulations. 

§9.4 Zoning Compliance 
§9.4.1 Application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance 
A. 	Approval of an application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be required from the Zoning Enforcement Officer or a designated agent thereof prior to any land being used, altered, cleared of vegetation, grubbing, disturbed, graded, filled, changed, or otherwise altered in any physical way, in whole or in part, and prior to any building or structure, including signs and lights, being erected, constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, altered, relocated or used, in whole or in part, including a change in use. 
B. 	An application for Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be made in writing by the owner of record of the property involved upon such forms as shall be prescribed by the Zoning and Planning Department. Each application shall be accompanied by such information specified in the application and any other information as may be required deemed necessary to evaluate the zoning compliance of the application. 
§9.4.2 Certificate required prior to use 
A. 	A Certificate of Zoning Compliance (provisional and/or permanent) shall be issued upon a finding by the Zoning Enforcement Officer that an application and proposed activity relating thereto is in compliance with the use and development provisions, standards and requirements of these Regulations. Following issuance, an application for a building permit from the Building Inspector may be sought. 
B. 	A provisional certificate may be issued during a period of construction, which shall have an effective period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless an extension is granted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, upon completion of which shall require the issuance of permanent certificate to effectuate the original approval thereof and to be deemed zoning compliant. Failure to obtain a permanent certificate in the time period allotted shall render the provisional certificate expired, null and void. Obtaining a permanent Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be the sole responsibility of the owner seeking same. 
C. 	A permanent certificate shall be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer upon the showing that the effective use and/or completed construction are in accordance with these Regulations, and any requirements, modifications or conditions as may be required pursuant to these Regulations and any Commission approval relating thereto. 
§9.4.3 Review of Compliance; applications to the Commission 
A. 	Review of Applications 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review all applications submitted to the Commission and shall report to the Commission advising whether the premises are free of any violations of these Regulations or of any violations which exist. 
B. 	ZEO Report to Commission 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall periodically report to the Commission regarding the issuance and status of pending zoning violation orders and notices. 

§9.5 Zoning Board of Appeals 
§9.5.1 Organization and Rules of Procedure 
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals as provided for in the Charter of the Town of Monroe, subject to the provisions of §8-6 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt bylaws, which shall be the official rules of procedure for the Board. 
§9.5.2 Membership 
The number and term of regular and alternate Zoning Board of Appeals members shall be as set forth in the Charter of the Town of Monroe and the bylaws of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
§9.5.3 Powers and duties 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the duties and responsibilities delegated to it by the General Statutes of Connecticut, including the following: 
A. 	To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement or decision made by the official(s) charged with the enforcement of these Regulations or any by­law, ordinance or regulations adopted under the provisions of Chapter 124 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
B. 	Determine and vary the application of the terms of these Regulations in harmony with their general purpose and intent. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be required to hear any application for the same variance or substantially the same variance for a period of six (6) months after a decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction on an earlier such application. 
C. 	Town ordinances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be empowered to act in a capacity as may be required by such other town ordinance enacted by the Town of Monroe. 
§9.5.4 Variances 
A. 	Variances may be granted only if in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these Regulations and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety, convenience, welfare and property values, when solely with respect to a parcel of land and owing to conditions especially affecting such parcel, but not affecting generally the district in which it is situated, a literal enforcement of such Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare secured. Before granting a variance on the basis of exceptional difficulty or unusual hardship, there must be a finding by the Board that the following conditions exist: 
(1) 	
That the difficulties or hardship are particular to the property in question in contrast with those of other properties in the same district. 

(2) 	
That the hardship is not the result of the applicant’s own action. 

(3) 	
That the hardship is not solely pecuniary. 

(4) 	
The variance must be shown not to substantially affect the comprehensive zoning plan. 


B. 	The concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to vary the application of these Regulations. At the discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, conditions may be attached to any granted variance to ensure that the intent and purpose of these Regulations are preserved. Further, any variance granted shall: 
(1) 	
Be the smallest or minimal necessary to achieve the requested relief; the Zoning Board of Appeals in granting any variance shall be specific in regard to the extent to which any such standard or zoning provision may be varied. 

(2) 	
Be specific to the application at hand and shall not grant blanket relief of the standard or requirement varied (i.e., a granted building setback variance shall be specific to the building proposed at the time of the variance application and shall not vary or relieve the application of the underlying zoning district setback for a different, subsequent or future proposed building or building addition). 

(3) 	
Run with the land and shall not be personal in nature to the person who applied for and received the variance. A variance shall not be extinguished solely because of the transfer of title to the property or the invalidity of any condition attached to the variance that would affect the transfer of the property from the person who initially applied for and received the variance. 


C. 	The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not permit by variance any use not allowed by the provisions of these Regulations, and shall not permit by variance in any zoning district a use not allowed by the provisions of these Regulations in such zoning district. 
§9.5.5 Appeals 
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision made by any official charged with the enforcement and administration of these Regulations may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the issuance of notice of said order, requirement or decision. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide the appeal and may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify any order, requirement or decision appealed from, and shall have all the power of the authority for whose decision such appeal is taken, but only in so far as to enforce these Regulations, where an error has occurred. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement or decision issued by said official. 
§9.5.6 Application requirements 
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 124 of the State of Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and within the time prescribed by said statutes. Applications and appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be submitted, in writing, on a form designated by the Zoning Board of Appeals, together with any required fees. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a notarized letter of consent from the property owner must accompany the application. Each application or appeal shall clearly set forth the action desired by the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall state the circumstances creating the need for such action, pursuant to §9.5.4 of these Regulations, and where applicable shall illustrate with maps and other drawings the location and nature of the appeal or application. 
§9.5.7 Public hearing and notification 
A. 	A public hearing shall be required for all applications for variance and all zoning appeals. All decisions shall be rendered not later than sixty (65) days after the close of the public hearing. 
B. 	Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town of Monroe not more than fifteen (15) days before the date set for the hearing. 
C. 	Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to persons who own land within a one-hundred 
(100) feet of the property perimeter of the lot that is the subject of the hearing at least seven 
(7) days prior to the hearing. Proof of mailing shall be evidenced by a certificate of mailing. The person who owns land shall be the owner indicated on the last completed grand list of the Town of Monroe as of the date such notice is mailed. The applicant shall be responsible for mailing and all associated costs thereof. 

§9.6 Architectural Review Board 
§9.6.1 Statement of Purpose 
The Commission hereby finds that excessive uniformity or dissimilarity or inappropriateness and poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of buildings, structures and land developments adversely affects the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas and, by so doing, impairs the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas; impairs the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property in such areas; adversely affects the most appropriate development of such areas; produces degeneration of property in such areas, with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants thereof; and creates an improper relationship between the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of municipal services provided thereto. It is the purpose of these Regulations to prevent these and other harmful effects and to achieve an improved architectural balance and continuity of buildings, structures and land developments in the Town. 
§9.6.2 Organization and Rules of Procedure 
There shall be an Architectural Review Board (ARB) as provided for in the Charter of the Town of Monroe. The ARB shall adopt bylaws consistent with these Regulations, which shall be the official rules of procedure for the ARB. The ARB shall be advisory to the Commission. 
§9.6.3 Membership 
The number and term of regular ARB members shall be as set forth in the Charter of the Town of Monroe. ARB members shall be specifically qualified by reason of training or experience in a relevant business or profession or by reason of civic interest and sound judgment to assess the effects of proposed buildings, structures and land developments, including the alteration or demolition of such upon the property values and development of surrounding areas. To the extent possible, one member of ARB shall be a Connecticut licensed architect and one member shall be a Connecticut licensed landscape architect. 
§9.6.4 Powers and Duties 
A. Applicability 
The ARB shall review all applications submitted to the Commission for Site Plan or Special Exception Permit involving the construction, reconstruction, expansion, addition or alteration of nonresidential and multifamily buildings, structures and related site development. 
B. Referral to ARB 
(1) 	
Upon submission of a Site Plan or Special Exception Permit application to the Commission, a copy of same shall be referred to the ARB for its review and recommendation. 

(2) 	
The Commission at its discretion may refer any other application or agenda item to the ARB for its review and recommendation. 

(3) 	
The Commission, at its discretion, may determine referral to ARB is not warranted or necessary due to the limited or diminished nature of an application. In doing so, the Commission shall state the reasons in making such a determination. 


C. ARB Meetings and Procedures 
(1) 	
Regularly scheduled meetings of the ARB shall be held bi-monthly, as needed, and at such other times as the Chair shall designate. The ARB shall keep minutes of all its proceedings. Any recommendation made by the ARB shall have a majority consensus of its members and shall be officially filed along with pertinent data upon which such recommendation was based with the Commission. 

(2) 	
The applicant is expected to appear before the ARB to present its application, answer any questions ARB may have and to provide or supplement its application materials, including provision of architectural drawings, sections, details, renderings, color simulations and sample building materials to support its illustration of the proposal. 

(3) 	
The ARB shall have a minimum of thirty (30) days to review and render a referral recommendation report as it deems appropriate to the Commission, concerning the design of the proposed buildings, structures and their related site development. 

(4) 	
The ARB may request additional time in which to review the referral application due to scheduling issues or complexity of an application, which the Commission and/or applicant may grant, provided no extension of time shall exceed the time frames in which the Commission must act upon said application. 

(5) 	
Failure of the ARB to report within thirty (30) days, unless additional time to review is granted by the Commission or applicant, shall be deemed that the ARB has no comments on the application at hand. 

(6) 	
The ARB shall submit its recommendations to the Commission in writing for consideration as part of the Commission’s application review process. Recommendations where changes or modifications to any submission are recommended, the ARB's report shall set forth the specific changes recommended and the reasons for same. 


§9.6.5 Application Referral Materials 
A copy of the application for Site Plan or Special Exception Permit as submitted to the Commission shall be referred to ARB for its review and recommendation, including but not limited to the following: 
A. 	Descriptive application materials, narratives and other written documents. 
B. 	Site Plan documents as specified in these Regulations. 
C. 	Architectural floor plans and details prepared at a standard architectural scale, including floor plans indicating the usage, circulation and square footage. 
D. 	Architectural elevations showing all sides of proposed buildings and structures, and including building heights, finished floor elevations, fenestration details, building materials and colors. In the case of enlargement, addition or expansion of an existing building or structure, both existing and proposed conditions shall be detailed. The provision of perspective drawings, renderings, architectural simulations and/or models are encouraged to illustrate the proposal. The Commission may require same. 
E. 	Samples of exterior building or structure materials, including color samples and textures shall be provided, including presentation of actual material samples. 
F. 	Photographs and/or sketches of adjacent areas, buildings or structures may be required to assist both the ARB and Commission in evaluating the design of the proposed application. 
G. 	Other specific documentation may be required by the ARB or Commission to assist both the ARB and Commission in evaluating the design and its compatibility to the site, the surrounding landscape pattern, adjacent land uses, buildings and structures, and the community character of Monroe. 
§9.6.6 Review considerations 
In considering any request for review brought before it, the ARB shall evaluate the design of all proposals through consideration of the following: 
A. 	Landscape and Environment: To prevent the unnecessary destruction or blighting of the natural landscape or the built environment, and to ensure that proposed conditions have been designed such that open spaces, buildings and structures on the site relate harmoniously to the natural environment and topographic conditions. 
B. 	Design of Buildings and Structures: The appropriateness of the site plan layout, architectural design and construction materials proposed in maintaining and/or enhancing the existing and cultural community character of the site and surrounding area, and the extent to which the proposal compliments, protects and will preserve the integrity, architectural character and property values of the Town. 
C. 	Relationship of Buildings and Structures: To ensure the appropriateness of proposed buildings, structures and/or land development in relation to adjacent buildings, structures and land development existing or for which a permit has been issued, or to other buildings, structures and/or land development included in the same application with respect to one or more of the following features: 
(1) 	
Appropriateness of architectural style and detailing, as well as the materials used or colors and textures proposed. 

(2) 	
The repeated and adjacent use of identical or near identical facades or structures arranged without respect to natural features of terrain or other existing structures. 

(3) 	
Gross differences in cubical content of floor area, height of building or roof, contrasting roof lines and/or architectural details and materials. 

(4) 	
Other significant design features, such as material or quality of architectural design, roof structures, dividing walls, accessory structures, chimneys, mechanical equipment and services, service and storage enclosures, signs and lights, landscaping, walls and fencing, parking and loading areas, and similar site features. 


D. 	Protection of Adjoining Uses and Properties: To protect adjoining users and owners ensuring that reasonable provision has been made for such elements as sound and sight buffers, the preservation of views, light and air, and such other elements of design which may have a substantial effect or impact on adjoining areas. 
E. 	Design of Accessory Elements: Aesthetic and functional review of signage, lighting, landscaping, refuse management, exterior art, and similar accessory elements. 

§9.7 Fees and Escrow Accounts 
§9.7.1 Fees 
Fees for applications to the Commission shall be in accordance with a fee schedule, recommended by the Planning and Zoning Department, accepted by the Commission and adopted or amended by the Town Council at a public meeting, and shall be posted or made available upon request in the Planning 
and Zoning Department and the Town Clerk’s office. 
§9.7.2 Escrow Accounts for Consultant Services 
A. 	The Planning and Zoning Administrator, his/her designee, the Commission, or the Zoning Board of Appeals may retain the services of a professional consultant, including but not necessarily limited to scientific, engineering, and legal consultants such as a land use planner, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor, architect, attorney, biologist, archeologist, soil scientist, traffic consultant, real estate appraiser, or other expert consultant to review, comment, and guide its deliberations on any application, and/or to provide inspection and/or monitoring services. 
B. 	Issues for which such review, inspect or monitoring may be needed may include, but are not limited to, compliance with existing laws and regulations; the potential for environmental or other impacts; the need for public improvements, drainage improvements, sediment and erosion-control measures, and other environmental safety measures; and the provision of adequate legal conveyances and financial performance security. It is the purpose of this Section to ensure that any fees and expenses reasonably incurred by the Town in procuring such services be reimbursed by the applicant. 
C. 	Upon the filing of an application or during the course of its review, the Planning and Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, the Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, may determine that one or more consultant(s) are needed to analyze, review and report on areas requiring a technical review, and/or to provide inspection and/or monitoring services. In making such a determination, the following shall be considered: 
(1) 	
That the evidence in the record of the proceedings has been produced or is likely to be produced which requires the hiring of such consultant(s); 

(2) 	
That the Planning and Zoning Department staff will be unable to perform the technical review; and 

(3) 	
That adequate time exists for the applicant to review and respond to such consultant(s)’ report(s). 


D. 	If the assistance of professional consultants is found to be necessary or appropriate at any time after the submission of an application: 
(1) 	
The Planning and Zoning Administrator, Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals may require an escrow account to be established from which withdrawals shall be made to reimburse the Town for the cost of professional consultant review, inspection and/or monitoring services. The applicant shall be provided with copies of any Town voucher for such services as they are submitted to the Town by its consultants. 

(2) 	
A preliminary estimate of the fees or expenses that such consulting services are likely to entail shall be considered in establishing an initial escrow deposit. The preliminary estimate, which shall not be binding on the Town, may be derived in any reasonable manner, including but not limited to a good-faith estimate of the hours that the consultant is likely to require based upon the specific nature of the application. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall provide payment to the Town of Monroe, in addition to all other applicable application fees, one-hundred-fifty percent (150%) of the above estimate, which amount shall be held in escrow until the technical review(s) are completed. 

(4) 	
Should the amount in the escrow account be reduced to less than one-third (1/3) of its initial amount, the applicant shall upon request by the Planning and Zoning Department promptly replenish the account to the amount of the initial deposit or other amount as deemed appropriate. 

(5) 	
After all pertinent fess or expenses have been reimbursed to the Town, the Town shall refund to the applicant any excess amount collected and remaining on deposit. 

(6) 	
The establishment, payment and maintenance in good standing of an escrow account shall be considered an integral component of the application. The failure by the applicant to establish the escrow account and make initial and subsequent payments as may be required shall render the application incomplete. 

(7) 	
No Certificate of Zoning Compliance, Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be authorized for issuance unless all professional review fees charged in connection with an applicant’s project have been reimbursed to the Town. 




ARTICLE 10 SCHEDULES 
§10.1 Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
*Editor’s Note: 
See Schedule §10.1 – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District at end of this Article. 


§10.2 Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
*Editor’s Note: 
See Schedule §10.2 – Schedule of Off-Street Parking at end of this Article. 

Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
§10.1 –  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT  
USE  ZONING DISTRICT  
RF-1  RF-2  RF-3  ARR  MFR  RR  HOD  B-1  B-2  LOR  I-1  I-2  I-3  
Arborist  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Accessory Drive-Through  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Agriculture / Farms  
Agriculture / Farm  P  P  P  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Farm Stores (accessory to Farm)  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Seasonal Farm Store (accessory to Farm)  ACC  ACC  ACC  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Art Studio / Gallery  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Automobile Body Shop  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Automobile Service Shop  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  SEP  x  
Automobile Sales  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  
Banks  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Boat, Camper, RV, Trailer Sales/Service  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  
Brew Pub  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  x  
Car Wash (retail) – Automatic and Self-Service Facilities Fully Within Enclosed Building with Recycled Water  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Cemeteries  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Club  
County Club (swim, tennis, golf)  x  x  x  x  ACC  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Health Club / Spa  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  SEP (1)  
Fraternal Organization  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  

Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 Zoning Districts Use Schedule – Page 1 Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
§10.1 – SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT  
USE  ZONING DISTRICT  
RF-1  RF-2  RF-3  ARR  MFR  RR  HOD  B-1  B-2  LOR  I-1  I-2  I-3  
Commercial Vehicle Facility  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Community-Wide Event  (2)  (2)  (2)  x  x  x  x  (2)  (2)  (2)  (2)  (2)  (2)  
Conservation / Open Space  SEP (3)  SEP (3)  SEP (3)  ACC  ACC  ACC  ACC  SEP (3)  SEP (3)  SEP (3)  SEP (3)  SEP (3)  SEP (3)  
Contractors’ / Building Trades’ Establishment  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  
Day Care Services  
Adult Day Care Center  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Child Day Care Center  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Family Day Care Home  ACC  ACC  ACC  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Group Day Care Homes  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Firewood Process Facilities  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Funeral Home or Mortuary  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Gasoline Station  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Golf Course  x  x  x  x  ACC  ACC  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Home Based Business (accessory to single-family dwellings)  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Home Occupation (accessory to single-family dwellings)  ACC  ACC  ACC  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Hospital  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  
Hotel  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Instructional (retail) – Martial Arts, Dance, Music, Learning Support, Painting/Pottery, or Similar  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  

Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 Zoning Districts Use Schedule – Page 2 Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
§10.1 –  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT  
USE  ZONING DISTRICT  
RF-1  RF-2  RF-3  ARR  MFR  RR  HOD  B-1  B-2  LOR  I-1  I-2  I-3  
Landscaper  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Laundromat, Dry Cleaners (retail and drop-off centers)  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Manufacturing/ Industrial  
Manufacturing, Processing and/or Assembly of Products Where Conducted Within Fully Enclosed Buildings  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Business Service Facilities Providing Supporting Services to Industrial and Business uses, including Computer and Business Machine Service and Repair (not retail)  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Medical Clinic: Urgent Care Facility (no overnight), Radiology/Diagnostics Laboratory  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Medical Rehabilitation Facility  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Mixed Use Landmark Property Development  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Museum  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Office, Medical and Dental  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Office, General  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  SDP  SDP  SDP  
Office, Professional  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  SDP  SDP  SDP  
Outdoor Sales of Accessory Play Equipment and Sheds  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Personal Service Business  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  

Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 Zoning Districts Use Schedule – Page 3 Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
§10.1 –  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT  
USE  ZONING DISTRICT  
RF-1  RF-2  RF-3  ARR  MFR  RR  HOD  B-1  B-2  LOR  I-1  I-2  I-3  
Pet Groomer Business  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Place of Religious Worship  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Public Utility Facility  SEP  SEP  SEP  ACC  ACC  ACC  ACC  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Recreation Facilities  
Indoor Recreation Facilities  x  x  x  ACC  ACC  ACC  ACC  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Outdoor Recreation Facilities  x  x  x  ACC  ACC  ACC  ACC  x  SEP  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Research and Development Facilities, not Involving Hazardous or Biological Materials Use, Storage or Disposal  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Residential  
Single-Family Dwelling (1 per lot in all RF and RR Districts)  P  P  P  x  x  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Multi-Family Dwelling  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Multi-Family, Group Homes < 6 Residents  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Multi-Family, Group Homes > 6 Residents  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Age Restricted Attached Dwelling  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Age Restricted Detached Dwelling  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Safe Homes  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Accessory Apartment  ACC  ACC  ACC  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Caretaker Residence  x  x  x  ACC  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  


Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 Zoning Districts Use Schedule – Page 4 Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
§10.1 –  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT  
USE  ZONING DISTRICT  
RF-1  RF-2  RF-3  ARR  MFR  RR  HOD  B-1  B-2  LOR  I-1  I-2  I-3  
Restaurant and Food Related Uses  
Bakery, Wholesale  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Bakery, Retail  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  SEP (1)  
Café  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Caterer, Off-Premises (as the principal use)  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Caterer, On-Premises (as the principal use)  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Ice Cream Parlor (Yogurt Shop/Dairy Bar)  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  SEP (1)  
Mobile Food Vendor  (4)  (4)  (4)  x  x  x  x  (4)  (4)  (4)  (4)  (4)  (4)  
Outdoor Dining, Accessory  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  ACC  ACC  ACC  x  x  ACC  
Restaurant, Full Service  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  SEP (1)  
Restaurant, Fast-Food  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Retail Food Establishment  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  SEP (1)  
Tavern  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Retail  
General Retail  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  SEP (1)  
Instructional Retail (martial arts, dance, music, learning support, painting, pottery, or similar)  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  SEP (1)  
Retail Garden Center  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  


Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 Zoning Districts Use Schedule – Page 5 Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
§10.1 –  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT  
USE  ZONING DISTRICT  
RF-1  RF-2  RF-3  ARR  MFR  RR  HOD  B-1  B-2  LOR  I-1  I-2  I-3  
Riding Academies, Boarding Stables  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Schools, public and private  
Preschool, Nursery  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Elementary or Middle  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Senior High  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Secondary, Vocational, Trade  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
Town of Monroe Board of Education Offices  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  
School Bus Parking Facility  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Storage Uses  
Commercial Warehousing Contained Within Fully Enclosed Buildings  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  
Self-Storage Warehousing for Rental of Fully Interior Enclosed Building Space  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Temporary Storage of Carnival Rides  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  x  x  x  
Theater (Indoor for Stage/Movies)  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  SEP (1)  
Town of Monroe Governmental Non-School Administrative Facilities: including but not limited to Offices, EMS, Fire, Police, Library, Senior/Community Center, Food Pantry  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  SDP  SDP  SDP  x  x  x  
Town of Monroe Governmental Service Facilities: including but not limited to DPW Yard, Dog Pound, Transfer Station  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  
Town of Monroe Shooting Range  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  x  

Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 Zoning Districts Use Schedule – Page 6 Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Schedule of Permitted Land Uses by Zoning District 
§10.1 – SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED LAND USES BY ZONING DISTRICT  
USE  ZONING DISTRICT  
RF-1  RF-2  RF-3  ARR  MFR  RR  HOD  B-1  B-2  LOR  I-1  I-2  I-3  
Town of Monroe Communication Sites and Facilities (see also §6.8)  SEP  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  
Veterinary Hospital  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  x  x  x  x  
Wholesale and Distribution Centers, not including Automobiles or Boats  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  SEP  SEP  SEP  
LEGEND AND NOTES  
P ACC SDP SEP x  Permitted Use Accessory Use Site Development Plan Special Exception Permit Use Not Permitted in District  (1) SEP (1) Use Industrial District 3 – Special Exception Permit Use – See §8.2.3M. (2) Community-Wide Event – See §6.11. (3) Permitted without permit in its natural state; structures or other constructed facilities require SEP. (4) Mobile Food Vendor – See §6.12.  

Amended Effective Through April 15, 2019 Zoning Districts Use Schedule – Page 7 Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Off-Street Parking and Loading Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Off-Street Parking and Loading Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Off-Street Parking and Loading Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Off-Street Parking and Loading Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Off-Street Parking and Loading Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Off-Street Parking and Loading Town of Monroe Zoning Regulations – Off-Street Parking and Loading 
§10.2 – SCHEDULE of REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  
USE  MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  

Accessory Drive-Through  See §6.1.3.  
Agriculture / Farms  
Agriculture / Farm  Subject to Commission determination based on facilities involved.  
Farm Stores (accessory to Farm)  See Retail.  
Seasonal Farm Store (accessory to Farm)  1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Arborist  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of office GFA; plus 1.0 space per field employee peak shift of 3.0 spaces per facility vehicle, whichever is greater.  
Art Studio / Gallery  See Retail.  
Automobile Body Shop  3.0 spaces plus 5.0 spaces per service bay; service bay is not a parking space.  
Automobile Service Shop  3.0 spaces plus 5.0 spaces per service bay; service bay is not a parking space.  
Automobile Sales  1.0 space per 250 sq. ft. GFA of principal sales area/offices; plus 1.0 space for each 7,000 sq. ft. of outside display area; plus 5.0 spaces per service bay, to be provided in areas clearly reserved for customers and employees.  Outside display area to include specified spaces and aisles.  
Bank  See Retail.  
Boat, Camper, RV, Trailer Sales/Service  See Automobile Sales and Automobile Service Shop.  
Brew Pub  1.0 space for every 200 sq. ft. GFA of that portion of the premises for patron functions (where not operated as a restaurant or other food related use); plus 1.0 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA of that portion of the premises for the administrative, manufacturing, containerization and storage operations.  
Car Wash (retail) – Automatic and Self-Service Facilities Fully Within Enclosed Building with Recycled Water  0.75 spaces per employee peak shift. Vacuum, detailing and other dedicated services to be provided separate from parking.  See also §6.1.3.  
Cemeteries  Subject to Commission determination based on facilities involved; plus 1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA of facility office/maintenance.  
Club  
County Club (swim, tennis, golf)  1.0 space for every four (4) persons of the rated capacity.  
Health Club / Spa  1.0 space for every four (4) persons of the rated capacity.  
Fraternal Organization  1.0 space for every four (4) persons of the rated capacity.  

§10.2 – SCHEDULE of REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  
USE  MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  

Commercial Vehicle Facility  1.0 space per fleet vehicle; plus 1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA administrative offices/dispatch facilities.  
Community-Wide Event  See §6.10  
Conservation / Open Space  Subject to Commission determination based on facilities involved.  
Contractor’s / Building Trades Establishment  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per facility vehicle.  
Day Care Services  
Adult Day Care Center  1.0 space for each employee (including all management, administrative, care givers, teachers and maintenance personnel); plus 1.0 space for every five (5) persons of licensed capacity.  
Child Day Care Center  1.0 space for each employee (including all management, administrative, care givers, teachers and maintenance personnel); plus 1.0 space for every five (5) persons of licensed capacity.  
Family Day Care Home  1.0 space for each employee (including all management, administrative, care givers, teachers and maintenance personnel); plus 1.0 space for every five (5) persons of licensed capacity.  
Group Day Care Homes  1.0 space for each employee (including all management, administrative, care givers, teachers and maintenance personnel); plus 1.0 space for every five (5) persons of licensed capacity.  
Firewood Process Facilities  1.0 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per 2,000 sq. ft. outside work areas; plus dedicated space for facility vehicles.  
Funeral Home or Mortuary  13.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Gasoline Station  3.0 spaces; plus 5.0 spaces per service bay.  Service bay is not a parking space and additional parking shall be provided for accessory retail use per the requirements of these Regulations, except fifty percent (50%) of fuel pump spaces may be counted toward such additional required spaces).  
Golf Course  3.0 spaces for each green plus thirty-five (35%) of spaces otherwise required for any accessory uses (e.g., shops, food service).  
Home Based Business (accessory to single-family dwellings)  See §8.2.3C.  
Home Occupation (accessory to single-family dwellings)  1.0 space if includes a permitted non-resident employee.  


§10.2 – SCHEDULE of REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  
USE  MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  

Hospital  1.0 space per three (3) beds; plus 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA for administrative offices/outpatient service facilities.  
Hotel  1.25 spaces per guest room.  
Instructional (retail) – Martial Arts, Dance, Music, Learning Support, Painting/Pottery, or Similar  See Retail.  
Landscaper  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of office GFA; plus 1.0 space per field employee peak shift or 3.0 spaces per facility vehicle, whichever is greater.  
Laundromat, Dry Cleaners (retail and drop-off centers)  See Retail.  
Manufacturing / Industrial  
Manufacturing, Processing and/or Assembly of Products where Conducted within Fully Enclosed Buildings  1.0 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA.  
Business Service Facilities providing Supporting Services to Industrial and Business Uses, including Computer and Business Machine Service and Repair  1.0 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA.  
Medical Clinic: Urgent Care Facility (no overnight), Radiology/Diagnostics Laboratory  See Office, Medical and Dental.  
Medical Rehabilitation Facility  1.0 space per bed for inpatient service facilities; plus 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA for administrative offices/outpatient service facilities.  
Mixed Use Landmark Property Development  Based on specific use(s) involved – see those standards herein.  
Mobile Food Vendor  See §6.12.  
Museum  1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA.  
Office, Medical and Dental  6.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Office, General  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Office, Professional  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  


§10.2 – SCHEDULE of REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  
USE  MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  

Outdoor Sales of Accessory Play Equipment and Sheds  See Retail for building floor areas; plus 1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. for outdoor display/sales areas.  
Personal Services Business  See Retail.  
Pet Groomer Business  See Retail.  
Place of Worship  1.0 space for every four (4) persons of the rated capacity.  
Recreation Facilities, Indoor  6.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Recreation Facilities, Outdoor  
Basketball Court  10.0 spaces per court or 1.0 space for every four (4) spectator seats, whichever is greater.  
Gymnasium  1.0 space for every four (4) spectator seats, including temporary seating.  
Park, Multi-use  6.0 spaces per one (1) acre of land.  
Park, Natural  Amount to be determined by the Commission based upon anticipated demand.  
Practice Fields/Athletic Fields  20.0 spaces for every diamond or athletic field, or 1.0 space for every four (4) spectator seats, whichever is greater.  
Swimming Pool  1.0 space per four (4) persons, based on design capacity of the pool.  
Research and Development Facilities, not involving Hazardous or Biological Materials Use, Storage or Disposal  
0 to 25,000 GFA  5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA  
Over 25,000 GFA  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Residential  
Single-Family Dwelling  2.0 spaces per unit with adequate driveway turnaround.  
Multi-Family, Studio  1.0 space per unit with adequate driveway turnaround.  
Multi-Family, One-Bedroom  1.5 spaces per unit with adequate driveway turnaround.  
Multi-Family, Two-Bedroom  2.0 spaces per unit with adequate driveway turnaround.  
Multi-Family, Three-Bedroom or more  2.0 spaces per unit with adequate driveway turnaround.  
Multi-Family, Visitor Spaces (excluding Group Homes)  0.5 space per unit.  

§10.2 – SCHEDULE of REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  
USE  MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  

Multi-Family, Group Homes  1.0 space for every family member or group home client; plus 1.0 space for every two (2) clients for visitor parking. Parking must be on-site and not within roadway.  
Age Restricted Attached Dwellings Units  1.5 spaces per unit, plus 1.0 one visitor space for every five (5) dwelling units.  
Age Restricted Detached Dwelling Units  2.0 spaces per unit; plus 1.0 visitor space for every two (2) dwelling units.  All detached dwelling units shall have a two (2) car garage.  
Safe Homes  2.0 spaces per unit with adequate driveway turnaround.  
Accessory Apartment  See §6.9.1.  
Caretaker Residence  2.0 spaces per unit.  
Restaurant and Food Related Uses  
Bakery, Wholesale  1.0 space per 600 sg. ft. GFA.  
Bakery, Retail  See Retail.  
Café  10.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, including outdoor seating areas.  
Caterer, Off-Premises (as the principal use)  See Retail.  
Caterer, On-Premises (as the principal use)  15.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, including outdoor seating areas.  
Ice Cream Parlor (Yogurt Shop/Dairy Bar)  See Retail.  
Outdoor Dining  Same as associated restaurant.  
Restaurant, Full Service  15.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, including outdoor seating areas.  
Restaurant, Fast-Food  13.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, including outdoor seating areas.  
Retail Food Establishment Seating Capacity of 12 or less Seating Capacity of greater than 12  See Retail. 13.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, including outdoor seating areas.  
Tavern  10.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, including outdoor seating areas.  


§10.2 – SCHEDULE of REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  
USE  MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  

Retail Garden Center  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per accessory vehicle.  
Retail Stores including Personal Service Businesses, General Retail, Instructional Retail, Grocery and Department Store  
0 to 25,000 GFA  5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Over 25,000 GFA  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Riding Academies, Boarding Stables  1.0 space per three (3) stalls.  
Schools, public and private  
Preschool, Nursery  1.0 space per one (1) employee (including all management, administrative, care givers, teachers and maintenance personnel); plus 1.0 space for every five (5) students; plus adequate separate designated drop-off/pick-up area.  
Elementary or Middle  1.5 spaces for each classroom; plus 1.0 space per 400 sq. ft. of office floor area; plus 1.0 space for every six (6) seats in an auditorium or gymnasium.  
Senior High  1.5 spaces for each classroom; plus 1.0 space per 400 sq. ft. of office floor area; plus 1.0 space for every four (4) students of design capacity.  
Secondary, Vocational, Trade  1.25 spaces per student capacity.  
Town of Monroe School Board of Education Offices (standalone facility)  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per accessory vehicle.  
School Bus Parking Facility  1.0 space per fleet vehicle; plus 1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA administrative offices/dispatch facilities.  
Storage Uses  
Commercial Warehousing Contained Within Fully Enclosed Buildings  1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Temporary Storage of Carnival Rides  Subject to Commission determination based on facilities involved.  
Theater (indoor for stage/movies)  1.0 space per 30 sq. ft. in principal assembly area, or 1.0 space per four (4) seats, whichever is greater.  


§10.2 – SCHEDULE of REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  
USE  MINIMUM REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING  

Town of Monroe Governmental Non-School Administrative Facilities  
Offices  4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per accessory vehicle.  
EMS, Fire, Police Senior/Community Center Food Pantry  3.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per accessory vehicle.  
Library  2.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.  
Town of Monroe Governmental Service Facilities: including but not limited to DPW Yard, Dog Pound, Transfer Station  3.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per accessory vehicle.  
Town of Monroe Shooting Range  3.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 1.0 space per accessory vehicle.  
Town of Monroe Communication Sites and Facilities  2.0 spaces per facility compound.  
Veterinary Hospital  See Retail.  
Wholesale and Distribution Centers, not including Automobiles or Boats  1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA; plus 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA administrative offices/dispatch facilities.  
All Other  Reasonable and appropriate off-street parking requirements for structures and uses which do not fall within the categories listed above shall be determined by the Commission upon consideration of all factors and unique characteristics entering into the parking needs of such structures and uses.  The Commission remains responsible for balancing the need for adequate parking with the need to avoid the negative environmental impacts of excess parking.  


CHAPTER 111 – SUBDIVISION OF LAND 

Regulations Governing(1) 
The Subdivision of Land in the Town of Monroe, Connecticut 

Adopted March 23, 1956 
Major Revision January 25, 1972 
Amendments Through November 26, 2018 

(1) Editor’s Note: These Regulations were adopted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 126 of the 1958 revision of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, the Town Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Monroe, Connecticut, has adopted the following regulations as the Land Subdivision Regulations· of the Town of Monroe. These regulations apply to all land within the Town of Monroe. The purpose of these regulations is to provide that the land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or the public safety, that proper provision shall be made for water, drainage and sewage and, that the proper provision shall be made for protective flood control measures, and that the proposed streets are in harmony with existing or proposed principal thoroughfares in the Town, especially in regard to safe intersections with such thoroughfares, and so arranged and of such width as to provide an adequate and convenient system for present and prospective traffic needs and fire safety, and to provide for open spaces for parks and playgrounds, for open spaces, for recreation, light and air. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
• 
Planning and Zoning Commission – See Charter, Chapter VI, §9 and §10. 

• 
Zoning Board of Appeals – See Charter, Chapter IV, §6 and §7. 

• 
Building Construction – See Chapter 232. 

• 
Excavations – See Chapter 53. 

• 
Sewers – See Chapter 89. 

• 
Zoning – See Chapter 117. 

• 
Zoning Penalties – See Chapter 505 

• 
Historic Districts – See Chapter 310 

• 
Scenic Roads – See Chapter 430 

• 
Sewage Disposal – See Chapter 440 

• 
Highway Modification – See Chapter 308 

• 
Driveway Construction – See Chapter 260 

• 
Street Numbers – See Chapter 462 

• 
Standard Specifications – See Chapter A601 


SUBDIVISION OF LAND 
Chapter 111 




REGULATIONS CONTENTS 

ARTICLE I General Provisions .............................................................. 4 

§ 111-100 Definitions..............................................................................................................4 

§ 111-101 Applicability............................................................................................................4 

§ 111-102 Map approval required ...........................................................................................4 

§ 111-103 Fine for noncompliance...........................................................................................4 

§ 111-104 Approval prior to construction ................................................................................5 

§ 111-105 Time and place of data presentation .......................................................................5 

§ 111-106 Changes in contour of land......................................................................................5 

§ 111-107 Restoration of disturbed lands ................................................................................5 

§ 111-108 Professional responsibility in subdivision work ........................................................5 


ARTICLE II Requirements and Procedure.............................................. 6 

§ 111-200 Informal preliminary consideration .........................................................................6 

§ 111-201 Requirements for formal consideration ...................................................................6 

§ 111-202 Conditions of approval ..........................................................................................12 


ARTICLE III Subdivision Design Standards............................................ 16 

§ 111-300 General requirements ...........................................................................................16 

§ 111-301 Streets..................................................................................................................16 

§ 111-302 Drainage...............................................................................................................22 

§ 111-303 Open spaces .........................................................................................................25 

§ 111-304 Design of lots........................................................................................................28 

§ 111-305 Streetlights ...........................................................................................................28 

§ 111-306 Marking of lot boundaries.....................................................................................28 

§ 111-307 Pedestrian easements...........................................................................................29 

§ 111-308 Utility locations.....................................................................................................29 

§ 111-309 Reserved rights-of-way .........................................................................................29 

§ 111-310 Street trees...........................................................................................................29 


ARTICLE IV Building Occupancy and Accessibility ................................ 31 


§111-400 Preparation of Road – Certificates of Occupancy and Zoning Compliance ...............31 


ARTICLE V Authorization of Construction........................................... 32 


§ 111-500 Authorization of improvement construction and installation .................................32 


ARTICLE VI Specifications.................................................................... 33 


§ 111-600 Standard Specifications; conflict of provisions .......................................................33 


ARTICLE VII Bond ................................................................................. 34 

§ 111-700 Partial release of performance bond......................................................................34 

§ 111-701 Final release of performance bond ........................................................................34 

§ 111-702 Maintenance bond and contract............................................................................35 

§ 111-703 Release of maintenance bond ...............................................................................35 


ARTICLE VIII Waiver of Requirements ................................................... 36 

§ 111-800 Requests for Waiver..............................................................................................36 

§ 111-801 Conditions for Waiver ...........................................................................................36 


ARTICLE IX Violations of Zoning Regulations ....................................... 37 

§ 111-900 Zoning Enforcement Officer; Report ......................................................................37 

§ 111-901 Effect of Violation .................................................................................................37 


ARTICLE X Water Supply Plan............................................................. 38 

§111-1000 Method of water supply; requirements .................................................................38 

§111-1001 Distance required for mandatory public water supply............................................39 


ARTICLE XI Miscellaneous ................................................................... 40 

§ 111-1100 When effective: applicability.................................................................................40 

§ 111-1101 Amendment of provisions .....................................................................................40 

§ 111-1102 Severability...........................................................................................................40 


ARTICLE I General Provisions 
§ 111-100 Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
RESUBDIVISION – A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or resubdivision if such 
change: 
A. 	Affects any street layout shown on such plan. 
B. 	Affects any area reserved thereon for public use. 
C. 	Diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map. 
SUBDIVISION – The division of any tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts or lots for the 
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, expressly excluding 
development for municipal, conservation or agricultural purposes, and includes resubdivision. 
§ 111-101 Applicability. 
All contiguous land held in the same ownership on or subsequent to the adoption of the Subdivision Regulations on March 23, 1956, shall be considered a single parcel or tract and shall be subject to these regulations and amendments. 
§ 111-102 Map approval required. 
No subdivision or resubdivision of land shall be made until a map of such subdivision or resubdivision has been approved by the Monroe Town Planning and Zoning Commission and until the said map has been endorsed by the Chairman of the Commission and filed in the office of the Monroe Town Clerk. The Commission shall not approve any subdivision plan unless it conforms to the standards hereinafter specified. No subdivision or resubdivision shall be considered to have final approval until the map of the said subdivision or resubdivision plan shall have been endorsed by the signature of the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
§ 111-103 Fine for noncompliance. 
Any person, firm or corporation making any subdivision or resubdivision of land without the approval of the Commission shall be subject to fine in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
§ 111-104 Approval prior to construction. 
No construction of buildings shall commence in the area of any proposed subdivision until the Commission has approved the proposed subdivision and endorsed such approval on the subdivision map and until the subdivision map has been filed in the office of the Monroe Town Clerk. 
§ 111-105 Time and place of data presentation. 
All maps, plans, documents and data required by these regulations shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission at such times as designated by the Commission at its regular place of business. 
§ 111-106 Changes in contour of land. 
All changes in contour of land within a subdivision shall be in general accordance with the conditions specified in Article XXI of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe, as applicable. (2) 
(2) Editor’s Note: See Chapter 117, Zoning. 
§ 111-107 Restoration of disturbed lands. 
All land disturbed during the construction of a subdivision shall be restored in general accordance with the conditions specified in Article XXI of the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe, as applicable. (3) 
(3) Editor’s Note: These regulations were adopted In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 126 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
§ 111-108 Professional responsibility in subdivision work. 
All technical work done in conjunction with the submission of subdivisions shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, January 1, 1966, as amended. The technical responsibilities of the registered professional engineer and the land surveyor in regard to subdivision work are specified in §20-300-10a of the above document and are as follows: 
A. 	The design of roads, both horizontal and vertical alignment; drainage systems, including the design and location of structures and pipes; sanitary sewer systems; sewage disposal systems; and water supply and distribution constitute professional engineering and as such shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer. A land surveyor's seal or an architect's seal is not acceptable for this phase of land subdivision design work. 
B. 	The phase of land subdivision which relates to topography maps and the delineation of the boundary lines of the outside perimeter as well as the interior lots and streets constitute land surveying within the meaning of the statute and as such shall be sealed by a registered land surveyor. A professional engineer's seal or an architect's seal is not acceptable. 

ARTICLE II Requirements and Procedure 
§ 111-200 Informal preliminary consideration. 
Upon written request of the applicant, the Commission will discuss informally a preliminary subdivision map. To be considered, the preliminary subdivision map shall conform to the requirements of the site development map specified in §111-201C. Three (3) blue line or black line prints, twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches in size, drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100, feet to the inch, and one 
(1) transparency of the preliminary subdivision map, at a scale of one (1) inch equals eight hundred 
(800) feet, shall be submitted. The Commission shall consider the preliminary subdivision map and any accompanying plans and may hold an informal hearing with the applicant, recommend changes in the proposed maps and plans and give such advice as it deems necessary to preserve the purpose and intent of the regulations. Request for consideration of a preliminary subdivision map and plans shall not be deemed to constitute formal application for approval of a subdivision but shall merely serve to guide the applicant in preparing maps and plans for submission with a formal subdivision application. 
§ 111-201 Requirements for formal consideration. 
In order to apply for approval of a subdivision and before the Commission shall consider any proposed subdivision, the following requirements shall be met and information submitted by the person, firm or corporation proposing a subdivision: 
A. 	Application. Application for approval of a subdivision shall be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission in writing on forms prescribed by the Commission. The application shall be signed by the applicant, and if the subdivision is proposed by a person, firm or corporation other than the owner of the land to be subdivided, the application shall also be signed by the owner. An application fee in an amount specified by the Connecticut General Statutes shall accompany the application. [Amended 3·1·76] 
B. 	Additional requirements. [Amended 3-1-76] 
(1) 	
No application for approval of a subdivision will be accepted for consideration unless accompanied by the following: 

(a) 
Report of the Town Engineer concerning conformance of the proposed subdivision plans with the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe and good engineering practices pertaining to, but not necessarily restricted to, survey accuracy, engineering details, utility requirements and relation of construction to existing town roads. 

(b) 
Bond estimate of the Town Engineer. 

(c) 
Report of the Health Enforcement Officer concerning the feasibility of septic system installation and recommendations for the certification of lots as buildings lots. 

(d) 
Report of the Planning Administrator concerning the conformance of the proposed subdivision plans to the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe, including but not necessarily restricted to the general planning aspects, lot and street layout, open space and preservation of wetlands. 

(e) 
Report of Fire Marshal concerning Water Supply Plan (Article X).  	[Effective May 1, 1979] 



(2) 	
Requests for said reports required by the Commission shall be made to the respective departments on forms provided by the Commission. 


C. 	Site development map. A map of existing conditions, the proposed general layout of the subdivision and a tentative layout of all contiguous land of the applicant that may be subdivided in the future shall be submitted, signed and sealed as prescribed in §111-108. 
(1) 	
The map shall show the following: 

(a) 
Existing structures and existing and proposed property and street lines, with approximate dimensions. 

(b) 
Adjoining property lines for a distance of two hundred (200) feet and the names of adjoining owners as shown on tax assessment records. 

(c) 
Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds, swamps and easements. 

(d) 
Existing and proposed streets and street names. 

(e) 
Existing and proposed storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, bridges, headwalls and all other structures pertaining to streets, drainage and sewers. 

(f) 	
Proposed lot arrangement and lot numbers. 

(g) 
Existing contours at an interval not exceeding five (5) feet, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer in writing, based on official United States Geological Survey data, with the source of the contours and the location of bench marks noted on the map. Interpreting between contours on United States Geological Survey maps is not acceptable. 

(h) 
Key elevations of existing adjoining roads and spot elevations showing proposed grading of proposed roads within the subdivision. 

(i) 	
Location of all test holes. 

(j) 	
Existing and proposed parks, recreation areas and open spaces. 

(k) 
Principal wooded areas and ledge outcrops. 

(l) 	
Existing stone walls, fences, foundations, trails, etc., that would serve as landmarks for field inspection. 

(m) 
Location map (scale at one (1) inch equals eight hundred (800) feet) showing location of subdivision in relation to primary roads in the town. 

(n) 
Name of subdivision and applicant. 

(o) 
Title, date, scale and North point. 

(p) 
Name and seal of engineer and surveyor preparing map. 



(2) 	
The map or maps shall be twenty four by thirty-six (24x 36) inches and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, India ink on Mylar or linen, and shall be submitted with three (3) black line or blue line reproductions. One (1) transparency of the site development map showing lot and street layout only, drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, and one (1) to a scale of one (1) inch equals eight hundred (800) feet, shall also be submitted. 


D. 	Subdivision map. A subdivision map shall be submitted, prepared, signed and sealed as prescribed in §111-108, with certification that the accuracy of the information on the map meets standards for a Class A·2 Transit Survey of the Connecticut Technical Council, Inc. The map shall be twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches and shall be not less than one hundred 
(100) feet to the inch and shall be drawn with black waterproof ink on good quality heavy white linen or may be a litho print on good quality heavy white linen tracing cloth or Mylar. In addition a copy of the map shall be submitted on good quality heavy linen tracing cloth for the records of the Town of Monroe and four (4) blue or black line paper prints of the map shall also be submitted. The map shall conform to the subdivision design criteria of Article III and shall show the following: 
(1) 	
Existing structures and existing and proposed property and street lines. 

(2) 	
Adjoining property lines and the names of adjoining owners as shown on tax assessment records. 

(3) 	
Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds, easements and rights-of-way. 

(4) 	
Existing and proposed parks, recreation areas and open spaces. 

(5) 	
Existing stone walls. 

(6) 	
Proposed lot arrangement and lot numbers. 

(7) 	
All dimensions to the hundredth of a foot and all bearings or angles on all property lines, proposed lots, street lines, easements, rights-of-way, parks, recreation areas and open spaces. 

(8) 	
The central angle, tangent distance and radius of all arcs. 

(9) 	
The width of all streets, rights-of-way and easements. 

(10) 	
The square footage or acreage of all lots, parks, recreation areas and open spaces. 

(11) 	
Street names and existing and proposed street monuments. 

(12) 	
Length of all proposed streets along the center line from intersection to intersection or terminus. 

(13) 	
The survey relationship of proposed streets to nearby monumented town or state 
highways or to nearby subdivisions, if any such highways or subdivisions exist. 


(14) 	
Title, date, scale and North point. 

(15) 	
The words "approved by the Monroe Town Planning and Zoning Commission," with the designated place for the signature of the Chairman and date of signing. 

(16) 	
The error of closure, which shall not exceed one (1) in five thousand (5,000). 

(17) 	
An index map if the proposed subdivision is divided into sections or is of such size that more than one (1) sheet is required. 

(18) 	
A location map [scale at one (1) inch equals eight hundred (800) feet] showing the 
location of the subdivision in relation to primary roads in the town. 



E. Construction plans. 
(1) 	Plan and profile drawings of all proposed streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, watercourses, headwalls, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, bridges, culverts and all other structures pertaining to streets, drainage and sewers shall conform to the requirements of Article III and the Standard Specifications(4) and shall have been approved by the Town Engineer prior to being accepted for final consideration by the Commission. Four (4) copies of such plan and profile drawings shall be submitted on good quality plan-profile paper twenty-four (24) inches in width and thirty-six (36) inches in length and shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of one (1) inch to forty (40) feet and a vertical scale of one (1) inch to four (4) feet. Profile drawings and elevations shall be based on the same bench mark as required for the site development map in Subsection C. 
(4) Editor's Note: See Chapter A120, Standard Specifications. 
(2) 	
In the case of streets typical road cross sections shall be shown, and the profiles shall show the existing grades and proposed elevations at the center line and both curblines. The beginning and end of all vertical curves and the length of curves shall be shown. The depth, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches and streams shall be shown. Specifications for pipe, catch basin, manhole and headwall construction shall be shown and typical ditch cross sections shall also be shown. Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and other special structures shall also be submitted. 

(3) 	
All construction plans shall be signed and sealed as prescribed in §111-108. When two (2) or more lots in a subdivision front on an existing town street, cross sections of the existing street shall be submitted on cross-section paper of twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x.36) inches, at a scale of one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet. The sections shall extend a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the center line of the existing street into any lots or streets that are a part of the subdivision. The sections shall extend to the street line in other areas. 


F. 	Drainage calculations. Drainage calculations in accordance with the design criteria in Article III shall be submitted, listing the design flow and theoretical capacity of each pipeline in; the drainage system. When inlet control governs, the required head for design flow and height of structure above pipe invert shall be shown. A map of suitable scale shall be included showing the extent of all drainage areas contributing to the drainage system. 
G. 	Contour plans. In the event that any regrading, cuts, fills or soil or rock removal in excess of one hundred (100) cubic yards per acre, not including excavations for foundation or excavation or fill for roads, is proposed in the area of the subdivision, a contour plan shall be presented showing existing contours, proposed contours and the proposed layout of streets, lots, parks, recreation areas and open spaces and drainage, at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch. The contour interval shall not exceed five (5) feet and shall be based on the same bench mark as required for the site development map in Subsection C. Three (3) black line or blue line prints of the contour plan shall be submitted; the plan shall be signed and sealed as prescribed in §111-108. 
H. 	Sewage disposal plan. A copy of the subdivision map of Subsection D, showing the location of seepage test holes of one (1) per lot at the approximate location and grade of the finished sewage disposal area, shall be submitted along with a written report describing the results of such tests, signed by an engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, and containing recommendations for the design of the sewage systems. Such tests and report shall conform to the Sanitary Code of the State of Connecticut. 
I. 	Well Water Supply. In the case of any lot to be served by an onsite well water supply intended to supply water for human consumption, the well shall be located a minimum of one hundred 
(100) feet from an open stream, any portion of a septic system or potential source of pollution, or such greater distance as may be applicable through the provisions of any other state and/or local code or ordinance. [Effective May 1, 1979] 
J. 	State Highway Department permit. Where a proposed road or drain joins with a state highway, the applicant shall obtain a permit for such connection from the Connecticut State Highway Department and shall present a copy of such permit to the Commission. 
K. 	Easements and deeds. Easements for sanitary sewers and public rights-of-way other than streets, and easements for storm drainage and watercourses, draining existing and proposed streets or streets that may be constructed in the future, shall be confirmed by written easements and deeds describing the land involved and privileges of the town in a form eliminating any town liability for installation and maintenance and satisfactory to the Town Attorney. 
L. 	Other evidence. In addition to the above requirements for consideration, other evidence as required by the Commission shall be submitted establishing that the land to be subdivided is of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health or the public safety; that proper provision will be made for water, drainage and sewerage, and in areas contiguous to brooks, rivers or other bodies of water subject to flooding, that provision will be made for protective flood control measures; that in places deemed proper by the Commission, open spaces for parks and playgrounds will be established; and if the Commission shall have adopted a plan of development affecting the area of the proposed subdivision, that any proposed street shown on the subdivision map is in harmony with existing or proposed thoroughfares shown on said plan, especially in regard to safe intersections with such thoroughfares. 
M. Inland wetlands approval. If the proposed subdivision property or any portion thereof is shown to be subject to regulation as an inland wetland in accordance with the prescribed wetland map for the Town of Monroe, the necessary approvals and/or permits must be obtained from the governing wetland authority pursuant to Title 22a of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision (Revised to 1972). Such approvals and/or permits must be submitted as part of the subdivision application. No subdivision application shall be deemed to be complete until the aforesaid information is submitted to the Commission by the applicant. [Added 9-14-74] 
N. 	Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. A plan of soil erosion and sediment control shall be prepared, adopted, implemented, maintained and enforced in accordance with the provisions of Article XIX of the Zoning Regulations. [Effective July 1, 1985] 
§ 111-202 Conditions of approval. 
After the foregoing requirements for application and consideration have been met, the Commission shall pursue the following procedure: 
A. Approval 
(1) 	
The Commission shall give consideration to the proposed subdivision, and if it shall find that the subdivision map and plans and the accompanying certificates, documents and data conform to the requirements of these regulations the Commission may conduct a public hearing. All legal notices required in connection with such hearing shall be at the expense of the applicant. The Commission, after the public hearing, if conducted shall give approval to the proposed subdivision if it shall find that the subdivision map and plans and accompanying certificates documents and data conform to the conditions and requirements of these regulations. In granting approval the Commission may attach such conditions as it deems necessary to modify the subdivision map plans or documents and to preserve the purpose and intent of these regulations. 

(2) 	
The applicant shall comply with all such conditions of approval within ninety (90) days of the date of approval and failure to do so shall render approval null and void unless the Commission upon written request of the applicant extends the ninety-day limit. Such request shall state the reasons that make the request necessary. 

(3) 	
The Commission shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove any subdivision map or any accompanying plan or document within the time limit prescribed by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended. The grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the records of the Commission. The submission of inaccurate or incomplete material shall be grounds for denial by the Commission. 


B. Map endorsement. 
(1) 	
Construction plans. At the time of approval, the Commission shall endorse copies of the construction plans to permit the initiation of construction after the posting of the required bond. Such endorsement shall in no way affect the right of the Commission or its agent to modify these plans to cope with problems encountered during construction. 

(2) 	
Subdivision map. When all the conditions of approval, if any, have been met, the Commission shall note its approval of the proposed subdivision by endorsement of the subdivision map in order to permit filing of the map with the Town Clerk. No such endorsement may be made by the Commission until all conditions of approval have been met or, if no bond is posted with the Commission, until all required subdivision improvements have been completed in compliance with the plans as approved and/or modified by the Commission or its agent. 


C. 	Posting of performance bond.  [Effective 7-25-81] 
(1) 	Prior to final decision by the Commission, the applicant shall file with the Commission a performance· bond to assure completion of subdivision improvements as set forth in these regulations and any specific requirements of the Commission. The Commission shall set the final bond figure, which shall be the sum the Commission shall require, and the required bond shall be posted in the form of: 
An irrevocable letter of credit issued through a bank doing business in the State of Connecticut, and with offices in the State of Connecticut, using form(s) prescribed by the Commission. No other form(s) shall be accepted. [10-1-87] 
The required total bond shall be in such amount as the Commission shall deem sufficient to ensure the completion of subdivision improvements within five (5) years in accordance with the plans as approved. The Commission may extend the period for completion of improvements by one (1) year upon receipt of evidence of the need for such extension and upon receipt of assurance that the bond obligation will cover the extension period. 
(2) 	
Amount of bond; costs. 

(a) 
In computing the amount of the bond, the Commission shall include the construction cost of the following items: the construction of all required improvements, including storm drainage system, roads and pavements, sidewalks and curbs, trees, street signs, grading, setting of monuments and any other requirements made as a condition for subdivision approval. 

(b) 
Estimated costs shall be those that would allow for the town's advertising and awarding a contract for construction of the improvements. 

(c) 
Costs shall be projected to a point at the end of the performance bond term. 	Any extension of the term of the performance bond may result in an adjustment as to the bond total. 

(d) 
The total estimated cost of the performance bond shall also include an addition of fifteen percent (15%) to cover contingencies and engineering. 



(3) 	
The bond agreement shall remain in full force and effect until such time as the 
Commission shall authorize its release and cancellation. 


(4) 	
Change in ownership or responsibility; approved subdivision. Should the land upon which subdivision improvements have been approved change in ownership during the life of the approval (as defined in §8-26c, Connecticut General Statutes) the new owner and/or principal of said land shall post a performance bond in the same amount and in the same manner as originally prescribed by the Commission, and as specified in §111-202C(1)-(3). Upon posting of the required bond by the new owner and/or principal, the previously posted bond shall be released by the Commission. Should the new owner and/or principal fail to post the required bond, the existing bond agreement shall remain in full force and effect and the Commission shall prevent the issue of zoning compliance certificates in any form for any lot appearing on the approved subdivision map until such time as the replacement bond is posted. 

(5) 	
All projects bonded under methods specified prior to the revisions to §111-202(C) adopted October 1, 1987 may be converted to the method specified on said date upon the request of the principal. 


D. 	Insurance. 
(1) 	
The subdivider shall file with the Commission, on a form acceptable to the town, a general liability insurance policy. This policy shall be of the same term as the performance bond and shall be extended in conformance with any extension of the performance bond. 

(2) 	
The policy shall insure the Town of Monroe and the subdivider and shall cover all his operations in the development involving existence and maintenance of property and building and contracting operations of every nature, including all public improvements. Said policy shall have the following limits: 

(a) 
Property damage (including automobile). 

[1] Each accident, not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). 

(b) 
Bodily injury (including automobile). 




[1] Each person, not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). 
[2] Each accident, not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000). 
E. 	Filing of maps and documents. The subdivision map, easements and deeds shall be filed and recorded with the Town Clerk by the Commission at the expense of the applicant. 
F. 	Certificate of compliance. Before release of any subdivision bond, or before the Commission endorses any subdivision map to permit filing with the Town Clerk when no subdivision bond has been posted, the applicant shall present the following documents to the Commission. 
(1) 	
As-built plans. The applicant shall present as-built cloth tracings of the approved construction plans, signed and sealed as prescribed in §111-108 of these regulations, certifying that the streets, storm drains, sanitary sewers, catch basins, manholes, ditches, headwalls, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, bridges, culverts and all other structures pertaining to streets, drainage and sewers have been installed in the location and at the elevation or grade shown on said construction plans. 

(2) 	
Materials. The applicant shall present signed certificates approved by his engineers from suppliers, certifying that the following materials incorporated in the construction of the subdivision conform to the requirements of the Standard Specifications: subbase gravel, processed aggregate for base, bituminous concrete, precast units for drainage structures, pipe and guideposts. In addition, the applicant shall submit test results, from a laboratory satisfactory to the Commission, of samples of the subbase gravel used. The samples shall be taken at the construction site in an approved manner. One (1) sample shall be tested from each five hundred (500) linear feet of street. 

(3) 	
Construction. The applicant shall also present a statement, signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut, certifying that the following items conform to the Standard Specifications: 

(a) 
Construction and depth of subbase. 

(b) 
Construction and depth of processed aggregate base. 

(c) 
Construction and depth of bituminous concrete pavement. 

(d) 
Construction of storm drainage, including underdrains. 




G. 	Statement of satisfactory completion. Upon completion to the satisfaction of the Commission of all requirements related to the subdivision, the Commission, at the request of the applicant, shall execute a statement certifying that the subdivision has received approval, that all of the conditions of approval have been met and that all required subdivision improvements have been completed in accordance with plans as approved. No road completed after October 31 shall be accepted prior to April 1 of the succeeding year. 
H. 	Hold-harmless agreement. Where, in the best interests of the town, it agrees with the subdivider to provide snow and ice control maintenance on a street within a subdivision that has not been accepted, the subdivider shall provide the town with an agreement holding the town harmless for any accidents or damage to existing improvements that may occur as a result of the town's maintenance. 

ARTICLE III Subdivision Design Standards 
§ 111-300 General requirements. 
All improvements shall be planned and constructed as provided herein and shall be subject to the approval of the Commission. Improvements shall generally be in accord with the Standard Specifications of the Town of Monroe.(5) Construction shall be carried on only under the supervision of the Town Engineer. The following criteria shall apply to the planning and map layout of streets, lots, parks, recreation areas and other improvements and facilities required in any proposed subdivision. 
(5) Editor’s Note: See A120, Standard Specifications. 
§ 111-301 Streets. 
Streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Standard Specifications of the Town of Monroe. Streets shall be planned in such a way as to provide a safe and convenient street system for present and prospective traffic and to conform to the following standards: 
A. 	Classification of streets. All streets shown on the subdivision map as approved by the 
Commission shall be classified as follows: 

(1) 	
Major thoroughfare or parkway. A major thoroughfare or parkway is a street of considerable continuity which is primarily a traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas of the town and on which through traffic passing abutting properties will be dominant. 

(2) 	
Secondary thoroughfare. A secondary thoroughfare is a street which is supplementary to the major thoroughfare or parkway system and is primarily a means of intercommunication between this system and smaller areas or among smaller areas and on which traffic past abutting properties is somewhat dominant. 

(3) 	
Local street. A local street is a street which primarily provides access to abutting residential properties. 

(4) 	
Commercial street. A commercial street is a street which gives direct access to or circulation within business and industrial areas. 

(5) 	
Private commercial street servicing DI and DB Design Districts. A private street is a street which: (1) is owned and maintained privately, with access, utility and maintenance obligations clearly documented and established in a legal instrument submitted for review at the time of subdivision application and subsequently filed on the land records prior to the construction of said private street; and (2) provides direct access to or circulation within a commercial subdivision within a DI and/or DB Deign District. 


B. 	Street width. Streets shall have the following minimum width according to their classification: 
(1) 	
Major thoroughfare: sixty (60) feet: parkway, eighty (80) feet. 

(2) 	
Secondary thoroughfare: sixty (60) feet. 

(3) 	
Local street: fifty (50) feet. 

(4) 	
Commercial street: sixty (60) feet. 

(5) 	
Private commercial street servicing DI and DB Design Districts: sixty (60) feet. 


C. 	Pavement width. Streets shall have the following width between curb faces: 
(1) 	
Major thoroughfare: forty (40) feet: parkway: two (2) lanes of twenty (20) feet each. 

(2) 	
Secondary thoroughfare: thirty-six (36) feet. 

(3) 	
Local street: thirty-two (32) feet. 

(4) 	
Commercial street: thirty-two (32) feet. Where deemed necessary, at the discretion of the Commission, the road width standard may be increased to a width of thirty-six (36) feet. 

(5) 	
Private commercial street servicing DI and DB Design Districts: thirty-two (32) feet. 

(6) 	
Turnaround: radius of fifty (50) feet. 


D. 	Grade. Streets should in general follow the contours of the land. The minimum grade for any street shall be one percent (1%) and the maximum grade shall not exceed the following: 
(1) 	
Major thoroughfare and parkway: four percent (4%). 

(2) 	
Secondary thoroughfare: six percent (6%). 

(3) 	
Local street: ten percent (10%). 

(4) 	
Commercial street: six percent (6%). 

(5) 	
Private commercial street servicing DI and DB Design Districts: eight percent (8%), or nine percent (9%) if said street currently exists as of August 15, 2013 and functions as a private roadway servicing more than one building or property. 

(6) 	
Turnaround: three percent (3%). 

(7) 	
Intersections. Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed five percent (5%) for a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet from the center line of the intersection. 


E. 	Horizontal alignment. The minimum radius of curvature at the center line of streets shall be as follows: 
(1) 	
Major thoroughfare or parkway: one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet. 

(2) 	
Secondary thoroughfare: six hundred (600) feet. 

(3) 	
Local street: two hundred (200) feet. 

(4) 	
Commercial street: three hundred (300) feet. 

(5) 	
Private commercial street servicing DI and DB Design Districts: (1) three hundred (300) feet, or (2) one hundred sixty (160) feet if said street has no outlet; currently exists as of August 15, 2013 and functions as a private roadway servicing more than one building or property; has adequate maneuverability; and has adequate sight-line and stopping distance as per existing (field-determined) vehicle running speed. 


F. 	Vertical alignment. Vertical curves shall be used for all changes in gradient where the algebraic difference in grades exceeds five-tenths percent (0.5%). All vertical curves shall be parabolic with a minimum length of one hundred (100) feet. The length of vertical curves for crests and sags shall be determined for stopping sight distances as follows: 
Design Speed (mph)  Stopping Sight Distance (feet)  
30  200  
40  275  
50  350  

G. 	Cross section. Streets shall be crowned with a cross slope of three-eighths (3/8) inch per foot. The sidewalk shelf shall be graded from the back of curb to the street line and shall slope up from the curb at one-half (1/2) inch per foot. 
H. 	Pavement structure. Streets shall have the following compacted depths of materials: 
(1) 	
Subbase. The subbase shall be gravel with the following compacted depths: 

(a) 
Major thoroughfare or parkway: twelve (12) inches. 

(b) 
Secondary thoroughfare: eight (8) inches. 

(c) 
Local street: six (6) inches. 

(d) 
Commercial street: twelve (12) inches. 

(e) 
Private commercial street servicing DI and DB Design Districts: ten (10) inches. 



(2) 	
Base course. The base course for all streets shall be four (4) inches' compacted depth of processed aggregate. 

(3) 	
Surface course. The surface course shall be three (3) inches compacted depth of bituminous concrete placed in two (2) equal layers, except that arterial and commercial streets and private commercial streets servicing DI and DB Design Districts shall have four 


(4) inches of compacted depth placed in two (2) equal layers. 
I. 	Intersections. The following criteria shall apply to street intersections: 
(1) 	
Number of streets. No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at anyone (1) point. Except for crossroads, no point of intersection of any street shall be closer than two hundred (200) feet to an intersection on the opposite side of the street. 

(2) 	
Angle of intersection. Wherever practical, all streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°), and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than eighty-five degrees (85°). 

(3) 	
Corner radii. Intersecting local streets shall have a minimum radius of fifteen (15) feet at the street line. Intersections of local streets with major thoroughfares or parkways, secondary streets and commercial streets shall have a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet at the street line. All other intersections shall have a minimum radius of twenty·five 


(25) feet at the streetline. 
J. 	Slopes. Cut or fill sections beyond the street line shall not be steeper than two to one (2:1) [two 
(2) horizontal to one (1) vertical], except in rock. The Commission or its agent may require flatter slopes to maintain the stability of the bank. At intersections, banks shall be cut back to maintain a minimum sight distance of one hundred (100) feet along each approach leg. No cut or fill slopes shall extend outside of the subdivision property unless appropriate slope rights are obtained for the town. All ground surfaces that are disturbed due to grading and constructing the street shall be loamed and seeded in accordance with the Standard Specifications. 
K. 	Removal of turnarounds. During the construction of a new street that is the extension of a cul­de-sac street, the turnaround shall be removed, even though it is outside of the limits of the subdivision being constructed. The pavement shall be removed to a depth of at least six (6) inches, new curbs constructed and the area backfilled, loamed and seeded to blend with the requirements of the Standard Specifications. 
L. 	Curbs. Machine-laid bituminous concrete curbs shall be installed along all streets and turnarounds in accordance with the Standard Specifications. The Commission may require portland cement concrete curbs to be installed. 
M. Sidewalks. 	The Commission may require the installation of portland cement concrete sidewalks in locations deemed proper by the Commission. Sidewalks, when required, shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard Specifications. 
N. 	Guideposts. Guideposts shall be installed along streets where slopes are steeper than four to one (4:1). Guideposts shall be installed in accordance with the Standard Specifications. 
O. 	Relation to adjoining areas. Proposed local streets and private commercial streets servicing DI and DB Design Districts shall be planned to discourage through traffic and to provide a safe and convenient system for present and prospective traffic in the area surrounding the proposed subdivision. Proposed major thoroughfares, parkways, secondary thoroughfares and commercial streets shall be planned to provide for continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas with an alignment in accordance with the standards provided herein and for proper projection into adjoining properties when subdivided. Proposed streets to be projected into adjoining properties shall be carried to the boundary line. Minimum fifteen-foot-wide slope rights on each side of the future right-of-way shall be given to the town. 
P. 	Cul-de-sac or dead-ends; number of lots to be served by. Culs-de-sac or dead-end streets, which are closed at one (1) end by building lots or other land, ending in a turnaround which may be temporary or permanent shall provide sole access to not more than twelve (12) building lots, nor less than four (4) lots. All such lots shall meet the minimum frontage requirement of the Zoning District along the street line of the cul-de-sac or dead-end street. The length of a street terminating with a permanent or temporary cul-de-sac or dead-end shall not exceed 2,000 linear feet.  The Commission may approve a longer length where adequate emergency access provisions are provided. The Commission may also approve an alternative terminus design for a proposed private commercial street servicing DI or DB Design Districts provided said alternative terminus design provides for safe and adequate continuation of vehicle movement and turnaround with adequate easements relating thereto. 
Q. 	Turnarounds. A turnaround shall be provided at the closed end of a cul-de-sac or dead-end street.  Turnaround design shall not exceed a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet to the curbline/sixty (60) feet to the street line or a maximum radius of sixty-five (65) feet to the curb line/seventy-five (75) feet to the streetline. In any case, the area from the curbline to the street line shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Land for a turnaround on a dead-end street which will at some future date be projected into adjoining property shall be provided in the form of an easement to the town which shall contain a condition for automatic termination of the easement upon extension of the street. Pavement for the temporary turnaround shall be removed upon termination of the temporary turnaround easement, in accordance with the Standard Specifications. 
R. 	Street names. Streets shall bear names which do not duplicate or too closely approximate, in spelling or sound, existing street names in Monroe. All street names shall be approved by the Commission. 
S. 	Monuments. Concrete monuments shall be located on points of curve and points of tangency with an unobstructed line of sight between them. Monuments shall be no more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart nor closer than two hundred (200) feet except on short curves. Center line pins shall be placed at all points of curve, points of tangency, angle points and at the intersections of all streets within the subdivision as well as adjoining streets. Where two (2) pins are not visible, pins will be set on line. Pins shall be made of ferrous metal, twenty-four (24) inches long and three-fourths (¾) inch in diameter, and set flush with the finished pavement. The distance between all center-line pins shall be indicated on the finished map. The location of monuments and pins shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineering Department. 
T. 	Existing streets. When proposed subdivisions abut an existing town street, the following requirements shall be adhered to: 
(1) 	
Right-of-way. A street line shall be established to provide for future widening of the existing street. The street line shall be set in accordance with the requirements as to width and alignment for the classification assigned to the street by the Commission. The developer shall give the town a quitclaim deed for the land between the newly established street line and the edge of the existing traveled way. 

(2) 	
Drainage. When required by the Commission, drainage structures shall be constructed to conform to the future widening of the existing street with provisions made to properly drain the street in its existing configuration. 

(3) 	
Reconstruction. When required by the Commission, the existing street shall be reconstructed in conformance with the requirements of the classification assigned to the street by the Commission. 


U. 	Street lines. Street lines on each side of a proposed street shall be parallel or shall be concentric arcs. 
V. 	Block dimensions. Intersecting streets shall be laid out at such intervals that block lengths between street lines are not more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet nor less than four hundred (400) feet, except when in the opinion of the Commission existing conditions justify a variation from this requirement. 
W. 	Street signs. Each street intersection in a subdivision, including intersections of new subdivision streets with existing streets or highways, shall be provided with appropriate signs identifying both streets, in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1) 	
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the number and types of signs required and shall specify the requirements upon final approval of the subdivision. 

(2) 	
The Town Highway Department shall provide and install the required signs with the funds deposited by the applicant to the Town Subdivision Street Sign Account. The applicant shall deposit to this account sums for the required signs in accordance with a schedule on file with the Commission. The total sum required shall be deposited to said account prior to the time that a release of the subdivision improvement bond is requested by the applicant, except that no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure unless sufficient funds are deposited to said account to pay for signs to identify any intersections of the street where said structure is located. 


X. 	Construction signs. 
(1) 	The developer shall erect and maintain at each terminus of each street as it is laid out a secure sign reading as follows: 
"This is not-a Public Road" 
Signed: _______________________________ 
Developer 

(2) 	The above-required sign shall be at least eighteen by twenty-four (18 x 24) inches in size, with two (2) inch block lettering, and shall be maintained until the streets are accepted by the town. 
Y. 	Stonewalls. In recognizing the historic and natural value of field constructed stonewalls, common in and around the Town of Monroe, all stonewalls on a subdivision site shall be mapped per the requirements of §§111-201C and D. Wherever feasible, stonewalls shall be preserved as found on site or shall be relocated on site. Wherever practical, existing or new lot lines shall be made to follow stonewalls provided they generally conform to the provisions of §111-304 of these regulations. [Effective 3-24-85] 
§ 111-302 Drainage. 
The protection of life and property of area residents, the traveling public and the town shall be of paramount importance and the facilities shall be located and planned so as to minimize danger to such life and property. Storm drainage shall be designed in accordance with the following criteria: 
A. 	Runoff. The rational method shall be used for computing runoff (Q=Aci), where the following values apply: 
Q = runoff, in cubic feet per second 
A = area of watershed contributing, in acres 
i = rainfall intensity, in inches per hour 
c = coefficient of imperviousness 

B. 	Design storm. Design of facilities to carry stormwater runoff shall be based on a ten-year storm. Design of facilities to carry established streams shall be based on a fifty-year storm. 
C. 	Rainfall intensity. 
(1) 	Rainfall intensity shall be determined from the New Haven Chart, a copy of which is included.(6) 
(6) 
Editor’s Note:  The New Haven Chart is included at the end of this chapter. 

(2) 
The time of concentration used in this chart shall be determined as follows: 

(a) 
Overland flow less than one thousand (1,000) feet, Seelye Chart. 

(b) 
Overland flow more than one thousand (1,000) feet, Kirpich Chart. 

(c) 
Flow in pipes, computed for design flow. 



(3) 	
Copies of the Seelye Chart and Kirpich Chart are included.(7) 



(7) 
Editor’s Note: Copies of the Seelye Chart and Kirpich Chart are included at the end of this chapter. 


D. 	Coefficient of imperviousness. The following coefficients shall be used in the various zoning districts: 
District  Coefficient  
Residential and Farming C  0.40  
Residential and Farming D  0.35  
Residential and Farming E  0.30  
Business No. 1 and No. 2  0.75  
Industrial Park  0.75  
Restricted Industrial  0.75  

E. 	Pipe. All pipe for storm drains shall be reinforced concrete pipe. The minimum size of pipe shall be fifteen (15) inches. In special cases, asphalt-coated corrugated metal pipe may be used if approved by the Town Engineer. 
F. 	Slope. The minimum slope for storm drains shall be five tenths percent (0.5%). 
G. 	Hydraulic design. The hydraulic design of pipes shall be based on the Manning formula. The roughness coefficient (N) used shall be fifteen-hundredths (0.015) for concrete pipe and nineteen-hundredths (0.019) for corrugated metal pipe. 
H. 	Cover. The minimum cover over all pipe shall be two (2) feet. 
I. 	Intersections. Inlets shall be installed to properly drain all intersections of new streets and intersections of new streets with existing town streets. 
J. 	Easements. Easements at least thirty (30) feet in width centered on the storm drain, shall be provided for all stormwater and sanitary sewer pipes which will not be installed in streets to be dedicated to the town. Easements for outlet pipes shall extend to a suitable existing storm drain or an adequate natural watercourse. Easements shall be provided for ditches, channels or natural streams and shall be of sufficient minimum width to include a ten-foot access strip in addition to the width of the ditch, channel or natural stream from top of bank to top of bank. In addition, a minimum easement width of twenty (20) feet shall be dedicated, if required, on the rear line of each lot for the use of public utilities, poles, pipes and conduits, except where the Commission deems such easements impracticable or undesirable. 
K. 	Channel lines. Channel and building lines shall be provided along any major stream or river for the purpose of preventing encroachment upon and constriction of the natural water channel by buildings, filling operations or other facilities and construction. The width of the channel shall be based on sound engineering calculations, anticipating long-range storms and flow potentials and recognizing proper alignment and gradients of the channel. A note shall be placed on the final map explaining the channel and building lines and stating the restrictions against encroachment upon the channel in a manner approved by the Town Attorney. 
L. 	Catch basins, drop inlets and manholes. 
(1) 	
The first inlet in a storm drain system shall be located within three hundred fifty (350) feet of the roadway high point. Other than the first inlet, all inlets will be spaced a maximum of three hundred (300) feet apart. When the spacing between inlets exceeds four hundred (400) feet, manholes shall be placed to give a maximum length of pipe between structures of four hundred (400) feet. 

(2) 	
Drainage structures (catch basins, drop inlets or manholes) shall be placed at each grade change along a storm drain, at each change in horizontal direction and at each junction point of two (2) or more storm drains. Normally, drop inlets shall be used. In areas that are susceptible to the deposit of sand or debris, catch basins shall be used. Double-grate inlets shall be used at sags where, due to off-street runoff, a design flow in excess of three 


(3) cubic feet per second will be entering the inlet. 
M. Discharge. 	The discharge of all stormwater shall be conducted into suitable watercourses, wetlands, or into town drains with adequate capacity to carry additional water. Where the discharge shall be onto private property adjoining the proposed subdivision, proper easements and discharge rights shall be secured by the applicant for the town before approval of the final map and acceptance of the drainage plan. No storm drain shall outlet into a natural watercourse, whether continually flowing or intermittent, or into an existing drainage system, so as to exceed the capacity of the watercourse or drainage system, without provisions being made to satisfactorily increase the capacity of the watercourse or downstream structure. [Effective 6-1S-80] 
N. 	Underdrain. Underdrains shall be installed in all areas where wet conditions prevail or where required by the Town Engineer. Underdrain outlets shall be connected to drainage structures whenever practical. When impractical, they shall be terminated with an approved end wall. 
O. 	Outlets. All storm drain outlets shall be terminated with an approved outlet structure and shall be so constructed as to dissipate the flow energy in a way that will minimize the possibility of soil erosion. Crossing culverts for established watercourses shall extend no less than twenty-five 
(25) feet from the street line. Except for crossing culverts, storm drains shall terminate at least one hundred (100) feet from the edge of an established watercourse into a rip-rapped ditch or swale. Storm drains shall terminate no less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a street line except where required to maintain the minimum setback from the edge of an established watercourse. If a discharge less than one hundred (100) feet from the edge of an established watercourse is proposed, it shall require the approval of the State Department of Health as required by the State Public Health Code. [Effective 6-15-80] 
P. 	Ditches. The use of ditches to carry stormwater to natural watercourses will not be allowed except in special cases, and then only with prior approval of the Commission. 
Q. 	Special structures. Bridges, box culverts, deep manholes, nonstandard endwalls and other special structures shall be designed in accordance with good engineering practice and shall be subject to the approval of the Commission or its agent. Bridges and box culverts shall be designed to carry at least the full width of the required street pavement and at least a four (4) foot sidewalk on each side. 
§ 111-303 Open spaces. 
A. 	Open Space.  In accordance with §8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes and consistent with the Town of Monroe Plan of Conservation and Development, no subdivision or resubdivision of land shall be approved unless proper provisions have been made for the preservation of open space in conjunction with such subdivision or resubdivision. Open space for natural habitat preservation (preserving natural features, wildlife habitat, scenic vistas, ridgelines and hilltops, significant trees, environmentally sensitive areas, stonewalls, areas beyond wetlands and watercourses a minimum of 100 feet), passive recreation and/or active recreation (parks and playgrounds) shall be formally reserved as part of all subdivisions and resubdivisions in places as deemed proper by the Commission. Such open spaces shall be preserved in perpetuity and conveyed to and accepted by the Town or other approved conservation non-profit organization with the recording of an approved subdivision map.  Land reserved for open spaces shall be of such size, location, shape, topography and general character as to be useful to satisfy the needs determined by the Commission. Proper pedestrian and vehicular access, parking, drainage, and environmental protection measures shall be provided for each such reservation. Open space shall abut and have direct access to a public street, unless such open space is proposed to be merged with an existing preserved open space parcel that has existing suitable street frontage and access as determined by the Commission.  Reservation of land shall conform to the Town Plan of Conservation and Development pertaining to parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and open space. 
B. 	Condition of Open Space Lands. The Commission, in requiring the provision of open space, shall consider the proper development of the town, the density of population and existing public open spaces in the vicinity of the subdivision. No loam, fill or natural growth shall be removed from the area reserved for open space, and no foreign matter shall be permanently placed upon said space unless required by the Commission in connection with the grading, construction or development of the subdivision or resubdivision. 
C. 	Area of Open Space Reservation.  All subdivision and resubdivision applications shall include a dedication of open space equal to or greater than fifteen (15%) percent of the total combined acreage of the subdivision property.  At least fifty (50%) percent of this open space shall be preserved as “Useable Open Space” containing: no wetlands (as defined by the Monroe Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations) or excessive slopes (greater than twenty (20%) percent). The Commission may partially waive this requirement and permit the required open space area to include additional areas of wetlands and/or excessive slopes where the total area of the property to be developed contains more than twenty-five (25%) percent of such areas.  In all cases the proportion of wetlands and/or excessive slopes that is included within the open space shall not exceed the proportion that exists within the total area to be developed. 
D. 	Method of Protection. The applicant shall submit with an application the necessary draft proposed map and legal instrument designed to ensure that designated open space lands shall be preserved in perpetuity.  The applicant shall be responsible for any filing fees due to the Office of the Town Clerk. 
E. 	Exclusions. The open space requirement set forth herein shall not apply if the transfer of all land in a subdivision of less than five (5) lots is to a parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, or first cousin for no consideration, or if the subdivision includes affordable housing as defined in CGS §8-39a, as amended, equal to twenty (20%) percent or more of the total housing to be constructed in said subdivision. 
F. 	Alternatives to Open Space Reservation On-Site.  The following alternatives to on-site open space reservation may be considered by the Commission only in instances where the Commission determines that the subdivision or resubdivision property does not possess lands suitable for open space reservation based on the criteria set forth in Subsections A through C above: 
(1) 	
Off-Site Land Reservation In lieu.  In lieu of the reservation of open space on-site, the Commission may approve the reservation of property located off-site which is equal to that otherwise required on-site, provided said property is also of suitable access, location and character as otherwise required if from the application property. 

(2) 	
Payment In lieu.  In lieu of reservation of open space on-site, the Commission may authorize a payment of a fee in lieu of, or may approve a combination of paying a fee to the Town of Monroe and preserving land in accordance with this Section, in lieu of part or the full requirement to preserve open space otherwise required by these Regulations. 

(3) 	
Market Value. Any in lieu fee payment, or combination of payment and the fair market value of the land to be reserved, shall be equal to ten (10) percent of the fair market value of the total land to be subdivided or resubdivided prior to the approval of same. 

(4) 	
Appraisal.  The fair market value shall be determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the applicant, the cost of which appraisal is to be paid by the applicant.  Each such appraisal shall be prepared in conformance with the current version of the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice and with such other standards as may be required by Connecticut State Law.  The Commission shall reserve the right to determine whether such standards have been met.  If the Commission finds that any appraisal was not prepared in conformance with such standards, it may reject such appraisal. 

(5) 	
In lieu Fee Payment. 

(a) 
At the option of the applicant, the applicant may submit: 

(i) 	
The entire payment may be provided to the Town in one lump sum prior to the recording of an approved Subdivision or Resubdivision Map with the Town Clerk; or 

(ii) 	
Equal fractional payments, the numerator of which is one and the denominator is the number of approved building lots in the subdivision or resubdivision, may be provided to the Town no later than the time of the sale of each approved building lot (i.e., prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance and certificate of occupancy). With this election, notation describing this requirement shall be placed on the final Subdivision or Resubdivision Map recorded in the Town Clerk's office. 



(b) 
When fractional payments are elected to be provided in lieu of reservation of open space land, the applicant shall execute a lien for each individual lot in a form and substance acceptable to the Commission and Town Attorney, including evidence of satisfactory Certificate of Title.  Each such lien shall place the Town with first priority and shall state the exact dollar amount to be paid to the Town at the time of sale of the individual lot.  Such liens shall be recorded on the Town of Monroe Land Records. The fee in lieu shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance and certificate of occupancy for each individual lot.  A release of lien for an individual lot shall be provided by the Town upon the Town’s receipt of the fee for that individual lot. The applicant shall be responsible for any filing fees due to the Office of the Town Clerk. 

(c) 
All payments of fee in lieu shall be deposited by the Town in the Open Space and Land Acquisition Fund (Chapter 60 of the Code of the Town of Monroe) as may be amended from time to time.  All fees shall be paid to the Town prior to the release of any subdivision or resubdivision bond. 




§ 111-304 Design of lots. [Effective 3-24-85] 
A. 	Lot size and arrangement. 
The area and width of the proposed lots shall conform to the Zoning Regulations of the Town of Monroe (8) and shall be of such shape, size, location and character that buildings can be constructed in conformity with the requirements of such regulations. The lots shall be as nearly rectangular as is practical. The design of lots to include unusable area consisting of unusual shapes and angles that deviate in the extreme from the practical rectangular design of the lot for the purposes of meeting lot standards of the Zoning Regulations, or maximizing the number of lots is not acceptable and shall constitute grounds for rejection of the proposal. 
(8) Editor’s Note: See Chapter 117 Zoning. 
B. 	Lot quality. 
The lots shall be of such character that they can be used for building purposes without danger to the health and safety of the public or the occupants. Any lot which is found to be unsuitable for buildings by reasons of water or flooding conditions, unsuitable soil, topography, ledge, rock, or other conditions shall be combined with another lot that is suitable or shall be marked "Not a Building Lot" on the final map until necessary improvements to the lot have been made and approved by the Commission. 
§ 111-305 Streetlights. 
A. 	When required by the Commission, the developer shall install streetlights at all intersections, including intersections of new streets with existing streets. Streetlights shall be in operation before any certificate of occupancy is issued. 
B. 	The developer shall be responsible for all operating' and maintenance costs until the streets are accepted by the town. Streetlighting installed shall be in accordance with standards established by the town or recommended standards for municipal streetlighting as established by the power company providing local service. 
§ 111-306 Marking of lot boundaries. 
All lots in a subdivision must be pinned or have monuments set at all points of significant changes in direction of the lot boundaries. Monuments will consist of concrete and pins will be of metallic composition with a minimum diameter of three-fourths (¾) inch and be forty-eight (48) inches long. Such pins or monuments shall be set with the top at grade level. 
§ 111-307 Pedestrian easements. 
In areas where the proposed street system does not conform to the anticipated pattern of pedestrian circulation, particularly in the vicinity of schools and playgrounds, the Commission may require the provision of ten-foot easements deeded to the town for the establishment of pedestrian ways. 
§ 111-308 Utility locations. 
All utility distribution and service lines shall be located underground with a depth and distance from the center line of pavement as specified in the Standard Specifications of the Town of Monroe or as directed by the Town Engineer and in compliance with all regulations of the Public Utilities Commission. 
§ 111-309 Reserved rights-of-way. 
When required by the Commission, the developer shall dedicate to the town reserved rights-of-way for future street connections to adjoining property susceptible to being subdivided. Such reserved rights­of-way shall be included in an agreement by and between the town and the developer and shall include slope rights fifteen (15) feet outside of the street rights-of-way. These rights-of-way shall have necessary radial intersections. Lots adjoining these rights-of-way shall be so laid out that access to a house or garage shall not be over the reserved right-of-way. When the adjoining property is subdivided, the developer of said adjoining property shall be required to connect to and build the street over the reserved right-of-way at his own expense. 
§ 111-310 Street trees. 
Street trees shall be planted on both sides of any street to be dedicated to the town. The developer may elect either to plant the trees himself or to contribute a sufficient sum to the Town Tree Planting Account to have such planting accomplished by the town. 
A. 	Tree specifications. The variety of tree shall be specified by the Town Tree Warden. Each tree shall be nursery grown, free from disease and bark damage, and shall have a minimum height of ten (10) feet and a straight trunk with a caliper of at least one and three-fourths (1¾) inches. The head of each tree shall be multiple-branched with the branches starting approximately six 
(6) feet above the ground. 
B. 	Location and spacing. Trees shall be planted on both sides of the street at locations designated by the Tree Warden. Trees shall be spaced approximately fifty (50) feet apart, subject to variations made necessary by driveways, street corners and walks. Existing trees along the proposed street which conform to these requirements may be used in lieu of new trees. 
C. 	Planting. A bare-rooted tree shall be planted in a hole twice the width of the spread of the roots. A balled tree shall be planted in a hole whose diameter exceeds that of the ball by at least twelve (12) inches. All holes shall be backfilled with good loam and shall be deep enough to set the trees on six (6) inches of loam at the bottom of the hole. All trees shall be planted as deep as they were growing at the nursery, and bare rooted trees shall be staked with three (3) wooden stakes one by one by six (1 x 1 x 6) inches and light cable secured with hose around the tree trunk. The soil around the base of the tree shall be formed into a saucer, and the tree shall be well watered at the time of the planting. 
D. 	Guaranty. Trees installed by the developer shall be guaranteed by the developer for the first growing season. Any tree which is not flourishing at the end of the first growing season shall be replaced by the developer at his expense. 
E. 	Street Tree Fund. [7-1-90] 
(1) 	
Instead of planting the trees himself, the developer may elect to have the town accomplish the planting. In such a case, the developer shall pay into the Reserve Street Tree Planting Account a sum calculated based upon the lineal foot rate for frontage feet along both sides of any new street in the subdivision. The amount as calculated by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deposited into said account prior to the time that a full release of subdivision bond is requested by the subdivider. 

(2) 	
Credit shall be given the developer for existing trees certified by the Tree Warden under the provisions of this section. One credit may be allowed for each deciduous tree so certified. Credits shall be valued at: one certified tree equals fifty frontage feet for the lot on which the certified tree is located. There shall be no more than two (2) credits per lot. Credits shall be allowed for trees within thirty-five (35) feet of the curb line, a minimum six (6) inches caliper and determined to be healthy and free of disease. 

(3) 	
The responsibility for planting the trees shall be assumed by the Public Works Department, and such planting shall be accomplished with the funds deposited in the Reserve Account. Requisitions against said account shall be authorized by the Selectman or his designee. 

(4) 	
The Commission between June I and June 30 of each year shall review the prevailing rates for the installation of street trees and shall establish the rate for calculation (referenced in Subsection E(1) above), effective July 1 -June 30 for the ensuing fiscal year. 



ARTICLE IV Building Occupancy and Accessibility [Effective August 15, 1978] 
§111-400 Preparation of Road – Certificates of Occupancy and Zoning Compliance. 
No Certificate of Occupancy and/or Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued for any structure unless the road of the approved subdivision giving access to the lots is prepared with 10" of sub-base gravel as specified in §§111-301H(1) and (2), as certified by the Town Engineer to the Commission. Prior to paving, the top four (4) inches of said sub-base gravel shall be removed and the base course of four 
(4) inches of compacted processed aggregate shall be constructed. The requirements of this section shall not pertain to lots fronting along an existing public street. 

ARTICLE V Authorization of Construction 
§ 111-500 Authorization of improvement construction and installation. 
Construction and installation of roads, drainage and other subdivision improvements required by these regulations shall not be deemed authorized until the proposed subdivision has received the approval of the Commission and the construction plans have been endorsed in accordance with §111-202B(1). 

ARTICLE VI Specifications 
§ 111-600 Standard Specifications; conflict of provisions. 
When "Standard Specifications" is used in these Subdivision Regulations, it shall refer to "Town of Monroe, Connecticut, Standard Specifications and Details," a copy of which is on file if: the office of the Town Clerk.(9) All construction will be done in accordance with these Standard Specifications. Whenever there is a conflict between the Standard Specifications and these Subdivision Regulations, the Subdivision Regulations shall govern. 
(9) Editor's Note: The Standard Specifications are also included as Chapter A120 of this code. 
ARTICLE VII Bond [Effective 7-25-81] 
§ 111-700 Partial release of performance bond. 
Fifty percent (50%) of the required subdivision improvement bond shall be eligible for release by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the full Commission and report of the Town Engineer stating that the following improvements have been satisfactorily completed: all construction including full drainage installation, full utility installation, complete sub-base and base course installation and surface course application. No partial release shall be considered by the Commission unless preceded by written request of the principal(s). 
§ 111-701 Final release of performance bond. 
The required subdivision improvement bond shall be released by an affirmative vote of the Commission, report of the Town Engineer stating that required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, and such other pertinent information or evaluation as the Commission may require. No release shall be considered by the Commission unless preceded by written request of the principal(s). 
A. 	Procedure to be followed except in the case of a subdivision where the bond covers the setting of monuments and marking of lot boundaries only: 
(1) 	
Following the review of release request and report of the Town Engineer, the Commission shall authorize public advertising of bond release. Advertising shall be by legal notice in a form prescribed by the Commission to be published in a daily newspaper having substantial circulation in the Town of Monroe. Said notice shall be published twice, the second publication ten (10) days after the first. 

(2) 	
Notice of requested bond release shall be sent by the principal, or his designated representative, to owners of record in the subdivision to whom lots have been conveyed. Said notice shall be in a form prescribed by the Commission. Said notice shall be postmarked no later than the date of first publication of legal notice and shall be sent by certified mail. Postmarked certified mail receipts shall be returned to the Planning and Zoning office for verification. 

(3) 	
Placards giving notice of the requested bond release shall be posted at the intersection of each subdivision street by the Commission to coincide with the publication of the first legal notice. 

(4) 	
The advertising and notice period shall consist of thirty (30) days commencing on the first day of publication of legal notice. 

(5) 	
Following the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, providing that no comment or unsatisfactory work has become apparent, the Commission shall recommend the road(s) to the Town Council for acceptance as town roads. The bond shall be eligible for release upon said acceptance. 

(6) 	
Should public comment be made or discovery of unsatisfactory work become apparent, said comment or work shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the Commission prior to recommendation for acceptance. 


§ 111-702 Maintenance bond and contract. 
Prior to the release of subdivision improvement bond, the Commission shall require the posting of a maintenance bond and signing of maintenance contract to cover correction of any defects in materials and workmanship, or omissions from approved plan, that may become apparent after release of the performance bond. Such bond shall be in an amount equal to twenty percent (20%) of the original amount of the performance bond and said bond and contract shall remain in effect for a minimum period of one (1) year from date of issue. Said bond shall be posted by irrevocable letter of credit through a recognized bank doing business in the State of Connecticut and with offices in the State of Connecticut, using form(s) prescribed by the Commission. No other form(s) shall be accepted. [10-1-87] 
§ 111-703 Release of maintenance bond. 
The maintenance bond shall be released by an affirmative vote of the Commission and report of the Town Engineer stating that required improvements have not become defective nor omissions in construction found. Upon release of maintenance bond, all further obligation towards subdivision improvements on the part of the principals shall end. 

ARTICLE VIII Waiver of Requirements [Effective 3-15-80] 
§ 111-800 Requests for Waiver. 
The Commission may waive requirements under these regulations by a three-quarters vote of all the members of the Commission in cases where conditions exist which affect the subject land and are not generally applicable to other land in the area, provided that the waiver is sought under one or more of the conditions contained in §111-801. No waiver shall be granted that will have a significant adverse effect on adjacent property or on public health and safety. The Commission shall state upon its records the reasons for which a waiver is granted. 
§ 111-801 Conditions for Waiver. 
The Commission may waive requirements of these regulations upon request of the applicant, or upon initiation by the Commission where owing to conditions especially affecting the subject land, a literal enforcement of these regulations would result in practical difficulty in its development, so that substantial justice will be done and the intent of these regulations secured. Conditions under which waivers may be considered shall be limited to the following: 
A. 	Topographic or geologic features making compliance with design standards as set forth in §§111-300 through 310 of these regulations impractical; 
B. 	Size and shape of property making compliance with design standards as set forth in §§111-300 through 310 of these regulations impractical; 
C. 	Inability of public utilities to provide service. 
In no case shall a waiver be granted without the Commission first receiving a report from the Town Engineer. 

ARTICLE IX Violations of Zoning Regulations [Effective 7-20-83] 
§ 111-900 Zoning Enforcement Officer; Report. 
Prior to the acceptance by the Commission of any application for subdivision or resubdivision, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the premises being the subject of the application and shall return a report to the Commission advising whether the premises are free of any violations of the Zoning Regulations (Chapter 117 from the Code of the Town of Monroe) or any violations which actually exist. No application shall be accepted by the Commission unless such report is received. 
§ 111-901 Effect of Violation. 
Should the Zoning Enforcement Officer find any violation(s} exist, no application shall be accepted by the Commission until such time as there is compliance with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Regulations, unless it is a stated intent of the purposes of the application to achieve compliance. 

ARTICLE X Water Supply Plan [Rev. 11-1, 1996] 
§111-1000 Method of water supply; requirements. 
Where any portion of property to be subdivided lies within a distance specified in §111-1001 of an existing public utility water supply main, all lots shall be supplied with water by the public utility, at no cost to the Town. Where any portion of property to be subdivided lies beyond a distance specified in §111-1001 of an existing public utility water supply main, the method of water supply shall be subject to the written approval of the Fire Marshal of the Town of Monroe, in consultation with other appropriate fire officials of the Town, and may be subject to such conditions which he may impose. The Fire Marshal, in his review, may take into consideration the requirement of public utility water supply, various alternative methods of water supply, or such other safeguards which may be deemed necessary to achieve fire safety. (For the purpose of this section: measurement of footage shall be from the existing water main terminus, along public road and/or approved subdivision road centerlines to a point perpendicular to the closest extremity of the subject property.) 
Statement of Purpose: The purpose of this section is to achieve continuing higher degrees of public safety through fire safety by providing more ready access to water supply and related appurtenances, while providing sources of potable water in the best interest of public health, as mandated in Chapter 126, Connecticut General Statutes. 
Waiver Provision: Upon written request by an applicant prior to approval of a subdivision application, the Commission shall consider waiving the requirement that the subdivision be supplied with water from a public utility at no cost to the Town (in the event of any part of the property to be subdivided lies within a distance specified in §111-1001 of an existing public utility water supply main) as to all or any part of the property to be subdivided which is the subject of the application. Said public water requirement may be waived subject to conditions as may be imposed by the Commission, in the event the Commission shall find that all of the following requirements are met: 
1. 	
That requiring public water would create an unusual hardship and substantial difficulty for the applicant, which arises out of conditions unique and particular to the property which is the subject of the application and the waiver request. 

2. 	
That the method of water supply proposed by the applicant as an alternative to public water complies with the provisions of this section relating to subdivisions which are not required to have a public water supply. 

3. 	
That the Monroe Fire Marshal approves unconditionally, the proposed alternate water supply plan and the alternate method of fire protection acceptable to the Fire Marshal. 

4. 	
That the proposed alternate plan of water supply will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, general welfare and property values of the general area and neighborhood. 

5. 	
That the future development of the property which is the subject of the application and/or of the surrounding area and the neighborhood as well as any anticipated future general needs of the surrounding area and Town in general will not be detrimentally effected by failure to supply public water to the subject property. 


The Commission's findings shall be stated upon the records of the Commission. 
§111-1001 Distance required for mandatory public water supply. 
A. 	Minimum requirement. The minimum distance for mandatory public water supply shall be five hundred (500) feet. 
B. 	Method of calculation. In the case of subdivisions of land resulting in four (4) or more lots the required minimum distance for mandatory public water supply shall be computed by multiplying the gross number of lots in the proposed subdivision by one half (0.5) times the minimum required street frontage of the underlying zone. 
C. 	Calculation of sectioned (phased) development. When a subdivision is to be performed in sections or phases, or has the potential to be performed in sections or phases the computation of distance (see Subsection B above) shall be made based upon the gross number of lots which can be attained from the parcel. 

ARTICLE XI Miscellaneous 
§ 111-1100 When effective; applicability. 
These regulations and any amendments thereto shall become effective on the date of adoption and shall apply to all subdivisions except as noted below: 
A. 	Approved plans. Subdivision plans previously approved by the Commission and filed with the Town Clerk in accordance with the regulations adopted March 23, 1956, as amended, shall continue to be governed by said regulations for a period of five (5) years following the date of approval. After this five (5) year period, these regulations and all amendments shall apply. 
B. 	Plans in process. Subdivision plans for which an application has been filed with the Commission prior to the adoption of these regulations shall, if such application results in an approved subdivision plan, be governed by the regulations adopted March 23, 1966, as amended. 
§ 111-1101 Amendment of provisions. 
These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
§ 111-1102 Severability. 
Invalidity of one (1) provision of these regulations shall not invalidate any other provision of these regulations. 

ADOPTED: MAY 25, 1988
REVISED: MARCH 8, 1989
REVISED: APRIL 25, 2001
REVISED: DECEMBER 12, 2001
REVISED: JANUARY 4, 2002
ADOPTED: SEPTEMBER 24, 2003
EFFECTIVE DATE: OCTOBER 1, 2003
REVISED: MAY 14, 2008
ADOPTED: MAY 14, 2008
EFFECTIVE DATE: JULY 1, 2008
REVISED: MAY 13, 2009
ADOPTED: MAY 13, 2009
EFFECTIVE DATE: MAY 28, 2009
REVISED: JULY 28, 2010
EFFECTIVE DATE: AUGUST 1, 2010
REVISED: JANUARY 27, 2016
EFFECTIVE DATE: FEBRUARY 1, 2016
http://monroect.qscend.com/content/343/351/371/960.aspx
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 2 of 32
Table of Contents
SECTION 1 TITLE AND AUTHORITY Pg 6
1.1 Purpose Of The Act and IWWC Regulations
1.2 Name Of Regulations
1.3 Inland Wetlands Commission and Its Charge
1.4 Amendments
1.5 Duties Of The Commission
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS as used in these Regulations Pg 7
SECTION 3 INVENTORY OF INLAND WETLANDS AND WATERCOURSES ………….…. Pg 11
3.1 “The Map” – What It Is, Where It Is Kept, How It Is Created
3.2 Commission’s Maintenance Of Map
3.3 Public Requests For Map Changes
3.4 Map Change Process
SECTION 4 PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT AND NON-REGULATED USES Pg 11
4.1 Activities Permitted As Of Right
4.2 Activities Non-Regulated
4.3 Activities Requiring Application Process
4.4 Determination Of Use Re Permitted Or Non-Regulated By Commission
4.5 Change Of Use/Permit Status
SECTION 5 ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE Pg 13
SECTION 6 ACTIVITIES REQUIRING COMMISSION ACTION Pg 13
6.1 Regulated Activities
6.2 Subdivision Recommendations
6.3 Violations
6.4 Amendments
6.5 “As Of Right”/Non-Regulated Activity Determinations
6.6 Appeals
SECTION 7 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS Pg 14
7.1 Application Form
7.2 Application Timing Regarding ZBA and P&Z
7.3 Sufficient and Factual Info. Required
7.4 Significant Activity Determined By Commission
7.5 Required Information In Applications
a. Applicant’s Contact Information
b. Owner’s Contact Information and Consent
c. Applicant’s Interest In The Land
d. Description Of The Land
e. Description Of Activity
f. Two Alternative Plans
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 3 of 32
SECTION 7 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS (continued) Pg 14
7.5 g. Site Plan and Details
h. Assessor’s Map
i. Site Walk Permission
j. D.E.E.P. Reporting Requirements
k. Other Information
l. Filing Fees
m. Authenticity Statement
n. Address Sign On Property
o. Storm Water Control Description
p. Bond Form
q. Verification of Easements
7.6 Discretionary Additional Information
a. More Detailed Site Plans
b. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance
c. Engineering Reports
d. Soil Type Mapping
e. Detailed Survey
f. Environmental Impact Study
g. Description Of Impacts and Alternatives
h. Analysis Of Fill Material
i. Description Of Management Practices
j. Recent Photographs
k. Aerial Photographs
l. Additional Reports
m. All Info. In Electronic Format
n. Report From Health Agency
7.7 Applications That Are Within 500 ft Of Adjoining Municipality
7.8 Copies Required
7.9 Conservation Easements or Preservation Restrictions
SECTION 8 APPLICATION PROCEDURES Pg 18
8.1 Applications, Appeals Submitted To IWC
8.2 Notice To Adjoining Towns
8.3 Notice To Water Company and Commissioner Of Public Health
8.4 Date Of Receipt Of Application
8.5 Additional Information
8.6 Public Inspection Of Information
8.7 Public Notice Of Application
a. Public Notice
b. Petition For Public Hearing
8.8 Amending Permits
8.9 Conditions Of Permit Renewal
SECTION 9 HEARINGS Pg 20
9.1 Public Hearings
a. When Public Hearings Are Held
b. Time Limitations
c. Public Inspection and Participation
d. Newspaper Notice
e. Notice To Neighbors
f. Notice To Others
g. Notice At The Site
h. Required Forms For Notices
i. Submission of Evidence
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 4 of 32
9.2 Regular Hearings
a. Public Attendance, No Participation
b. When Regular Hearings Are Required
c. Time Limitations
d. Public Inspection Of Materials
e. Submission of Evidence
SECTION 10 CONSIDERATIONS, STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR DECISION Pg 22
10.1 Considerations For Decision
a. Application and Documentation
b. Town Agents and Commissions
c. Outside Agencies
d. Public Comment
e. Plan Of Conservation & Development
10.2 Standards and Criteria For Decision
a. Environmental Impact
b. Applicants Purpose For Activity
c. Relationship Between Long and Short Term Impacts
d. Loss Of Wetland
e. Potential Damage
f. Impacts Outside Property Confines
g. Mitigation Measures
10.3 Feasible and Prudent Alternative Must Not Exist
10.4 Upon Denial, Suggestions For Alternatives
10.5 Other Limitations On Denial
10.6 Decision Must Be Based On Hearing
10.7 Reasons For Denial Without Prejudice
10.8 Fees Paid Before Permit Issued
10.9 Conflicts with Conservation Easement Restrictions
10.10 Appeals based on Conservation Easement Restrictions/Conflicts
SECTION 11 DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT Pg 24
11.1 The Decision
11.2 Decision Time Limits
a. Action On Applications Receiving Public Hearings
b. Actions On Applications With Regular Hearing
c. If Action Is Not Taken Within Allotted Time Period
11.3 State On Record Findings and Reasons
11.4 Notification Of Decision To Applicant and Public
11.5 Notification Of Decision To Town Agencies
11.6 Approval Expiration/Permit Issuance
11.7 Transfer To Another Party
11.8 Bond and Insurance
11.9 Resubmission Of Applications
11.10 General Provisions
11.11 Incomplete Applications
SECTION 12 AGENT APPROVALS Pg 25
12.1 Delegation By Commission
12.2 Notice Of Agent’s Actions
12.3 Appeal Of Agent’s Decision To Commission
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 5 of 32
SECTION 13 BOND AND INSURANCE Pg 26
13.1 Bond/Security May Be Required
13.2 Conditions
13.3 Release
13.4 Calling Of Bonds
13.5 Insurance
SECTION 14 ENFORCEMENT Pg 26
14.1 Enforcement Options By Agent
14.2 Agent & Commission Inspections
14.3 Violations and Enforcement Process By Commission and Agent
14.4 Enforcement Options By Commission
14.5 Enabling Legislation In CGS
14.6 Penalties
SECTION 15 AMENDMENTS Pg 28
15.1 When/Why Amendments Can Be Made
15.2 Existing Approvals and Extensions
15.3 Amendments To Regulations and Map
15.4 Map Amendment Application Requirements
15.5 Amendment Application Requirements
15.6 Watercourse Delineation
15.7 Public Hearing Notice and Procedure
15.8 Time Limits For Amendment Process
15.9 The Decision
SECTION 16 APPEALS Pg 29
SECTION 17 CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE Pg 30
SECTION 18 OTHER PERMITS Pg 30
SECTION 19 FEES Pg 30
19.1 Method Of Payment
19.2 Fee Paid Or Waiver To Be Obtained Before Permit Granted
19.3 Fee Not Refundable
19.4 Definitions Pursuant To This Section
19.5 Fee Schedule
19.6 Exemptions From Fees
19.7 Waiver Of Fees
SECTION 20 RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION Pg 32
SECTION 21 EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS Pg 32
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 6 of 32
Section 1
Title and Authority
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life.
Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the state for its citizens now and forever more.
The preservation and protection of the wetlands and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses, disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the state.
It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection, preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority; preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic, recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the state, the safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Monroe."
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission of the Town of Monroe, established in accordance with an ordinance adopted June 22, 1987 as further amended and hereby referred to as the Inland Wetlands Commission, shall implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these regulations.
1.5 The Inland Wetlands Commission (The Commission) shall enforce all provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act pursuant to sections 22a-28 et seq. inclusive, as same may be amended from time to time (hereinafter “the Act”) and shall:
a. Provide subdivision and re-subdivision reports with recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission;
b. Issue approvals/permits, or denials for regulated activities within all inland wetlands, watercourses, upland review areas and other regulated areas as further defined in these regulations and the Act;
c. Consider requested amendments to the regulations or the Town Wetlands Map;
d. Resolve issues relative to violations;
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 7 of 32
e. Provide determinations for uses termed “as of right” and/or “non-regulated” (See also Sec. 4.4);
f. Hear appeals relative to decisions of the wetlands agent;
g. Any other action for which the Commission has been granted authority.
Section 2
Definitions as used in these Regulations
2.1 "Act" - the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-28 et seq., inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS), as may be amended from time to time.
“Agency" - the Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Monroe.
“Agent” (“duly authorized agent”) - an individual designated by the Commission to carry out its functions and purposes. Said agent shall complete the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner pursuant to Connecticut General Statute section 22a-39, as amended.
"Bogs" - watercourses distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat deposits, poor or very poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
“Buffer” - an area determined by the Commission within the upland review area adjacent to the edge of a wetland and/or watercourse, whose purpose it is to provide a protective barrier. This barrier can be left as an undisturbed, natural area or can be of plants/materials that the Commission deems suitable.
“Clear-cutting” - the harvest or removal of timber in a fashion which removes substantially all trees two inches or greater in diameter at breast height from wetlands and watercourses, upland review area, or any other area which may affect wetlands and watercourses.
“Commission member” - a person appointed to the Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Monroe.
“Commission” - the Inland Wetlands Commission of Monroe.
“Commissioner of Environmental Protection" - the Commissioner of the State of Connecticut Department of Energy & Environmental Protection.
“Conservation Easement” - a restriction placed on a piece of property to protect its associated resources. The easement is voluntarily offered, lists the Town of Monroe as a party to the easement and constitutes a legally binding agreement that limits certain types of uses or prevents development from taking place on the land in perpetuity.
"Continual flow" - a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time; this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged succession.
“Deposit" - includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or emit.
"Discharge" - emission of any water, substance, or material into regulated areas whether or not such substance causes pollution.
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary and indispensable to sustain farming activities on the farm.
"Farming" shall be consistent with the definition as noted in section 1-1 (q) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
"Feasible" - able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound engineering principles.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 8 of 32
“Filling” – The act of adding and/or depositing any material (see definition for “Deposit”).
“Floodplain” - the area bordering a watercourse or wetland subject to flooding. The 100 year floodplain and special flood hazard areas have been determined for certain watercourses in the Flood Insurance Study, Town of Monroe, Connecticut prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and are shown on the official Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and flood hazard boundary maps of the Town as amended.
“Habitat” - areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
“Intermittent watercourses” - See “Watercourses”
“Intervene” - to submit a verified pleading in accordance with CGS section 22a-19.
“Intervenor” - a third party, authorized by the court, with interest in the proposed activity in an application, having the same rights to be heard and to receive copies of all documents presented by the applicant, his representatives and experts.
“Landscaping” - the modification of land surfaces and/or functions by the planting of trees, shrubs, plants, grass and other ground cover, and/or altering the contour of the ground. Such landscaping included in an application must be detailed and may include a written plan or report by an appropriate professional.
"License" - the whole or any part of any permit, certificate of approval or similar form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these regulations and the Act. (see also “Permit”).
"Management practice" - a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low so that fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
“Marshes” - watercourses that are distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and are dominated by soft-stemmed herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the ground surface throughout the year, and areas of open water six inches or more in depth are common, but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" - any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not limited to soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, mud, debris, peat, sand, refuse or waste.
“Mitigation” - actions taken to minimize the effect of wetland loss.
"Municipality" - the Town of Monroe
“Nurseries” - only the portions of land actually used for propagating trees, shrubs or other plants for transplanting, sale, or for use as stock for grafting.
"Permit" - the authorization to proceed with regulated activities as further defined in section 11.6.
See also “License”
"Permittee" - the person to whom a license has been issued.
"Person" - any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental agencies or subdivisions thereof.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 9 of 32
"Pollution" - harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials, discharged or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, land clearing or excavation activity and pesticides, herbicides and/or fertilizers not applied in compliance with federal, state and local standards.
"Prudent" - economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
"Regulated activity" - any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration, modification or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified activities in section 4 of these regulations. Regulated activity includes, but is not limited to any clearing, grubbing, filling, grading, re-grading, paving, excavating, constructing, depositing, or removing of material and/or discharging of storm water on the land within the established upland review areas as defined in these regulations. The Commission may determine that any other activity located within such upland review area or in any other area is likely to impact or affect wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
“Regulated Area” - any wetland or watercourse or upland review area as defined by these regulations.
“Regulations” - the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Monroe, as amended.
“Remediation” - the act or process of correcting a violation or unsatisfactory environmental condition In order to restore the land, wetlands and/or watercourses essentially to their original form and function.
“Restoration” - replacement of physical attributes to achieve conditions and/or functions that essentially match those in existence prior to any disturbance.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck, grub, clear, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" - any alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in odor, color, turbidity or taste.
“Significant impact” - substantial effect or change that may be the result of any activity, including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a substantial effect on the wetland or watercourse or on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed;
b. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the natural dynamics of a watercourse system;
c. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland wetland or watercourse to: support aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions;
d. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse;
e. Any activity which is likely to cause substantial diminution of flow of a natural watercourse or groundwater levels of the wetland or watercourse;
f. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a wetland or watercourse;
g. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 10 of 32
"Soil scientist" - an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by the federal Office of Personnel Management.
“Staff” - administrative and/or professional personnel employed by the town to administer the application and permitting process for the Commission and to advise the Commission on technical matters.
“Structures” - any man made objects, usually having a footing, foundation or bedding; Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires (a) location on, in or under the ground or water or, (b) attachment to something having location on the ground or water.
"Swamps" - watercourses that are distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs. and/or are areas with saturated soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes.
"Submerged lands" - those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or more frequent basis.
"Town" - the Town of Monroe
“Upland Review Area” - all areas adjacent to wetlands or watercourses including those that are not upgradient. These areas include but are not limited to:
a. Within 100 feet measured horizontally from the boundary of any wetland or watercourse;
b. Within 150 feet measured horizontally from the ordinary high water mark of the following watercourses:
1. Beardsley Brook
2. Boys halfway River
3. Copper Mill River
4. Great Pine Swamp
5. Halfway River
6. Housatonic River
7. Lake Zoar
8. Pequonnock River
9. Means Brook
10. Mill River
11. West Branch of the Pequonnock River
c. Within 200 feet measured horizontally from the mean high water mark of any public water supply reservoir;
d. Within 500 feet measured horizontally of any vernal pool or any area displaying some of the characteristics or indicators of a vernal pool;
e. Any area defined by the Commission or the Commission’s staff (after an initial review of materials submitted by an applicant) that is greater than the above mentioned distances due to special circumstances that may include, but shall not be limited to: steep slopes, impervious surfaces, topographical features, undersurface water, underground aquifers or any other reason the agency’s staff or agency may deem necessary to include for the purpose of conducting its review operations.
“Vernal Pool” - a seasonal or permanent watercourse in a depression or basin that lacks a fish population and supports or is capable of supporting breeding and development of amphibian or invertebrate species recognized as obligate to such watercourses.
"Waste" - sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands and watercourses of the Town.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 11 of 32
"Watercourses" - rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to the Act. “ Intermittent watercourses” shall be delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for a duration longer than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
"Wetlands" - watercourses and land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not regulated pursuant to the Act, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained, very poorly drained, alluvial and floodplain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated sites which possess an aquic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA Cooperative Soil Survey.
Section 3
Inventory of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
3.1 The inventory of wetlands and watercourses is shown on the map entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, Monroe, Connecticut" dated 1986, as amended, which delineates the general location and boundaries of inland wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk or the Inland Wetlands Commission.
In all cases, the precise location of wetlands and watercourses shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the distribution of wetland soil types and location of watercourses. For the purpose of mapping wetland areas, the Commission may use previous application data, field inspections, testing by a certified soil scientist, aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site observations or other information in determining the location of the boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 The Commission shall maintain a current inventory of regulated areas within the town. The Commission may amend its map as more accurate information becomes available. In the event that an applicant’s proof of wetlands delineation is different than that of the delineation on the Town map, the Commission may require that an application for a boundary map amendment be submitted in conjunction with the pertinent permit application pursuant to section 15 of these regulations.
3.3 Any person may also petition the Commission for an amendment to the map in writing, in the form of an application, pursuant to section 15.
3.4 All boundary map amendments are subject to the application and public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these regulations.
Section 4
Permitted Uses as of Right & Non-regulated Uses
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in wetlands and watercourses, as of right:
a. Grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of three acres or less essential
to the farming operation, and activities conducted by, or under the authority of, the Department of Environmental Protection for the purposes of wetland or watercourse restoration or enhancement or mosquito control. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to include:
1. Road construction or the erection of buildings not directly related to the farming operation,
2. Relocation of watercourses with continual flow,
3. Filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with continual flow,
4. Clear cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop land,
5. The mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands or watercourses for the purposes of sale.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 12 of 32
b. A residential home (a) for which a building permit has been issued or (b) on a subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission as of the effective date of promulgation of the municipal regulations pursuant to subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, which ever is earlier, and further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this subdivision unless the permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987;
c. Boat anchorage or mooring;
d. Uses incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property, such property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site permitted anywhere in the Town of Monroe. Such incidental uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or onto a wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse;
e. Construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for in chapter 102 of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in connection with public water supplies except as provided in sections 22a-401and 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes and;
f. Maintenance relating to any drainage pipe or man-made drainage way which existed before the effective date of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such pipe or drainage way is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subsection, "maintenance" means the removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine, while the pipe remains in place;
g. Withdrawal of water for fire purposes, Public Act 11-184.
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted, as nonregulated uses in wetlands and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse;
a. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish and wildlife;
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, golf courses, field trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin diving, camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shellfishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated;
c. Maintenance by the Town of Monroe or its agents of man-made drainage structures including detention and retention basins, manholes, catch basins, pipes, inlets and outlets, level spreaders, riprap stabilization areas, energy dissipation provisions, drainage ditches and/or swales, stormwater quality control structures, drywells, recharge structures. When access to said maintenance will directly impact wetlands or watercourses, the Commission must be consulted prior to commencing activity to determine if specific permitting is required.
d. The installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire department provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section, "dry hydrant" means a non-pressurized pipe system that: (A) Is readily accessible to fire department apparatus from a proximate public road, (B) provides for the withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department apparatus, and (C) is permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or stream that is a dependable source of water.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse area not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity by these regulations shall require a permit from the Commission or its agent in accordance with these regulations.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 13 of 32
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing a permitted operation/use or a non-regulated operation/use shall, prior to commencement of such operation/use, notify the Commission on a form provided by it, and provide the Commission with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine that the proposed operation/use is a (1) “permitted as of right” or (2) non-regulated use of a wetland or watercourse. The Commission or its agent shall determine whether the proposed operation/use or portion of it is either a (1) “permitted as of right” or non-regulated operation/use or that the proposed operation/use is (2) a regulated activity and a permit is required.
4.5 Any change of use of a property may void its “permitted as of right” and/or non-regulated status. In such case, the owner shall request a permit determination from the Commission.
Section 5
Activities Regulated Exclusively by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
5.1 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or regional board of education, pursuant to the Act.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to the Act.
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under section 22a-402 of the Connecticut General Statutes or a permit issued by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal order or permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or to carry out the activities authorized by said permit.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the state pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
Section 6
Activities Requiring Action by the Commission
6.1 Regulated Activities: Any person intending to conduct, or cause to be conducted, a regulated activity as defined in section 2 or to renew or amend a permit to conduct such activity shall, prior to the commencement of such activity, apply for a permit on a form provided by the Commission.
6.2 Subdivisions: Any person intending to subdivide or re-subdivide a previously approved subdivision or re-subdivision on land, or any portion of it, that contains regulated areas shall first apply to the Commission for a recommendation report to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further action as may be required by said commission.
6.3 Violations: Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior authorization of the Commission, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in section 14 of these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
6.4 Amendments: Any person(s) requesting amendments of these regulations and/or the Town Wetlands Map shall, in accordance with section 15.3 of these regulations, apply on a form provided by the Commission.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 14 of 32
6.5 “As of Right” Determinations: Any person(s) proposing to conduct uses that are permitted as of right shall, prior to the commencement of any activity, make a request to the Commission for a determination of compliance in accordance with section 4 of these regulations.
6.6 Appeals: Any person intending to appeal an action of the Inland Wetlands Agent shall apply for such appeal on a form provided by the Commission.
Section 7
Application Requirements
7.1 Applications shall contain the information described in this section and any other information the Commission may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in the office of the Inland Wetlands Commission.
7.2 If the land or any portion thereof involved in an application to the Town of Monroe Planning and Zoning Commission for subdivision or re-subdivision of land, or site plan, subdivision or re-subdivision changes, special permit, special exception or variance contains any regulated areas, the applicant shall, in accordance with section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as applicable, submit the appropriate application to the Commission in accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed determination thereon by the Commission. All information submitted in the application for review shall be considered factual. A failure of the applicant or his/her representative to provide correct and complete information shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of any permit under these regulations and/or for actions to be imposed in accordance with section 14 of these regulations.
7.4 A prospective applicant shall request the Commission to determine whether or not a proposed activity involves a significant impact.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing and/or on maps or drawings:
a. The applicant’s name, home and business mailing addresses, email addresses (if available) and telephone and fax numbers; if the applicant is a Limited Liability Corporation or a Corporation, the managing member’s or responsible corporate officer’s name, address, and telephone number;
b. The owner’s name(s), mailing address(s), telephone number(s) and written consent of the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject activity is proposed;
c. The applicant’s interest in the land;
d. The geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland wetlands, watercourses and upland review areas, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or watercourses and upland review areas to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. The purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. A minimum of two (2) other feasible alternative site plans that were considered relative to impacts on wetlands and watercourses and an explanation as to why the proposed plan was considered the most feasible and prudent alternative resulting in the least amount of impact to said wetlands and watercourses;
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 15 of 32
g. Site Plan showing:
1. Clear representation of the property boundaries, including survey dimensions/data for each property line and a notation referencing the source of the survey information;
2. A location map drawn to a minimum scale of 1” = 800’;
3. Title including the property address, name of the property owner, name of the applicant, indication of proposed activity, name of preparer, scale and date;
4. Appropriate live certification (embossed, or stamped seal with ink signature) by an appropriate licensed professional, including embossed seal with ink signature;
5. Certified depiction of wetlands & watercourses including flagging and flag numbers, including reference to a current soils report. The certification shall include a statement from a licensed land surveyor indicating that the wetlands were accurately located in the field;
6. Location of the “Designated Wetlands” as shown on the Town Wetlands Map;
7. Limits of all regulated upland review areas outlined in red;
8. Existing and proposed development including grading, two foot maximum interval contours, utilities, layout of buildings and paved areas, roadways, landscaping, drainage facilities, sedimentation and erosion control, a list of all regulated activities and appropriate dimensioning;
9. Existing land features such as rock walls, limits of wooded areas, large trees, rock outcroppings, wooded areas, specimen trees, large trees (30” caliper or greater) within 10 feet of the proposed limits of disturbance;
10. Proposed landscaping plantings (including seeding) to provide for enhancement, buffer establishment, food source, habitat, restoration, etc.
h. Copy of the Assessors map depicting parcel numbers of current abutting property owners of record, and all properties within 500 feet and names and mailing addresses of:
1. Adjacent land owners within 100’ as listed on the current Grand List of the Town;
2. Any municipality within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property, or through which municipality any significant portion of the traffic, sewage, drainage or runoff will pass if the project is approved as proposed;
3. The water company, if any, within whose watershed boundary any portion of the subject property exists.
i. Authorization for the members and agents of the Commission to inspect the subject land, at reasonable times, during the pendency of an application and for the life of the permit;
j. A completed D.E.E.P. reporting form which provides the Commissioner of the Department of Energy & Environmental Protection with information necessary to properly monitor the inventory of State wetlands. The reporting form shall be part of the application and the following information shall be provided by the applicant: name of applicant; location and name of the project; project and site description; area of wetlands and/or linear feet of watercourse proposed to be altered. The Commission shall be responsible for the remaining information and any corrections on the form which shall be promulgated in accordance with Regs., Conn. State Agencies §22a-39-14, as may be amended from time to time by the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses [sic] Regulations of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection [sic];
k. Any other information the Commission deems necessary to the understanding of what the applicant is proposing;
l. Submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in section 19 of these regulations;
m. Statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
n. An affidavit verifying the installation of a property address sign, including lot #, readable from the street and prominently posted at the site;
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 16 of 32
o. Description/narrative of storm water quality control measures chosen in accordance with the current CT Storm water Control Quality Manual and the CT Storm water Control Quality worksheet;
p. A completed bond form listing all wetlands related work and protective measures for same. Bond estimate forms are available with the application package in the Inland Wetlands office;
q. Verification of easements or other rights by adjacent or other land owners, where applicable.
7.6 At the discretion of the Commission or its agent, or when the proposed activity involves a significant activity, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the activity, including but not limited to the following may be required:
a. Site plans for the proposed land which will be affected as outlined in section 7.5 which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse boundaries, upland review areas, if applicable, delineated in red, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the land and the proposed activity prepared by an appropriate professional such as a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect and landscape architect licensed by the state of Connecticut or by such other qualified person;
b. Certificate or Conditional Certificate of Zoning Compliance;
c. Engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the proposed activity including any construction, structures, clearing, grubbing, filling, excavation, grading, regrading, paving, depositing, or removing of material, drainage, discharging of storm water or hydraulic modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control plan;
d. Mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the wetlands shall be delineated in the field with numbered flags by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s field delineation shall be depicted by flag numbers on the site plans;
e. A current A-2 survey and/or appropriately certified topographic survey which shall be in compliance with Connecticut General Statues, section 20 - 300b -11(d) “Standards for surveys and maps, Classes of Accuracy”. Appropriate certification relative to topographic information must provide for assurance that a submitted plan depicts accurate representation of actual field conditions (either generated or verified by field measurements). The contour interval shall be no greater than two feet, unless a variance from same is specifically requested and accepted by the Commission;
f. An environmental impact study by an appropriate professional (including but not limited to the following):
1. A description of the ecological communities and functions and values of the wetlands or watercourses involved with the application;
2. Effects of the proposed activity(ies) on these communities and wetland functions;
3. A narrative of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological communities and functions and values of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the application;
4. Alternative which would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
5. A description of why each alternative considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent.
g. A current Wetland Assessment by an appropriate professional (including but not limited to the following):
1. General site description;
2. Wetland, watercourse and plant inventories;
3. Wetland associated wildlife;
4. Wetland Functionality (rated in areas such as Ecological Integrity, Wildlife Habitat, Educational Potential, Visual/Aesthetic Quality, Flood Control, Nutrient Retention Opportunity/Removal Efficiency, Groundwater Recharge/Discharge);
5. Potential direct and indirect impacts of proposed activities on the wetlands;
6. Recommendations and/or possible alternatives to reduce impacts to regulated areas;
7. Mitigation Measures/Recommendations.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 17 of 32
h. Analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; The applicant may be required to describe any materials to be deposited on the affected property in terms of volume, composition, potential contaminants as revealed by laboratory analysis and the possibility of erosion or leaching from deposited materials;
i. Description of management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the proposed activity. Such measures could include but are not limited to plans or actions that:
1. Avoid destruction or diminution of the wetland and/or watercourse functions;
2. Create or enhance natural habitats and provide for recreational use;
3. Prevent flooding, degradation of water quality, erosion and sedimentation, and obstruction of drainage;
4. Safeguard water resources;
5. Provide for wetland/watercourse enhancement;
6. Restore or more than replace lost wetland/watercourse habitat and functions;
7. Are other legal measures designed to preserve and protect adjacent wetland and watercourse areas and natural buffers.
j. Submission of recent photographs of the areas in question from multiple angles sufficient to illustrate all pertinent aspects of the proposed activities and potential impacts;
k. Aerial photograph;
l. Additional reports by appropriate professionals, as referenced in section 19.5 of these regulations;
m. The Commission or its staff may require that the site plan and supporting documentation also be prepared and submitted in electronic versions, such as PDF files, power point files, or other formats compatible with software utilized by the Town;
n. A report from the Monroe Health District and/or appropriate agency having jurisdiction.
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. Any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality or otherwise required by law;
b. Traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. Sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality;
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Multiple copies of application materials as indicated on the application form shall be submitted to comprise a complete application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Commission.
7.9 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation restriction or preservation restriction, the following shall apply:
a. For purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in agricultural, farming, forest or open space use;
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 18 of 32
For purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of land, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision of the state, or in any order of taking of such land whose purpose is to preserve historically significant structures or sites;
b. No person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing building or for exterior work that does not expand or alter the footprint of such existing building, relating to that portion of the property that is subject to a conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides proof that the applicant has provided written notice of an application, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction, including but not limited to any State Agency that holds such restriction, not later than sixty days prior to the filing of the permit application;
c. In lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.9c, the applicant may submit a letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent, verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
Section 8
Application Procedures
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests or appeals of actions of the agent shall be submitted to the Inland Wetlands Commission of the Town of Monroe. Appeals on actions of the Commission shall be made in accordance with section 16 of these regulations.
8.2 The Commission shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes section 8-7d(f), notify the Town Clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
a. Any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within five hundred feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. A significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. A significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the adjoining municipality;
d. Water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice of the pendency of such application shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal, request or plan.
8.3 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of a water company as defined in section 22-42f of the Connecticut General Statutes, the applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company and the Commissioner of Public Health in a format prescribed by said commissioner provided such water company or said Commissioner has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed not later than seven days after the date of the application. For purposes of this subsection the date of the application shall be the same as the date of receipt as defined in Section 8 “Application Procedures”. The water company and the Commissioner of Public Health through a representative, may appear and be heard at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to the Commission.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 19 of 32
8.4 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission, immediately following the day of submission to the Commission or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal. There must be a minimum of 24 hours between the application submission and the meeting of the Commission.
8.5 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional information as the Commission may reasonably require. Requests for such additional information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these regulations.
8.6 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.7 Public Notice of Application:
a. The Commission shall cause to be published, in a newspaper having general circulation within the Town of Monroe, within fifteen (15) days after the submission of an application, a notice indicating receipt of an application to conduct a regulated activity. For the purposes of this section, the submission date shall be the date the agent received the application, not the date of receipt of the application by the Commission;
b. The notice shall provide for the public to petition for a public hearing on the application and the Commission must consider the petition if it is endorsed by at least twenty-five (25) persons who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the regulated activity is proposed, and received no later than fourteen (14) days after the publication date of such notice. The Commission may hold the meeting to determine whether or not a public hearing will be held. If a valid petition is received in accordance with this section, a public hearing shall be held.
8.8 Any application to amend an existing permit shall be on the same form as a new application and filed with the Commission in accordance with section 8 of these regulations prior to the expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing permit shall contain the information required under section 7 of these regulations provided:
a. The application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior permit;
b. The application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. The application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated or completed within the time specified in the permit; and if requesting an amendment, why changes to the original permit are needed;
d. The application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or affecting wetlands, watercourses or upland review areas or the use of the land for which the permit was issued;
e. The Commission may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by not interrupting the activity.
8.9 Application for Permit Renewals:
a. Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon written request of the permit holder unless the Commission finds that:
1. There has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application;
2. There is an increased potential for impact to the wetlands or watercourses due to the requested extension of time;
3. There is an apparent need for an enforcement action or there is an enforcement action pending with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 20 of 32
b. Any application for renewal must be received in the Inland Wetlands office prior to the regularly scheduled meeting before expiration of said permit;
c. Any permit issued for the development of property for which an approval is required under chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a of the Act shall be valid until the approval granted under such chapter expires or for ten years, whichever is earlier. Any permit issued under this section for any activity for which an approval is not required under the Act shall be valid for not less than two years and not more than five years. Any such permit shall be renewed upon request of the permit holder unless the agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued, provided no permit may be valid for more than ten years;
d. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.9(c), any permit issued prior to July 1, 2011, that has not expired prior to May 9, 2011, shall expire not less than nine years after the date of such approval. Any such permit shall be renewed upon request of the permit holder unless the agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances that requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued, provided no such permit shall be valid for more than fourteen years.
8.10 The Commission may charge fees sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on applications involving issues that the Commission determines by a majority vote that additional analysis is required in order to assist the Commission regarding information submitted by the Applicant. Such fees may include, but are not limited to, the cost of retaining appropriate professionals to analyze, review, and report on issues warranting such analysis. Said fees will be established by the Commission and/or its agent, based on preliminary estimates from such professionals, and said estimate of fees times 150% will be paid to the Town by the applicant. The fees shall be paid pursuant to section 19 of these regulations within 10 days of the applicant’s receipt or notice of the amount due. Any portion of the fees in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant after the publication of the Commission’s decision. The failure by the applicant to make this payment as required shall render the application incomplete. Therefore, said application shall be denied by the Commission or withdrawn by the applicant.
Section 9
Hearings
9.1 Public Hearings:
a. The Commission shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless:
1. The Commission determines that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses or;
2. A petition is submitted as detailed in Public Notice of Application (section 8.7 of these regulations) as they may be amended or;
3. The Commission finds that a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest or;
4. A public hearing is mandatory as detailed in section 15.7.
b. Time Limitations:
1. Public hearings shall be initiated no later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application;
2. The hearing shall be completed within thirty five (35) days of its commencement;
3. Action shall be taken on such application within thirty-five (35) days after the completion of a public hearing;
4. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this section provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days or may withdraw such application, petition, request or appeal.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 21 of 32
c. Public Inspection and Participation: All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection at the Inland Wetlands office prior to the hearing. At such public hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard;
d. Newspaper Notice: Notice of public hearings shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is located;
e. Notice to Neighbors: The Applicant shall give notice of the public hearing to all land owners within 100’ of the property by certified mail no less than fifteen days prior to the day of the hearing. In giving such notice the applicant shall rely on the last completed grand list for the town. Such notice shall be at the expense of the applicant. Failure of the above referenced landowners to receive notice shall not deprive the Commission of jurisdiction to hear and act on the application and shall not be grounds for appeal. Verification that the notice was sent via certified mail/return receipt requested must be provided;
f. Notice to Others: In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of Subsections 8.2 and 8.3 of these regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the Town Clerk of the adjoining municipality(ies), water companies and the Commissioner of Public Health have received notice of the pendency of the application. Proof of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record;
g. Notice at the Site: A sign shall be posted on each parcel respective to the application indicating the general nature of the proposed activity for which a permit is being sought and shall state the date, time and place of the public hearing. Such sign will be provided by the applicant and shall be weather resistant, no smaller than two square feet and no greater than four square feet, visible and legible to passers-by on the principal street on which the property is located. The sign shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the public hearing and shall remain in place until the public hearing is closed at which time the sign will be removed;
h. Required forms for notices: The Commission or its designated agent shall specify the forms to be used for required notifications;
i. Submission of Evidence:
1. All documentary evidence submitted by the applicant and/or respective consultants shall be filed with the Commission and available for public inspection no less than five (5) business days prior to the day of the hearing or reconvening thereof;
2. All other documentary evidence in the proceeding shall be filed on or before the date on which the public hearing is commenced or reconvened;
3. Should the public hearing extend to the last meeting within the final statutory limits:
a. The applicant and/or respective consultants shall file all additional documentation with the Commission no later than seven (7) business days prior to said meeting;
b. All other persons wishing to present documentary evidence in the proceeding shall file such evidence no later than two (2) business days prior to the scheduled meeting.
4. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Commission, in the exercise of its discretion, from receiving evidence at any time prior to the close of the hearing. However, the Commission may refuse to consider such information and documentary evidence that is submitted after the aforesaid dates if it determines that the Commission’s members, staff or consultants would not have sufficient time to review such information or evidence properly or thoroughly before the public hearing is closed;
5. The Commission and/or its agent is not responsible for providing notification of new documentary evidence received.
9.2 Regular Hearings:
a. Regular Hearings are open for public attendance, noting that the public is not permitted to submit data or provide testimony or comment;
b. Regular Hearings will be held for all applications other than those requiring a Public Hearing or agent approvals;
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 22 of 32
c. Time Limitations:
1. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of an application;
2. Action on applications considered at regular hearings shall be taken within 65 days of receipt of the application;
3. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of the periods specified in this Subsection provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days or may withdraw such application, petition, request or appeal.
d. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection at the Inland Wetlands office;
e. Submission of Evidence:
1. All documentary evidence submitted by the applicant and/or respective consultants shall be filed with the Commission and available for public inspection no less than five (5) business days prior to the day of the hearing or reconvening thereof;
2. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Commission, in the exercise of its discretion, from receiving evidence at any time prior to the close of the hearing. However, the Commission may refuse to consider such information and documentary evidence that is submitted after the aforesaid dates if it determines that the Commission’s members, staff or consultants would not have sufficient time to review such information or evidence properly or thoroughly before the public hearing is closed;
3. The Commission and/or its agent is not responsible for providing notification of new documentary evidence received.
Section 10
Considerations, Standards and Criteria for Decision
10.1 Considerations for Decision:
The Commission may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation;
b. Reports from other agencies, commissions and officials including but not limited to the:
1. Monroe Conservation Commission
2. Monroe Planning and Zoning Commission
3. Monroe Town Engineer
4. Monroe and/or State Health Department
5. Applicable state agencies and/or commissions
c. Comments on any application from agencies including but not limited to the Southwest Conservation District, the Connecticut Metropolitan Council of Government, Aquarion Water Company or other regional organizations; agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity, or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies or investigations ;
d. For an application for which a public hearing is held, public comments, evidence and testimony;
e. The current Plan of Conservation and Development for the Town of Monroe.
Non-receipt of comments from state agencies and commissions listed in l0.l. b and c above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the decision of the Commission.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 23 of 32
10.2 Standards and Criteria for Decision
In carrying out the purposes and policies of the Act, including matters relating to regulating, permitting and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Commission shall take into consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, which may include, but not be limited to:
a. The environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses including the effects on the inland wetland's and watercourse's;
b. The applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c. The relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d. Irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
e. The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed regulated activity;
f. Impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands and watercourses;
g. Measures which would mitigate the impact of any aspect of the proposed regulated activity.
10.3 In the case of an application which included a public hearing pursuant to a decision by the Commission that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Commission finds on the basis of the record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. However, a conclusion that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a presumption that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that the application is consistent with the purposes and policies of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town of Monroe and the Act. In making this decision, the Commission shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this section of these regulations. The decision and the reasons therefore shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Commission shall propose on the record in writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate. This subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant in proving entitlement to the permit or in presenting alternatives to the proposed regulated activity.
10.5 The Commission shall not deny or condition an application for a regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact or effect on aquatic, plant, or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses. For purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands and watercourses” includes aquatic, plant or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas or environments in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 In reaching its decision on any application, the Commission shall base its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Commission in its decision.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 24 of 32
10.7 An application may be denied without prejudice when a new/revised map and/or other new/revised information is submitted on the consideration deadline day, the last day of the hearing, or too close to the aforementioned days to permit adequate review of said information/map by commissioners, staff and/or public.
10.8 No permit to commence activity shall be issued until all applicable fees are paid.
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant to subsection 7.9c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof to the inland wetlands commission that granting of the permit application will violate the terms of the restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction, the inland wetlands commission shall not grant the permit approval.
10.10 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of subsections 7.9c or 7.9d of these regulations, the party holding the conservation or preservation restriction may, not later than fifteen days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland wetlands commission, subject to the rules and regulations of such commission relating to appeals. The inland wetlands commission shall reverse the permit approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such restriction.
Section 11
Decision Process and Permit
11.1 The Commission, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to section 12 of these regulations, may, in accordance with section 10 of these regulations, grant the application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources.
11.2 Decision Time Limits
a. Action shall be taken on applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing unless extensions are granted as specified in section 9.1b of these regulations;
b. In the absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65) days from the date of receipt of the application unless extensions are granted as specified in section 9.2 of these regulations;
c. If action is not taken within the time periods including extensions as specified in these regulations, the application shall be withdrawn by the applicant or shall be denied by the Commission. The failure of the Commission to act within any time period specified in this subsection shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the application, as further detailed in CGS 22a-42a(c).
11.3 The Commission shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision.
11.4 The Commission shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Commission shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice is not published within such fifteen day period, the applicant may provide for the publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetlands permit also involves an activity which requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special exception, under sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the Commission shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of Monroe Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the decision thereon.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 25 of 32
11.6 Approval Expiration/Permit Issuance: The conditions of an approval must be met and the final plans accepted and signed by the Wetlands Agent within 270 days of the date of approval or said approval becomes null and void. The aforementioned plans (once stamped, signed and dated), and a completed permit form, constitute a permit.
11.7 No permit issued by the Commission shall be assigned or transferred without the written permission of the Commission.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these regulations, the Commission may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 If the Commission denies an application, the application shall not be resubmitted unless the proposal is modified in a fashion that reduces the impacts which resulted in the denial and/ or addresses the reason for the denial. Such re-submission shall take the form of a new application.
11.10 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. No permits to commence construction shall be issued until all the appropriate pre-construction conditions of the approval have been met;
b. The Commission has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked;
c. All permits issued by the Commission are subject to and do not derogate any present or future rights or powers of the Commission or the Town of Monroe and convey no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
d. If the activity authorized by the Commission’s permit also involves an activity which requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special exception under sections 8-3g, 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes, no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such other approval(s) is (are) obtained;
e. In conducting the authorized activities, the permittee shall implement Best Management Practices (BMP’s) consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as needed to control storm water discharges, to prevent erosion and sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses;
f. Upon the completion of permitted activities, the Commission or its agent may require the installation of permanent markers indicating “Regulated Area”. Details of specific marker requirements may be obtained from the Inland Wetlands office.
11.11 An application deemed incomplete by the Commission shall be withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Commission.
Section 12
Agent Approvals
12 .1 The Commission may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or extend a permit for an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such Commission finds that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater than a minimal impact on any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall be made on a form provided by the Commission and shall contain the information listed under section 7.5 of these regulations and any other information the Commission may reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing applications prescribed in sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may approve or extend such an activity at any time, and may require a bond to assure acceptable completion of approved activity. The value of the bond may be determined by the Commission and/or its Agent upon assessment of the project, generally not to exceed $1,000.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 26 of 32
Any bond exceeding $1,000 must be approved by the Commission. The Commission has the right to control the requirements of any bond in accordance with section 13 of these regulations.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such Agent shall, within ten days of the date of such approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the administrative approval in a newspaper having a general circulation in the town of Monroe and/or the towns in which the activity may have an effect.
12.3 Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Commission within fifteen days after the publication date of the notice and the Commission shall consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Commission or its Agent of such appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Commission to consider the subject appeal. The Commission shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject the decision of its Agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with section 7 of these regulations.
Section 13
Bond and Insurance
13.1 Upon approval of the application and prior to issuance of a permit, the Commission may require as a permit condition the filing of a bond (or other form of financial security) with such surety in such amount and in a form approved by the Commission, and in such amount, as may be approved by the Commission, to guarantee that the applicant(s) and/or property owner(s) will complete all required work. A cash bond is the form of security generally preferable to the Commission, but the Commission may accept or require another form of security. The security shall guarantee, without limitation, erosion and sediment control, wetlands remediation, engineering and/or inspection fees, public noticing and costs associated with a cease and desist order and/or notice of violation.
13.2 The bond/security shall be conditioned on compliance with the provisions of these regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
13.3 The bond shall be released to the permittee upon receipt by the Commission of a written request from the applicant and receipt of the bond report/recommendation from the Inland wetlands Agent including evidence that the proposed activities have been completed in a satisfactory manner. The Commission may, at its own discretion, release a portion of the bond amount if it is of the opinion that the permitted activities have been substantially completed and only a minor portion of the activities remain to be completed.
13.4 The bond can be called by the Commission to correct violations or compliance problems on a permitted site in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of these regulations.
13.5 The Commission may require the applicant to certify that it has public liability insurance against liability which might result from the proposed operation or use of the wetlands or watercourses covering any and all damage which might occur within two (2) years of completion of such operations, in an amount commensurate with the regulated activity.
Section 14
Enforcement
14.1 The Commission may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the Commission or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision under section 10.2 of these regulations.
14.2 The Commission or its agent may make regular inspections at reasonable hours of all regulated activities for which permits have been issued under these regulations with the consent of the property owner or the authorized agent of the owner during the life of the permit.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 27 of 32
14.3 If the Commission or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, is exceeding the conditions or limitations placed on a permit or the scope of work as set forth in the application, or has obtained a permit through deception or through inaccurate information as to either the activity or its environmental impact, the Commission or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately cease such activity and/or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar days of the issuance of such order the Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not remain in effect. The Commission shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn. The Commission shall publish notice of its decision in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Commission affirms, revises or withdraws the order.
The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended;
b. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the Commission, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation including, without limitation, halting work in regulated areas (wetlands, watercourses and upland review areas). The Commission may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order provided in section 14.4.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by law, including but not limited to, recording violations on the Town Land Records after notice and hearing, in accordance with Connecticut General Statues, as amended.
14.4 If it finds that the permittee has not complied with the terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work as set forth in the application including application plans, the Commission may:
a. Suspend or revoke a permit. Prior to revoking or suspending any permit, the Commission shall issue notice to the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct which warrants the intended action. The Commission shall hold a hearing to provide the permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any and all requirements for retention of the permit. The permittee shall be notified of the Commission’s decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Commission shall publish notice of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the municipality;
b. Bring an action in Superior Court, pursuant to CGS section 22a-44 for the collection of all fines and penalties, together with all costs, fees and expense of such collection, including reasonable attorney's fees;
c. Bring an action pursuant to CGS section 22a-44 in the Superior Court, in all cases of continuing violation, for an order restraining such continuing violation and for such orders directing that the violation be corrected or removed as the Commission, pursuant to a public hearing, deems necessary and appropriate for the protection of inland wetlands and watercourses, and for the costs, fees and expenses of such action together with reasonable attorney's fees.
14.5 Nothing in these regulations shall be taken as limiting or excluding such other remedies as are available to the Commission for the protection of inland wetlands and watercourses, including, but not limited to, suits under CGS sections 22a-14 through 22a-20 for the protection of natural resources, and any legal or equitable powers or remedies that may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 28 of 32
14.6 Any person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any violation of any provision of these regulations may be fined the maximum allowed by law as per CGS section 22a-44, and to such other penalties as the law may provide. Each violation of said regulations shall be a separate and distinct offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day’s continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation. The Superior Court, in an action brought by the Commission, shall have jurisdiction to restrain a continuing violation of said regulations and to issue orders directing the violation to be corrected or removed. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violator.
Section 15
Amendments
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of Monroe as may be amended, from time to time (“the Map”), by the Commission in accordance with changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut Department of Energy & Environmental Protection, or as new information regarding soils and inland wetlands and watercourses becomes available.
15.2 An application filed with the Commission which is in conformance with the applicable inland wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetlands regulations, including changes to setbacks, upland review dimension requirements and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt. Any appeal of the decision of the Commission with respect to such application shall not be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to:
a. The establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of inland wetlands or watercourses;
b. Any change in regulations necessary to make such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt;
c. Applications dated after the adoption of these regulations as they may be amended from time to time for any regulated activity on the same property as previously submitted application(s).
15.3 These regulations and the Map shall be amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Commission shall provide the Commissioner of Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Applications for amendments to the Map shall contain at least the following information:
a. The petitioner's and/or applicant’s name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. The address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. The owner's name (if not the petitioner), mailing address, telephone number, and written consent to the proposed action set forth in the petition;
d. The petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition;
e. Map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in accurate detail and color coded together with the documentation supporting such proposed boundary locations;
f. The reasons for the requested action.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 29 of 32
15.5 Any person who submits an application to amend the Map shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such proof shall include a comprehensive soils report by a certified soil scientist accompanied by a survey plan accurately depicting and including appropriate certification of all wetland areas in comparison with the location of “designated wetlands” (as currently shown on the TownWetland Map.) In addition, such proof may also include professional interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Commission. If such person is the owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the subject of the petition, or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or purchaser, in addition to the information required in section 15.4, the application shall include:
a. The name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. The names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. Documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land. Such documentation shall at a minimum include the current report of the soil scientist documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of wetland soil types;
d. Map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
In the event that an applicant’s proof of wetlands delineation is different than that of the delineation on the Town map, the Commission may require an application for a boundary map amendment be submitted prior to or in conjunction with the pertinent permit application. Such proof may also include aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping or other available information.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a certified soil scientist.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the regulations and the Map. Notice of the hearing shall be published in accordance with the provisions of section 9.1 of these regulations, as they may be amended. A copy of such proposed boundary change shall be filed in the office of the town clerk for public inspection at least ten days before such hearing. All materials including maps and documents relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
15.8 The Commission shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five days after receipt of such petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five days after commencement. The Commission shall act upon the changes requested in such petition within sixty-five days after completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified in this subsection, provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than sixty-five days, or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the Commission to act within any time period specified in this subsection or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Commission shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
Section 16
Appeals
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Commission shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Commission and the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 30 of 32
Section 17
Conflict and Severance
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
Section 18
Other Permits
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Monroe, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States including any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Energy & Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant.
Section 19
Fees
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Commission by check or money order payable to the Town of Monroe at the time the application is filed with the Commission.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Commission unless the correct application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Commission pursuant to subsection 19.7 of these regulations.
19.3 Fees are not refundable except as noted otherwise in these regulations.
19.4 Definitions. As used in this section:
"Residential Uses" means activities carried out on property developed for permanent housing or being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
"Commercial uses" means activities carried out on property developed for industry, commerce, trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be occupied for such purposes, for profit or nonprofit.
"Other uses" means activities other than residential uses or commercial uses.
19.5 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
a. Regulated Activities:
Residential Uses ........... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ $300.00
Plus Fee from Schedule A, B and C
Commercial Uses.......... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ $500.00
Plus Fee from Schedule A, B and C
All Other Uses .. ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ $500.00
Plus Fee from Schedule A, B and C
Approval by Duly Authorized Agent ........ ............ ............ ............ $100.00
Plus Schedule C
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 31 of 32
Appeal of Duly Authorized Agent Decision .......... ............ ............ $200.00
Plus Schedule C
(The fee for an appeal of an authorized agent decision shall be reimbursed upon reversal of such Agent Approval decision by the Commission. Said reimbursement shall not include the state D.E.E.P. surcharge fee)
b. Permitted and Nonregulated Uses :
Permitted Uses as of Right ........ ............ ............ ............……………… n/a
Nonregulated Uses ...... ............ ............ ............ ............……………… n/a
c. Regulation Amendment Petitions.. ............ ............ ............….. ......…………….$500
(Does not include Notices to or Regulation Advisories from D.E.E.P.)
d. Map Amendment Petitions: ........... ............ ............ ............ ............….. ......…..$150
Plus Fee from Schedule C
e. Modification of Issued Permit: ....... ............ ............ ............ ............….. ......…..$100
Plus Schedule A and C
f. Subdivision reports/recommendations* with regulated activity……………..$20 per lot,
................ ............ ............ ............………...Residential $100 minimum, $300 max
…………………………………………………Commercial $100 minimum, $500 max
Subdivision reports/recommendations with no regulated activity…………………..n/a
* Evaluation and report that is sent to the Planning and Zoning Commission as part of a subdivision or resubdivision process.
g. Renewal of Issued Permit…………………………………………………………. …$100
Plus Schedule C
SCHEDULE A. Additional Fees
a. Regular Hearing ... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............…….n/a
b. Public Hearing...... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............…..$200
c. Professional Analysis Fee. ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ...Varies
The Commission may charge fees sufficient to cover the cost of reviewing and acting on applications involving issues that the Commission determines by a majority vote that additional analysis is required in order to assist the Commission regarding information submitted by the Applicant. Such fees may include, but are not limited to, the cost of retaining appropriate professionals to analyze, review, and report on issues warranting such analysis. Said fees will be established by the Commission and/or its agent, based on preliminary estimates from such professionals, and said estimate of fees times 150% will be paid to the Town by the applicant. The fees shall be paid pursuant to section 19 of these regulations within 10 days of the applicant’s receipt or notice of the amount due. Any portion of the fees in excess of the actual cost shall be refunded to the applicant after the publication of the Commission’s decision. The failure by the applicant to make this payment as required shall render the application incomplete. Therefore, said application shall be denied by the Commission or withdrawn by the applicant.
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations Page 32 of 32
SCHEDULE B. Additional Fees for areas of regulated activity. For the purpose of calculating the permit application fee, the area in Schedule B is the total area of wetlands, watercourses and upland review areas proposed to be disturbed. These fees shall be added to the fees as indicated in section 19.5a (Fee Schedule).
SQUARE FEET of DISTURBED AREA
a. Less than 1,000 ........... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............…...$ 50
b. 1,000 to 5,000.............. ............ ……………….……….…............ ............…..$100
c. More than 5,000 .......... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............…..$100
Plus $5.00 for every additional 5,000 sq. ft., rounded up.
SCHEDULE C. Additional fees for D.E.E.P. reporting.....………………………………..$ 60
(or as amended by Connecticut General Statute)
State Environmental Fee, established by the State Department of Energy & Environmental Protection
19.6 Exemption: Boards, Commissions, Councils and Departments of the Town of Monroe are exempt from all fee requirements.
19.7 Waiver: The applicant may petition the Commission to waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and circumstances the Commission should consider in its determination under this subsection. The Commission may waive all or part of the application fee if the Commission determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the environment or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount of the application fee;
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the Town for reviewing and processing the application; or
c. The applicant has shown good cause.
The Commission shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
Section 20
Records Retention and Disposition
20.1 The Agency and the Town Clerk for the Town of Monroe shall retain complete administrative records of Agency actions and dispose of such records in accordance with the retention/disposition schedules set forth in the By-laws of the Inland Wetlands Commission.
Section 21
Effective Date of Regulations
21.1 These regulations are effective upon adoption and filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and publication of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of Monroe.




