CODE OF THE CITY OF NEW HAVEN, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
VOLUME II 
CHARTER 
SPECIAL LAWS 
GENERAL ORDINANCES 
AND 
TECHNICAL ORDINANCES 
____________ 
Adopted, April 2, 1962 
Approved by the Mayor April 5, 1962 
Effective, June 1, 1962 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Aldermen 
Reprinted 1985 
Republished 2009 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
This Code of the City of New Haven consists of two volumes divided into five titles. Volume I has been reserved. Volume II contains Title I, the City Charter; Title II, a compilation of Special Laws affecting the City; Title III, a Code of General Ordinances; Title IV, the Building Code of the City; and Title V, the Housing Code. As expressed in Title III, section 1-1, Titles III, IV and V collectively comprise the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven. 
Titles III, IV and V represent a new and comprehensive codification which, as expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, supersedes all ordinances not included therein or expressly saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance. This Code contains only ordinances of a general and permanent nature prescribed for and affecting the public as a whole. Special ordinances or ordinances dealing with only a portion of the inhabitants of the City, rather than all of them, or relating to special purposes, such as the ordinances levying special assessments, providing for bond issues, paving, vacating and opening specified streets, etc., are not included. For a more specific enumeration of the types of ordinances which are not included, see Section 3 of the Adopting Ordinance. All of the ordinances have been classified as to subject matter, edited, revised and in many instances rewritten. 
Volume II of the Code was reprinted in 1985, and this reprinted volume merely provided a replacement volume without alteration to the contents of the Code. In 2006 the city initiated a review and recodification of selected chapters and portions of chapters of the Code under the direction of Attorney Mary F. Haddon. The publisher would like to gratefully thank Thomas W. Ude, Jr., Corporation Counsel, and Sally Brown, Deputy City Clerk, for their assistance in this project. These recodified chapters along with the remaining chapters of Volume II have been republished as a new volume in a new format of 8½ × 11 pages. This republished volume includes ordinances adopted through December 15, 2008 and replaces both previous versions of Volume II supplemented through Supplement No. 109 (old format) and Supplement No. 3 to the partially completed (new format) Volume II. 
In 2011 the parts of Titles IV and V, which were not superseded or repealed, were transferred from former Volume III to Volume II, and former Volume III discontinued. 
As it will be noted, the chapters have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order where possible and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Attention is also directed to the appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which also refer to correlative charter provisions and relevant state laws. 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 13 is 13-14. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustrations: If it is desired to add new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-4 and 4-5, the new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2 and 4-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be inserted in their alphabetical sequence by the addition of a fractional number after the chapter number. Thus, if the new material is to be included between Chapters 13 and 14, it will be designated as Chapter 13½. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way, or in the case of articles, may be included at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
The pagination sytem used in the republished Code is a prefex system. The number or letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the hyphen represents the number of the page in that portion. The following are typical parts of Codes of Ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
Charter 	CHT: 
Charter Code Comparative Table 	CHTCT: 
Special Laws 	SL:1 
Special Laws Appendix 	SLA:1 
Code 	CD1:1 
Code Appendix 	CDA:1 
Code Comparative Tables 	CCT:1 
Charter Index 	CHTi: 
Code Index 	CDi:1 
 
The parentheses which follow most of the sections in the Code designate the source of the material used. Where no historical citation follows a section, the provisions were officially adopted as of the date of the ordinance which adopted this codification. 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing. With this new looseleaf system, the Code of Ordinances will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected, reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting and deleting obsolete pages. To each such amendment will be attached an editorial footnote explaining briefly the effect of the amendment on the section or sections amended and the derivation of such amendment. Each such subsequent amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof as provided in Section 4 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintaining of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing same, and in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The general index to the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
The publishers are most grateful to the Corporation Counsel, Mr. Harold M. Mulvey, the Assistant Corporation Counsel, Mr. Horace Trotta, the Assistant Director of Administration, Mr. Dennis Rezendes and the other officials and heads of the various departments for their cooperation and untiring efforts during the progress of the editorial work on the 1962 codification of the New Haven Code. Publication of this Code was under direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and C. Julian Manson, of the editorial staff of Municipal Code Corporation. 
The 2006 republication of this Code was under direct supervision of Robert S. Hornyak, Editor, and credit is gratefully given to other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the entire project. 
This Code is presented for the use and benefit of the citizens of New Haven. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained By The Board of Aldermen of The City of New Haven, Connecticut: 
Section 1. That a Code of Ordinances, consisting of Titles III through V, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as "The Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Board of Aldermen and approved by the Mayor prior to April 11, 1961, except such as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force from and after the date specified in Section 10 hereof, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of New Haven enacted and approved on or before April 11, 1961 and not in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. That no resolution of the Board of Aldermen not specifically mentioned is hereby repealed. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; nor shall such repeal affect administrative ordinances or resolutions not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; nor shall such repeal affect any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, one-way traffic, or limitations on loads of vehicles, not inconsistent with such Code; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance making or authorizing any appropriation; nor shall such repeal affect any of the zoning ordinances not inconsistent with said Code; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessments therefor; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision of land; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance extending the boundaries of the City; nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. That any and all additions or amendments to such Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to "The Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 5. A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate an intention to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-8, Title III of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of New Haven to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-8 of Title III of said Code. 
Section 8. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed as of the effective date of this ordinance. 
Section 9. The Code of Ordinances described herein shall be published in printed or mimeographed form for distribution. A copy thereof is available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk. 
Section 10. This ordinance, and the Code of Ordinances referred to herein, shall become effective the 6th day after adoption. 
ENACTED BY THE BOARD OF ALDERMEN: April 2, 1962 
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR: April 5, 1962 
OPERATIVE AND IN EFFECT: June 1, 1962 
ATTEST: MILTON RICE 
City Clerk  
TITLE ONE CONSISTS OF THE FINAL REPORT OF THE CHARTER REVISION COMMISSION THE PROPOSED REVISED CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Title I consists of the Charter of the City of New Haven as approved by the Board of Alders, August 5, 2013 and approved by the electors of the City of New Haven on November 5, 2013; effective January 1, 2014. This said version replaces the 1993 Charter, amended Nov. 3, 1992, effective July 1, 1993. Where a section has been amended subsequent to November 5, 2013, history notation will be added giving the date such amendment was effective. The absence of a history note indicates there have been no such amendments. Article numbers, article titles and section numbers are as they appear in the original Charter and amendments thereto. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform. Obviously misspelled words and typographical errors have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. The legend for endnotes is located in the appendix at the end of this Charter. 
 
Approved by: THE BOARD OF ALDERMEN Pursuant to C.G.S. 7-191(d) CITY OF NEW HAVEN August 5, 2013 Annotated 
NEW HAVEN BOARD OF ALDERMEN 
HON. JORGE PEREZ 
President (5th Ward) 
HON. JACQUELINE JAMES 
President Pro Tempore (3rd Ward) 
HON. ALPHONSE PAOLILLO. JR. 
Majority Leader (17th Ward);eoc; 
HON. TYISHA WALKER 
Deputy Majority Leader (23rd Ward) 
  
HON. SARAH EIDELSON 
1st Ward 
HON. ANDREA JACKSON-BROOKS 
4th Ward 
HON. DOUGLAS HAUSLADEN 
7th Ward 
HON. JESSICA HOLMES 
9th Ward 
HON. BARBARA    
CONSTANTINOPLE 
11th Ward 
HON. BRENDA D. JONES-BARNES 
13th Ward 
HON. ERNIE G. SANTIAGO 
15th Ward 
HON. SALVATORE E. DECOLA 
18th Ward 
HON. DELPHINE CLYBURN 
20th Ward 
HON. JEANETTE L. MORRISON 
22nd Ward 
HON. ADAM J. MARCHAND 
25th Ward 
HON. ANGELA RUSSELL 
27th Ward 
HON. BRIAN WINGATE 
29th Ward;eoc; 
HON. FRANK E. DOUGLASS, JR. 
2nd Ward 
HON. DOLORES COLON 
6th Ward 
HON. MICHAEL SMART 
8th Ward 
HON. JUSTIN ELICKER 
10th Ward 
HON. MARK STOPA 
12th Ward 
HON. SANTIAGO BERRIOS-BONES 
14th Ward 
HON. MIGDALIA CASTRO 
16th Ward 
HON. ALFREDA EDWARDS 
19th Ward 
HON. BRENDA FOSKEY-CYRUS 
21st Ward 
HON. EVETTE HAMILTON 
24th Ward 
HON. SERGIO RODRIGUEZ 
26th Ward 
HON. CLAUDETTE ROBINSON-THORPE 
28th Ward 
HON. CARLTON STAGGERS 
30th Ward 
NEW HAVEN CHARTER REVISION COMMISSION 
HON. MICHAEL B. SMART 
Chair 
NILDA APONTE 
KEVIN ARNOLD 
HON. DELPHINE CLYBURN 
ARLENE DEPINO 
EDWARD FERTIK 
JOELLE FISHMAN 
WILLIAM GINSBERG;eoc; 
CALEB KLEPPNER 
HELEN MARTIN-DAWSON 
MELISSA MASON 
BRIAN PERKINS 
CARMEN J. REYES 
HON. MARK STOPA 
ELIZABETH TORRES 
ALBERT LUCAS 
Director, Office of Legislative Services 
STEVEN G. MEDNICK 
Special Counsel  
TITLE I - CHARTER 
PREAMBLE 
Recognizing the rich diversity of the people of the City of New Haven throughout its history, it is the public policy of the City of New Haven to ensure full and equitable participation of all citizens and residents in all aspects of the life of the City without regard to race, color, religion, creed, sex, age, marital status, familial status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, national origin, ancestry, disability or any protected class under law 1 .  
ARTICLE I. - CONSTRUCTION OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Title . 
The title of this document shall be the "Charter of the City of New Haven" or "Charter".  
Sec. 2. - Definitions and Titles Generally . 
The definitions contained in the General Statutes shall govern the interpretation of this Charter; unless a term is otherwise defined herein. Articles and sections are for the purpose of ready reference and shall not be held to limit, extend or effect the interpretation and meaning of the text.  
Sec. 3. Time of Appointments and Meetings Generally . 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, any appointment to office or election by the Board of Alders to fill a Vacancy required herein to be made on or before a certain Day shall be, if made after that Day, as valid and effective as if made on the Day specified. If the day on which any meeting specified to be held or action is to be taken shall be a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the meeting or action shall be held or taken on the first business day following. Any meeting required by this Charter to be held on a certain Day shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be a regular meeting. The Mayor shall designate the place of all meetings provided for in this Charter, unless the place of meeting is specified herein, fixed by Ordinance or within the purview of the Board of Alders. However, in the absence of any such designation by the Mayor, the person responsible for convening the meeting shall designate the place thereof.  
Sec. 4. Definitions. 
Whenever used in this Charter: 
A.  "Alder" means a member of the Board of Alders. 
B.  "Board" or "Commission" means, for the purposes of this Charter and except as otherwise provided by Law, all Boards, agencies, Commissions, authorities or like entities of the City, whether elected or appointed 6 . 
C.  "Board of Alders" or "Alders" means the Board of Alders of the City, the legislative body of the municipality, as required by the General Statutes 7 . 
D.  "Charter 8 " means the Charter of the City. 
E.  "City 9 " means the City of New Haven. The term "City" as used in this Charter, unless the context otherwise indicates, shall be taken to include the Town of New Haven 10 . 
F.  "City Clerk" means the City and Town Clerk of New Haven 11 . 
G.  "Civil Service System" or "Civil Service 12 " means the Civil Service of the City, as required by this Charter and as further set forth in the Ordinances of the City. 
H.  "Day(s) 13 " means calendar days; unless, otherwise specifically set forth in this Charter. Moreover, where a Day set forth in this Charter falls on a weekend, holiday or day when the City is closed for business, the deadline shall be extended through the close of the next City business day; unless otherwise required by law. 
I.  "Department 14 " means any major functional or administrative division of the City, including any subordinate offices, divisions, institutions, agencies, bureaus or other descriptions serving such purpose as may be set forth in the budget of the City. When used within the section establishing or describing the duties of the particular Department or its related Board or Commission, the term "Department" shall apply exclusively to the functional division referred to in that section. 
J.  "Department Head 15 " means an employee who heads any Department in the City, has substantial supervisory control of a permanent nature over other municipal employees, and is directly accountable to the Mayor or, in the alternative, to their appointing authority. 
K.  "Elected Official 16 " means an individual who holds an "Elected Municipal Office" (as defined in the General Statutes 17 but shall not include a justice of the peace) in the City. The Elected Officials are set forth in § 6.A of Article II of this Charter. 
L.  "Elector 18 " shall have the meaning contained in the General Statutes and as administered by the State. 
M.  "General Assembly" means the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut. 
N.  "General Statutes 19 " means the Connecticut General Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. 
O.  "Law 20 " means, but is not limited to, decisions of courts and administrative bodies, federal or State legislative enactments, rules and regulations and local Ordinance and regulations. 
P.  "Mayor 21 " means the chief executive officer of the municipality, as required by the General Statutes 22 . 
Q.  "Meeting (or Hearing) Notice 23 " means a notice posted as required by the General Statutes, including posting of regular meetings with the Office of the Secretary of the State and the City Clerk, as well the requirement pertaining to special and emergency meetings and the requirements of this Charter and the ordinances requiring notice of meetings or hearings. In addition to the above-referenced postings, the City may (1) post notices on its web-site or by other means of electronic media; or, (2) publish notices in a daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation distributed in the City; or, (3) in a conspicuous location in the Office of the City Clerk, City Hall and the central City Library (and each branch of the City Library); or, (4) provide notices as otherwise required by Law. Meeting Notice (including Public Hearings) shall state the time and place thereof and shall be published at a minimum in compliance with the General Statutes or by a more stringent requirement as may be set forth in this Charter. Meeting or Hearing Notice may also be governed by regulatory practices and procedures set forth in the General Statutes. 
R.  "Public Official 24 " means a person who holds an elected or appointed municipal office in the City; including but not limited to Elected Officials of the City, all members of Boards and Commission of the City which may be referred to in this Charter or established by Ordinance and all persons appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter including but not limited to § 3.A of Chapter VI of this Charter. "Appointed Public Officials" shall include all Public Officials of the City to the exclusion of Elected Officials. When the term "officer" is used, it shall be synonymous with the term "Official". 
S.  "Order 25 " means a legislative action conferring authority to do a specified act, including, but not limited to, the approval of Mayoral appointments, proposed contracts or other matters upon which are conferred temporary power or authority which when its purpose has been accomplished it ceases to require further authority. Orders shall be enacted in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
T.  "Ordinance(s)" or "City Ordinances 26 " means the powers of the City to (1) establish rules or regulations of general municipal application, the violation of which may result in the imposition of a fine or other penalty; (2) create a permanent local law of general applicability; or (3) accomplish other objectives permitted by the General Statutes as may be enacted in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
U.  "Public Notice" or "Publication" or "Published 27 " means a notice for matters other than public meetings or hearings, including the public inspection or availability of any documents or data, or notification of an action of the City, as may be required by this Charter. It specifically includes matters where "publication" was required under the prior Charter or the General Statutes. Said Public Notice requirements may be specifically set forth in this Charter, the Ordinances or as otherwise provided by the General Statutes or Law. Public Notice shall be posted as required by the General Statutes and, as may be required by this Charter or the Ordinances, as follows: (1) in a conspicuous location in the Office of the City Clerk and in City Hall; (2) in the central City Library (and each branch of the City Library); (3) on the City web-site or by other means of electronic media; or, (4) by publication in a daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation distributed in the City. 
V.  "Resolution 28 " means an action or declaratory statement of the Board of Alders on a given matter that expresses the sentiment or intent of the Alders, which governs the business of the Board or expresses recognition by the Alders. "Resolution" may also mean a necessary legislative action required by General Statutes in order to utilize the provisions of state enabling legislation; which shall be enacted in the same manner as an Ordinance under the provisions of this Charter. 
W.  "Special Acts 29 " means the acts of the General Assembly pertinent to the City. 
X.  "State" or "Connecticut 30 " means the State of Connecticut. 
Y.  "State Constitution 31 " means the Constitution of the State of Connecticut. 
Z.  "Vacancy 32 " or, in the alternative the use of the word "Vacant" means whenever any :Public Official, Department Head or other person appointed to office under this Charter or the Ordinances completes the term of office and vacates the office; is unable to complete the current term of office due to death, resignation, removal from office (as set forth in this Charter or in accordance with Law), incapacity, upon failure to comply with the Elector requirements of this Charter or other reason as may be defined by this Charter.  
ARTICLE II. - INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Established . 
The territorial limits and boundaries of the Town of New Haven comprise the same territory embraced within all the wards of the City as established by Special Act approved May 31, 1921 and amendments thereto by Special Act approved April 23, 1931 and amendments thereto by Special Act approved May 6, 1937 and by Special Act approved April 12, 1939.  
Sec. 2. - City Incorporated. Corporate Rights . 
All electors of the State of Connecticut dwelling within the limits hereinafter specified shall be a body politic and corporate by the name the "City of New Haven," and as such, and by that name, they and their successors shall have perpetual succession, and shall be a person in law capable of suing and being sued, pleading and being impleaded in all suits, may have a common seal and alter or change the same at pleasure, and shall have power of purchasing, holding and conveying any estate, real and personal, and shall remain absolutely vested with the title to and improvement of all the City lands, tenements, hereditaments, rights and estates, which, since the original incorporation of the City, have become vested in the City, and where the City never has been lawfully divested hitherto.  
Sec. 3. - Wards and Education Districts established. 
A.  Wards Established 36 . On the effective date hereof and until otherwise determined, the City of New Haven is divided into thirty (30) wards from each of which an Alder shall be elected at the regular election of said City to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November, 1983, and biennially thereafter. The boundaries of each ward as the same may be revised from time to time in accordance with this article are shown on a map entitled "Ward Map, City of New Haven, Connecticut," and in a verbal description, both of which are on file in the City Clerk's office. 
B.  Education Districts Established 37 . On or before January 1, 2015 the City shall be divided into two (2) education districts from each of which one (1) member of the Board of Education shall be elected on the first (1 st ) Tuesday after the first (1 st ) Monday of November, 2015 and thereafter as set forth in § 3.A(3)(b) of Article VII of this Charter. The boundaries of each education district shall be established and revised from time to time subject to the provisions of Law applicable to redistricting and § 4 of this Article; and to the extent practicable, the said districts shall be comprised of an equal number of wards.  
Sec. 4. - Reapportionment of the Wards . 
A.  Federal Constitutional Standards 39 . The establishment of wards and education districts in the City shall be consistent with federal constitutional standards. 
B.  In the event General Assembly Districts are Changed 40 . If the General Assembly districts are changed at any time in accordance with § 6 of Article 3 of the State Constitution, the Board of Alders shall, within six (6) months of the date such change becomes effective, by ordinance, enact a plan of redistricting the wards and education districts of the City, and, in so doing, the Board of Alders may change the boundaries. 
(1)  Circumstances Necessitating Appointment of a Redistricting Commission 41 . If the General Assembly districts are so changed and if the Board of Alders fails to enact a plan of redistricting within six (6) months of the effective date of such change, the Mayor shall forthwith appoint a commission consisting of fifteen (15) Electors, at least three (3) of whom shall be members of the Board of Alders, and no more than nine (9) of whom shall be members of one (1) political party 42 
(a)  Said commission shall proceed to consider the alteration of ward and education district boundaries in accordance with federal constitutional standards of proper appointment; and said commission shall have the power to change the boundaries of the wards and education districts 43 . 
(b)  Said commission shall submit a plan of ward and education district redistricting to the City Clerk within six (6) months of the date of appointment of said commission. No such plan shall be submitted to the City Clerk unless it is certified as approved by at least eight (8) members of the commission 44 . 
(c)  Upon receiving such plan, the City Clerk shall caused such Publication and record the same in the same manner as ordinances are required to be published and recorded by the Charter, and upon such Publication and recording, such plan of ward and education district districting shall have the full force of law 45 . 
C.  In The Event General Assembly Districts Are Not Changed 46 . 
(1)  Appointment of a Committee of Alders 47 . If the General Assembly districts located in the City of New Haven are not changed under § 6 of Article 3 of the State Constitution after any decennial census, within sixty (60) Days after the time for action under said section has passed, the Board of Alders of the City shall appoint a committee of five (5) Alders to determine whether or not the population within the wards has shifted so as to require reapportionment of the wards and education districts in accordance with federal constitutional standards. 
(2)  Committee Report 48 . Said committee shall report to said board within thirty (30) Days of the date of its appointment and if the committee reports that the wards or education districts are not apportioned according to federal constitutional standards, the Board of Alders shall, within six (6) months of the date of said report, by Ordinance, enact a plan of redistricting the wards and education districts of the City, said wards and education districts to be apportioned according to federal constitutional standards, and, in so doing, said board may change the boundaries of the wards and education districts; however, said plan shall endeavor to create education districts which shall be comprised of an equal number of wards. 
(3)  Failure to Appoint a Committee of Alders 49 . If said Board of Alders fails to appoint a committee as required in accordance with the provisions of § 4.C of this Charter or if the Board of Alders fails to enact the plan of redistricting within six (6) months of the date of such committee report, the Mayor shall forthwith appoint a commission consisting of fifteen (15) Electors, at least three (3) of whom shall be members of the Board of Alders and no more than nine (9) of whom shall be members of one (1) political party, and said commission shall proceed to consider whether or not the population within the wards or education districts has shifted so as to require reapportionment in accordance with federal constitutional boundaries; and said commission may change the boundaries of the wards and education districts. Said commission shall submit a plan of ward and education district districting to the City Clerk within six (6) months of the date of its appointment, which plan shall endeavor to create education districts which shall be comprised of an equal number of wards. No plan shall be submitted to the City Clerk unless it is certified as approved by at least eight (8) members of the commission. Upon receiving such plan, the City Clerk shall publish and record the same in the same manner as ordinances are required to be published and recorded as set forth in this Charter, and upon such publication and recording, such plan of ward and education district districting shall have the full force of law. 
D.  Relating Ward Boundaries to Assembly Districts in the State House of Representatives. 
(1)  When the Board of Alders, or any other authority legally empowered to redistrict, shall redistrict the wards of the City, the new ward boundaries shall be drawn so that, to the maximum extent feasible, each ward under the new districting plan shall lie completely within a single assembly district for the State House of Representatives which shall be in effect on the date when the new ward redistricting plan becomes effective 50 . 
(2)  When redistricting shall occur, the Board of Alders, or other authority legally empowered to redistrict, shall, to the greatest extent feasible, assign the area of each old ward lying within a single assembly district for the State House of Representatives to the same new ward, the new ward boundaries shall be drawn so as to assign the area of the old ward to as few new wards as possible 51 .  
Sec. 5. - Application of the General Statutes; qualification of Electors; polling hours; voting districts . 
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter all elections within and for the City shall be held pursuant to the provisions of the General Statutes and Laws pertaining to election law in the State. At any City election the polls shall be kept open as required by the General Statutes. The Board of Alders may by Ordinance duly passed and published, divide each or any ward of the City into two (2) or more voting districts; and all provisions of Law now existing, or which may hereafter be enacted, regulating the holding of elections in the other voting districts of said City shall apply to said new voting districts when so established 53 .  
Sec. 6. - Elected Officials specified; date of elections; term; vote required; special elections. 
A.  Elected Officials 54 . From and after the effective date of this Charter the following Public Officials of the City and town shall be elected, viz.: the Mayor, members of the Board of Alders, Registrars of Voters, and the City Clerk. On January 1, 2016 and thereafter, there shall be two (2) members of the Board of Education, elected by district. 
B.  Date of Elections; Term of Office. The Mayor, members of the Board of Alders, the City Clerk and, effective for the municipal election of 2015, the elected members of the Board of Education, shall be elected at the regular City election to be held under the provisions of this Charter on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November for a term of two (2) years from the first (1 st ) day of January next, and biennially thereafter 55 ; notwithstanding the foregoing the members of the Board of Education shall have a term of four (4) years, as set forth in § 3.A(3)(b) of Article VII of this Charter. The Registrars of Voters shall be elected at the regular City election to be held under the provisions of this Charter on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November, 1996, for a term of four (4) years from the first (1 st ) day of January next, and quadrennially thereafter 56 . 
C.  Plurality Vote 57 . Each of said Elected Officials shall be elected by plurality vote; but, if by reason of equality of votes, there shall be no choice of any of candidates for said office(s), then the Board of Alders shall provide for the holding of a new election within thirty (30) Days from and after the time when such failure to elect shall be made known. 
D.  Special Elections 58 . Special elections, when required under the provisions of this Charter or by the General Statutes, shall be called and warned by the City Clerk. Such a special election may be held coincidentally with the general State election.  
Sec. 7. - Vacancies in Elective Office. 
A.  Vacancies in the Office of the Mayor: Succession. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the Office of the Mayor, the President of the Board of Alders shall at once become Mayor for the unexpired term and shall have all rights, powers and duties of Mayor and shall receive the same compensation otherwise due the Mayor 59 . The office of President of the Board of Alders and member of the Board of Alders shall become vacant whenever the person holding them shall become Mayor, and the President Pro Tempore of said board shall thereupon become President 60 . The Board of Alders shall thereafter elect a new President Pro Tempore of said board 61 . 
B.  Vacancy in the Office of the Mayor-elect 62 . Whenever the Mayor-elect shall die or become permanently incapable of performing the duties of said office between the date of the election and the first (1 st ) day of the term thereafter, the Mayor then in office shall continue therein with all the powers and duties thereto appertaining until the Board of Alders elected at said election shall be organized as provided by this Charter. Thereupon the succession to the Mayoralty shall proceed in the manner herein provided for filling said office in the event of a vacancy therein. 
C.  Vacancies on the Board of Alders 63 . If an Alder is elected and for any reason fails to qualify, or whenever an Alder shall vacate the position because of resignation, death, removal from office or failure to remain an Elector within the ward said Alder was elected to represent, a vacancy shall exist in that office and the successor shall be chosen in the following manner pursuant to the General Statutes relating to elections 64 : 
(1)  If the position shall become vacant during the first eighteen (18) months of the term of office, a special election shall be called forthwith to fill the vacancy and shall be held no later than forty-five (45) Days from the effective day of the vacancy. The person so elected shall assume office on the day of election 65 . 
(2)  If the position shall become vacant commencing on or after the first (1 st ) day of the nineteenth (19 th ) month of the term of office, the Mayor shall appoint a successor to complete the term of office who shall hold office in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Said appointee shall be of the same party affiliation as that of the immediate previous incumbent and the Mayor shall appoint from a list of three (3) names submitted by that party's town committee members from that ward 66 . 
If there is a question whether an Alder resides within the ward said Alder was elected to represent, it shall be decided jointly by both Registrars of Voters 67 . 
D.  Vacancies of the Elected Members of the Board of Education 68 . If a member of the Board of Education is elected and for any reason fails to qualify, or whenever an elected member of the Board of Education shall vacate the position because of resignation, death, removal from office or failure remain an Elector within the district said member was elected to represent, a vacancy shall exist in that office and the successor shall be chosen in the following manner pursuant to the General Statutes relating to elections 69 : 
(1)  A special election shall be called forthwith and shall be held no later than forty-five (45) Days from the effective day of the vacancy unless the special election can be consolidated with a city-wide primary or general election, as may be permitted by the General Statutes, to be held within six (6) months of the vacancy 70 . The person so elected shall assume office on the day of election 71 . 
(2)  If there is a question whether an elected member of the Board of Education resides within the education district said member was elected to represent, it shall be decided jointly by both Registrars of Voters 72 .  
Sec. 8. - Vacancies of Appointed Public Officials . 
Whenever any office of an Appointed Public Official shall become vacant by reason of the death, resignation, inability, disability or removal of the person appointed to fill the same, said vacancy may be filled by the authority which made the former appointment, subject to the provisions of this Charter. If said last incumbent was appointed for a definite term, the successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of said term.  
Sec. 9. - Resignation from Office . 
Resignations from office by Public Officials of the City shall be made in writing as follows: 
A.  By the Mayor: to the Board of Alders; 
B.  By members of the Board of Alders and all other Elected Officials: to the Mayor; 
C.  By all Appointed Public Officials: to the Mayor or other appointing authority, as the case may be, whose duty it is under this Charter to fill the vacancy caused by such resignation.  
Sec. 10. - Temporary Disability or Absence of Mayor. 
A.  Acting Mayor during temporary inability 75 . If the Mayor shall be prevented from attending to the duties of office by absence from the City or by illness or by any other cause, the President of the Board of Alders and, in the absence or disability of the President, the President Pro Tempore of said board, shall act as Mayor until the Mayor or President of the Board of Alders, as the case may be, shall be able to assume the duties of the office. 
B.  Acting Mayor to discharge duties. Such Acting Mayor shall have all of the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor; however shall not have or exercise any power of appointment or removal 76 . The Acting Mayor may, however, temporarily suspend any Appointed Public Official or any employee of the City for cause, which cause shall not be political, and in the event of a vacancy in any office to which the Mayor has the power of appointment the Mayor may temporarily fill the same 77 . Any such temporary suspension or appointment shall automatically end upon the resumption of duties by the Mayor 78 . 
C.  Compensation of the Acting Mayor. For the second and each successive consecutive day that an acting Mayor actually performs the official duties of Mayor said acting Mayor shall be compensated for services performed at the rate of one hundred ($100.00) dollars per day or such other amount that the Board of Alders may approve 79 . If the Mayor shall be prevented from attending to the duties of office by absence from the City or by illness or by any other cause for more than twenty (20) consecutive Days, such acting Mayor shall receive, commencing the twenty-first (21 st ) day, the same amount as salary as would be paid to the Mayor 80 .  
Sec. 11. - Salaries of Elected Officials . 
The salary of each Elected Official, in accordance with the requirements of the State Constitution, the General Statutes and Law, shall be set by Ordinance by the Board of Alders by the affirmative vote of a majority of all its members, but only upon the recommendation of the Mayor; provided, further that any salary increase or decrease be for the full term of office of said Elected Official and shall become effective only on the first (1 st ) day of January next succeeding the date of the election of said elected officers 82 . The salary of all Elected Officials now set shall remain in full force unless otherwise modified as provided for herein 83 .  
Sec. 12. - Elected Officials and Appointed Public Officials. Elector Requirement. 
A.  Elected Officials 84 . Every Elected Official shall be an Elector at the time of the election. 
B.  Appointed Public Officials 85 . Every Appointed Public Official shall be an Elector of said City, unless otherwise set forth by Law or in this Charter, as may be otherwise prescribed in accordance with the provisions of § 12.D of this Article. 
C.  Department Heads and Deputies to be Electors; Exception 86 . Unless otherwise provided for by Law or waived in accordance with the provisions of § 12.D of this Article each of the several Department Heads and deputies or those second in command of all Departments and other City organizations enumerated in the Charter or created by Ordinance shall, within six (6) months following the effective date of said appointment, be required to be an Elector of the City, or reside outside the corporate boundaries of the City if such residence is on lands owned by the City of New Haven 87 . Moreover, each such Department Head and deputy or second in command of Departments and other City organizations shall be required to comply with the requirements of this section during the term of office 88 . 
(1)  Failure to Comply 89 . In the event that any such Department Head, deputy or second in command should fail to comply with the provisions of this section, the position shall immediately become vacant and a successor shall be appointed as provided for by Law. 
(2)  Role of the Personnel Director. The Personnel Director shall be responsible for the proper administration of the provisions of this section and shall at least twice yearly conduct a census as to the compliance of those Department Heads and others who fall within the jurisdiction of this section 90 . The Personnel Director shall within thirty (30) Days after making said census give a full report to the Mayor indicating those Department Heads and others who are and who are not in compliance with the provisions of this section 91 . The Personnel Director at the same time shall also make a report to the appointing authorities when such an authority is other than the Mayor 92 . 
D.  Waiver. The Elector requirement for appointment of Department Heads and members of Boards and Commissions may be waived by requiring an appointee(s) to establish evidence of a bona fide residence (as set forth in the General Statutes) in the City. The waiver shall be granted by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Board of Alders then eligible to vote.  
Sec. 13. - General Provisions . 
A.  Oath of Office 94 . Every Public Official shall, before entering upon the duties of office, make oath in the following form, namely: "I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of ___________ to the best of my ability and according to law, and that I will at all times strive to use the power entrusted to me as such officer for the best interest of the City (so help me God)". 
B.  Public Officials to hold over until successors chosen and qualified 95 . All Public Officials, unless prevented by death, inability or suspension or removal, shall hold their respective offices until their successors shall be chosen and shall have duly qualified. 
C.  Bonds of Public Officials 96 . The bonds of all Public Officials shall be taken to the City of New Haven, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office according to Law. The form and amount of each bond shall be to the satisfaction of the Controller, and no person or corporation shall be accepted by said Controller as surety on such bond except some corporation authorized by laws of this State to give bonds and become surety for bonds of municipal and other officials. The expense of all bonds required by this Charter shall be paid by the City. 
(1)  Duty to deliver records to successors 97 . It shall be the duty of every Public Official of said City, upon the expiration of the term of office, to deliver over to the successor in office all books, vouchers, papers and memoranda under the control of the official affecting the business of said City. 
(2)  Right of public to inspect records, accounts 98 . All records and accounts of every Department shall be open to inspection by any resident, any representative of a community based City organization, or any representative of the press at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the Mayor, except records and documents the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish. 
(3)  Inconsistent provisions repealed 99 . All Charter provisions, Ordinances and any regulations and bylaws of the City inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter are hereby repealed.  
Sec. 14. - Conflict of Interest and Code of Ethics . 
A.  Policy declared. There is hereby established a code of ethics for all Public Officials and employees whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid 101 . The purpose of this code is to establish suitable ethical standards of conduct for all such Public Officials and employees by prohibiting acts or actions incompatible with the best interests of the City and by directing disclosure of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the City by such Public Officials and employees 102 . The provisions and purpose of this article and such rules, regulations and standards as shall be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the City of New Haven 103 . 
B.  Conflicts of interest 104 . No Public Official, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, or employee of the City shall engage in any activities which result in a conflict of interest between the duties and responsibilities of public office and one's private affairs or which are incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. 
C.  Holding dual positions prohibited. 
(1)  No member of the Board of Alders shall, during the period of service as an Alder, hold any municipal position to which a salary is attached, except where it is provided by Law expressly that a member of the Board of Alders shall be appointed or nominated to such a position. The provisions of this subsection shall take effect January 1, 1962 105 . 
(2)  No person shall receive compensation for service on more than one (1) Board or Commission or for more than one (1) position in the City government 106 . 
D.  Disclosure of interest required. 
(1)  Public Officials and Employees 107 . All Public Officials and employees, except members of the Board of Alders, shall disclose in the public record, in a manner to be provided by regulations established pursuant to § 3.B of Article VII of this Charter, the extent and nature of any direct or indirect financial or other interest in matters affecting the City. 
(2)  Board of Alders 108 . Members of the Board of Alders shall publicly disclose, on the official records of the Board of Alders, the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other interest in any proposed legislation or other matters before the board.  
Sec. 15. - Removal of Elected and Appointed Officials. 
A.  Removal of Mayor for total incapacitation 109 . In case the Mayor shall, by any cause whatsoever, be totally incapacitated physically or mentally for a period exceeding thirty (30) Days from performing the duties of Mayor, the Board of Alders may, after summons and hearing in the manner concerning Public Officials appointed by the Mayor, remove the Mayor and declare the office of Mayor to be vacant on account of such incapacity for said period, and the person so removed may appeal from the order of removal in the same manner provided herein for an appeal by a Public Official removed by the Mayor. 
B.  Removal of Appointees of the Mayor 110 . Whenever the Mayor may believe any person appointed to office by said Mayor or any predecessor to be incompetent, or unfaithful to the duties of office, or that the requirements of the public service demand said appointees removal, the Mayor may summon said Public Official to appear at a place and time specified in said summons to show cause why said appointee should not be removed from said office 111 . With said summons the Mayor shall leave with said Public Official a written statement of the charges, and if, after a full hearing, the Mayor shall find that such appointee is incompetent, or unfaithful, or that the requirements of the public service demand removal of said appointee, the Mayor may remove such person from office 112 . Any such appointee so removed may appeal the Mayor's order of removal from said office to the Superior Court closest to the seat of government of the City of New Haven or to any judge thereof, which appeal shall be made returnable not more than six (6) nor less than three (3) Days from the date of the order of removal of said Mayor, and shall be served upon the Mayor or at the Mayor's usual place of abode at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time fixed for a hearing 113 . And said court or judge having given such further notice as may be deemed necessary to all parties, shall forthwith hear said case, and may approve or revoke the order of said Mayor and may award costs at the discretion of the court 114 . But no such appointee so removed shall exercise any of the powers of office during the pendency of the appeal to the Superior Court 115 . 
C.  Removals in classified service to conform to Charter; power of Mayor when unclassified 116 . Appointed Public Officials and employees of the City in the classified service may only be removed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. Appointed Public Officials of the City not in the classified service may be removed by the Mayor for cause. 
D.  Grounds and Procedures for Removal by Mayor 117 . Whenever the Mayor has reasonable grounds for believing that any Public Official not in the classified service is corrupt, incompetent or unfaithful to the duties of office, or that the requirements of the public service demand removal of the Public Official, the Mayor may summon said officer to appear at a time and place specified in said summons then and there in a Public Hearing to show cause why said official should not be removed from office. 
(1)  Statement of Charges and Notice 118 . Said summons shall contain a detailed written statement of the charges against the Public Official, shall be addressed to any sheriff, deputy sheriff, or constable authorized to serve legal process in the City of New Haven, with a direction to make personal service of the same upon the summoned official at least ten (10) Days before the time affixed for said Public Hearing. 
(2)  Written Order of Removal 119 . If, after a full Public Hearing, the Mayor shall find that the Public Official in question is corrupt, or incompetent, or unfaithful to the duties of office, or that the requirements of the public service demand removal the Mayor may remove such person from office, and thereupon shall forthwith file a written order of such removal with the City Clerk. 
(3)  Appeal from Removal By Mayor 120 . Any Public Official removed from office by the Mayor as herein provided may appeal from the order removing said official to the Superior Court for New Haven County, which appeal shall be made returnable to said court not less than fifteen (15) and not more than thirty (30) Days from the date of the order of removal and shall be served upon the Mayor at least five (5) Days before the return day thereof. 
(a)  Said court upon return of said appeal shall forthwith fix a time for a hearing thereon at which it shall determine whether the Mayor has acted arbitrarily, illegally, or so unreasonably as to have abused discretion, and award costs 121 . 
(b)  No Public Official removed by the Mayor shall exercise any of the duties or powers of office during the pendency of an appeal from the order of removal 122 . 
E.  Reasons for Removal by Mayor. 
(1)  The following actions shall be deemed to constitute unfaithfulness to the duties of public office and unsuitability to the requirements of the public service within the meaning of §§ 11.B and D of Article II of this Charter, and shall constitute sufficient cause for removal proceeding brought pursuant to this Charter 123 : 
(a)  The representation of private interests by an unpaid Appointed Official in any matter or litigation affecting the pertinent Department, Board or Commission 124 . 
(b)  The representation of private interests by any elected or paid Public Official in any matter or litigation affecting the City, except as one's official duty may require, and except before a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that no paid Public Official shall represent private interests in any matter whatsoever affecting the pertinent Department or Board or Commission 125 . 
(c)  The receipt or acceptance of any valuable gift, thing, loan or promise by any Public Official or employee, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, from any person, firm or corporation which, to the knowledge of the Public Official or employee is directly or indirectly interested in any business dealing with the City or in any legislation or other matter, except that nothing shall be construed to limit any Public Official or employee's right to engage in a normal commercial transaction which is in no way related to or conflicts with, the interests of the City 126 . 
(d)  The disclosure of confidential information concerning or affecting the affairs of the City by any Public Official or employee, except as may be required by Law 127 . 
(e)  The furnishing of material to, or transacting of business with the City by any Public Official or employee by or from which said Public Official or employee directly or indirectly receives a financial benefit, except as may be permitted by regulations established hereunder to prevent hardship, and except by competitive bid, formal or informal 128 . 
(f)  The willful failure to effect such disclosure as is provided for in §§ 10.A and B of this Article 129 . 
(2)  The above list of practices is not exhaustive and the Board of Alders may in its discretion define by Ordinance additional specific practices as cause for removal, pursuant to the policy stated in §§ 10.A and B of this Article 130 . 
(3)  The above provisions are not intended to abrogate or limit in any manner such powers of removal as are provided in other articles of this Charter or to narrow, by implication or otherwise, the scope of such grounds for removal as may be elsewhere provided.  
Sec. 16. - Recall of Mayor . 
A.  Procedure. The Mayor may be recalled from office in the following manner 132 : 
(1)  Any fifty (50) Electors may jointly file with the City Clerk an affidavit setting forth that they in good faith desire and propose to file a petition for the recall of the Mayor, which affidavit shall also contain a detailed statement of the grounds alleged for such recall 133 . 
(2)  Thereupon, the City Clerk shall deliver to the Electors making such affidavit a reasonable number of copies of petition papers for demanding such recall, printed form of which the clerk shall provide and keep on hand 134 . 
(3)  Each such paper so delivered shall be addressed to the Board of Alders and shall bear the certificate thereon of the City Clerk showing the date on which the same was issued and the persons to whom it was issued 135 . 
_____ 
(4)  Form of Petition 136 . The recall petition papers so provided and issued by the City Clerk shall be in form substantially as follows: 
We, the undersigned Electors of the City of New Haven hereby demand that the question of recalling ___________ from the office of Mayor of the City of New Haven be submitted to a vote of the Electors. 
Name 	Street and number of last voting list 	Date 
____________ 	____________ 	____________ 
____________ 	____________ 	____________ 
 
(5)  Affidavit of Circulator Required 137 . At the bottom of each separate page of the recall petition papers on which occur the signature of any signers thereof shall be an affidavit of the circulator as follows: 
State of Connecticut) ss. New Haven 
County of New Haven) 
________________ being duly sworn, deposes and says that he or she is the circulator of the petition papers of which this page is a part, and that the signatures subscribed on this page were made in the presence of such notary and are the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
(Signed) _______ 
Subscribed and sworn to this ___ day 
_______ 

Notary Public 
_____ 
(6)  Filing Petition with Clerk; Number of Signatures Required 138 . A recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) Days after the filing of the affidavit provided for in § 10.E of this Article, and to be sufficient must bear the signatures of Electors equal in number to at least twenty (20%) percentum of those who voted at the last preceding regular City election. 
(7)  Referral and Examination of Petition by Registrars of Voters 139 . Upon the return of said recall petition the City Clerk shall forthwith refer the same to the Registrars of Voters who within twenty (20) Days thereafter shall examine the same and determine whether each name subscribed thereto is that of an Elector City and on the twenty-first (21 st ) day thereafter return said petition to the City Clerk with their findings endorsed thereon. 
(8)  Transmittal to Alders: Service on Mayor 140 . Thereupon the City Clerk shall submit the same to the Board of Alders at its next following meeting certifying that the prescribed procedures have been complied with and notify the Mayor of such action, by causing to be served upon said Mayor an attested copy of such petition by an officer authorized to make service of civil process and in the manner required by Law for the service of civil process in the City. 
(9)  When election required. If the Mayor whose recall is sought does not resign within five (5) Days after such notice the Board of Alders shall thereupon order and fix a day for holding a recall election 141 . Any such election shall be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) Days after the petition has been certified to the Board of Alders, and it may be held at the same time as any other general or special election within such period, but if no other election is to be held within such period the Board of Alders shall call a special recall election to be held within the time aforesaid 142 . 
(10)  Proposition Submitted to Voters 143 . At any recall election the Electors shall be required to vote yes or no upon this proposition, viz: 
Shall (name of Mayor) be recalled from the office of Mayor of the City of New Haven? 
(11)  Result of Election. If a majority of the votes cast on this proposition be against the recall of the Mayor the Mayor shall continue in office for the remainder of the unexpired term but subject to recall as before 144 . If a majority of such votes be for the recall of the Mayor, the Mayor shall be deemed removed from office 145 . The method of canvassing said votes and certifying the result of same shall be in accordance with the provisions of canvassing and certifying the result of regular elections of Elected Officials 146 . 
(12)  Filling Vacancy 147 . If a Mayor in regard to whom a sufficient recall petition is submitted to the Board of Alders shall resign before the recall election, or be recalled as a result thereof, the vacancy so caused shall be filled in the manner provided by this Charter for filling vacancies in such office. 
(13)  When petitions prohibited 148 . No recall petition shall be filed against the Mayor within three (3) months after said Mayor takes office or, in case the Mayor is subject to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six (6) months after that election.  
ARTICLE III . - THE MAYOR 
 
Sec. 1. - Declared chief executive; qualifications; holding other offices prohibited. 
A.  There shall be a Mayor of the City who shall be its chief executive and administrative officer 150 . Said Mayor shall have been an Elector of the City for at least five (5) years immediately preceding said Mayor's election, and shall reside in the City during the term of office 151 , and shall during such term hold no other public office, the duties of which conflict in any manner with those of Mayor or to which is attached any compensation 152 . 
B.  Transition Period 153 . Each newly elected Mayor shall be provided with at least one secretary, one professional staff assistant, furnished office space and such other assistance as the Board of Alders may approve upon request of the Mayor-elect at the Board of Alders' next meeting following the election for the period from November 15 th in the year said Mayor was first elected up to the first (1 st ) day of said Mayor's term of office so as to best effectuate the transition of the change of executive leadership of the City government.  
Sec. 2. - Powers and Duties. 
A.  Powers 154 . The Mayor shall have power: 
(1)  To appoint members of Boards and Commissions, subject to the provisions of Article VII, except as otherwise provided by this Charter 155 . 
(2)  To appoint as employees of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, up to four (4) Coordinators, as set forth herein, and such Department Heads (and other officials as set forth in Article VI of this Charter) as may be designated by this Charter, Ordinance or other Law, subject to the provisions of Article VI 156 . Said coordinators shall have professional qualifications in such fields as, but not limited to, community development, human services, public administration and public finance, to aid the Mayor in the carrying out of said Mayor's duties as chief executive and administrative officer of the City 157 . Said qualifications shall be prepared in accordance with nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable field and shall be updated prior to the appointment of such Coordinator 158 . 
(3)  To fill, unless otherwise provided for by the provisions of this Charter, by appointment, any vacancy by an Elected Official, for the unexpired term for which any such official was elected 159 . 
(4)  To call special meetings of the Board of Alders or any Board or Commission of the City government when deemed expedient by the Mayor and to enforce the attendance of the members of the same thereat in the manner herein provided 160 . 
(5)  To assign any employee of one department to the temporary performance of similar duties in another department whenever the interests of the City require, except for employees of the Office of Legislative Services 161 . 
(6)  To administer oaths to duly Elected Officials and Appointed Public Officials 162 . 
(7)  To have and exercise all other executive and administrative powers conferred by the General Statutes upon any municipal chief executive, except as otherwise provided in this Charter 163 . 
B.  Duties 164 . It shall be the duty of the Mayor: 
(1)  To cause this Charter, the Ordinances and laws to be executed and enforced, and to conserve the peace within the City. The Mayor shall be responsible for the good order and efficient government of the City 165 ; 
(2)  Every vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance passed by the Board of Alders shall be transmitted by the City Clerk within seven (7) Days after its passage to the Mayor for action and then shall be returned by said Mayor to the City Clerk within ten (10) Days after said transmission 166 ; 
(a)  If the Mayor approves or fails to take action within said ten (10) Days, such vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance shall become operative and effectual 167 . 
(b)  In case the Mayor shall fail to take action upon any vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance passed by the Board of Alders within said ten (10) Days the City Clerk shall endorse the fact upon the vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance 168 . 
(c)  If the Mayor disapprove said vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance the Mayor shall endorse such disapproval thereon and return same to the City Clerk within said ten (10) Days and shall transmit in writing the reasons for such disapproval to the body in which it originated at or before its next regular meeting 169 . 
(d)  If the Mayor fails to endorse such disapproval thereon and fails to return same to the City Clerk within said ten (10) Days, such vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance shall become operative and effectual 170 . 
(e)  In the event that the Mayor shall disapprove any such vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance as hereinbefore described, it shall not become operative and effectual unless passed over the Mayor's veto by an affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 rds ) of all the members of the Board of Alders, present or absent 171 . 
(f)  The Mayor may also approve or disapprove any part of any vote, Resolution, Order or Ordinance, and the part of the vote, order, Ordinance or resolution approved shall become operative and effectual, and the part disapproved shall be void, unless passed over such veto in the manner aforesaid 172 . 
(i)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Board of Alders amend the budget as proposed by the Mayor and the Mayor should veto the budget as so amended, then the budget as originally proposed by the Mayor shall go into effect unless the Board of Alders should override the veto at a special meeting of the Board of Alders to be called by the Mayor or the President of the Board of Alders and held within seven (7) Days after receipt by said President from the Mayor of the veto and veto message concerning the budget 173 ; and, 
(ii)  In the event the Board of Alders amend in part the budget as proposed by the Mayor, and the Mayor should veto the part of the budget so amended, then the part as originally proposed by the Mayor shall go into effect, or if the part were new, it shall be void, unless the Board of Alders should override the veto at the special veto meeting of the Board of Alders; if the Board of Alders should override the veto of the Mayor by a two-thirds ( 2/3 rds ) vote of all of the members of said board, present or absent, then the budget shall go into effect as originally approved by the Board of Alders 174 . 
(3)  To sign together with the City Treasurer all bonds and other instruments evidencing City indebtedness, and by himself, all deeds and all written contracts of the City approved by the Board of Alders, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or any Department, Board or Commission of the City in accordance with authority conferred upon them by this Charter or by the Ordinances, or otherwise by Law; provided, the facsimile signature of the Mayor is authorized on all bonds issued by the City 175 . 
(4)  To see that all contracts and agreements with the City are faithfully kept and performed 176 . 
(5)  To submit to the Board of Alders in writing at its first meeting in February of each year a complete report of the affairs of the City for the preceding year including the activities of each Department 177 .  
Sec. 3. - Membership on Boards and Commissions . 
A.  General Rule 179 . The Mayor may serve as a member of every Board or Commission of an executive or administrative nature as may be established by the General Statutes, this Charter, the Ordinances or executive order, so long as there is no conflict with Law. Said Mayor shall have the power to vote on all matters before any of said Boards or Commissions in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Board of Alders, Civil Service Board; Board of Ethics; and Board of Zoning Appeals. The Mayor shall not participate in the zoning functions of the City Planning Commission as set forth in § 2.A through H of Article XIII of this Charter. 
C.  Right to Attend. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 3.B, above, the Mayor shall have the right to attend all meetings of every Board and Commission of the City and to address it at any meeting. Moreover, no Board or Commission shall have the authority to exclude the Mayor from its meetings.  
Sec. 4. - Mayor's Staff and Council of Economic Advisors. 
A.  The Mayor shall appoint a secretary to the Mayor and other employees in the Office of the Mayor, who shall serve under the direction of and subject to removal at the pleasure of the Mayor 180 . 
B.  The Mayor shall appoint a nine-member council of economic advisors to advise the Mayor on economic matters affecting the City. The Mayor may appoint one of the members the chairman, and either the chairman or the Mayor may call meetings of the council at such times as either may deem appropriate. Members of the council may be removed and replaced at the pleasure of the Mayor 181 .  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF ALDERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Membership, qualifications; to exercise City powers. 
A.  The Legislative Body of the City. There shall be in said City a legislative body which shall be the Board of Alders, which shall include one (1) Alder to be elected from each ward. Each Alder shall be an Elector at the time of election and shall reside in the ward from which said Alder was elected during the term of office 183 . 
(1)  Said board shall, with the approval of the Mayor or over the Mayor's veto, where applicable and as hereinbefore provided in this Charter or by Law, exercise all of the powers conferred upon said City, except as otherwise provided 184 . 
(2)  Said board shall have power to carry into effect and operation, by appropriate Ordinances with the approval of the Mayor, or over said Mayor's veto as provided in this Charter, all powers of the City as provided in this Charter 185 . 
(3)  Said board shall approve the following appointees of the Mayor: 
(a)  Up to four (4) Coordinators, Chief of Police and Fire Chief, as set forth in § 3.A (1) Article VI of this Charter. Pending action by the board, which shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the submission of the nomination, a proposed appointee to a position may perform the duties and exercise the powers of the position; although this provision shall not be applicable to appointees to boards or commissions. A rejected nominee may continue in office in an acting capacity pending resubmission of the candidate's name for approval at the board's next regular meeting; however, a person's name may not submitted more than two (2) times. Other than to membership on a Board or Commission, the Mayor may designate an individual to hold a position in an acting capacity pending the selection of a nominee, but no person may hold such a position for more than six (6) months without being submitted for confirmation by the board. 
(b)  Members of Boards and Commissions, as set forth in § 1.A of Article VII of this Charter. If a nomination to a position or to a board or commission has not been affirmed or rejected by vote of the board within sixty (60) days of the submission of the nomination by the Mayor, it shall be deemed to have been approved 186 . 
B.  Office of Legislative Services. There shall be an Office of Legislative Services, with full time professional and secretarial staff, to provide assistance to the Board of Alders. The Office of Legislative Services shall be provided adequate space for its operation and shall be supplied with all appliances and incidentals necessary for the proper discharge of its duties, to be paid from the general fund, as appropriated. The Office of Legislative Services shall be separate and distinct from and not subject to the authority of the executive branch of the City's government 187 . 
(1)  Appointment of Staff 188 . Each staff member of the Office of Legislative Services deemed necessary to carry out the Board of Alders' legislative function shall be appointed by a majority decision of the President of the Board of Alders and the Majority and Minority Leaders from a list of three (3) persons with the highest ratings obtained in a civil service examination held to determine eligibles for that position, which examination shall be created pursuant to criteria established by the appropriate committee of the Board of Alders. 
(2)  Transfers of Personnel 189 . All transfers of personnel into the Office of Legislative Services and all layoffs of its personnel must be approved by a majority of the President, Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Board of Alders, and by the appropriate bargaining unit. 
(3)  Director of Legislative Services. There shall be a Director of Legislative Services, so appointed, who shall serve for a four (4) year renewable term commencing on February 1, 1998 190 . The person in the position of Director of Legislative Services at the time of the approval of this Charter, unless appointed for an additional term, shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified 191 .  
Sec. 2. - Organization of the Board of Alders. 
A.  Officers Elected by the Board 192 . At the beginning of the municipal year 1952 and biennially thereafter, the Board of Alders shall elect from its members, a President who shall preside at the meetings of said board, and a President Pro Tempore who shall serve in case of the President's death, resignation, removal, absence or disability. Said board shall also elect such other officers and members of such Boards or Commissions as by the General Statutes, this Charter or the Ordinances of this City are designated to be elected by said board. In the event there is the absence of minority party representation on the Board of Alders, the rules of the board shall authorize: 
(1)  The election of a third officer to perform the functions of the Minority Leader under this Charter and other functions as may be prescribed by the Alders; and, 
(2)  The appointment of an officer elected under this section to serve in lieu of a representative of a minority party on any board or commission which requires said appointment; however, said appointment shall not circumvent the provisions of the General Statutes and this Charter pertaining to minority party representation. 
B.  Time of Meetings: Regular and Special Meetings 193 . Regular meetings of said board shall be held at such time as may be fixed by the City Ordinances; and said board may be especially convened at any time by the Mayor or the President of the Board, and, upon a petition of the majority of said board, in writing, filed with the City Clerk, a meeting of such board shall be called. 
C.  Power to Establish Rules; Punish or Expel Members 194 . Said board may determine the rules of its proceedings, in conformity with the general principles of parliamentary law, punish its members for disorderly behavior, and, by a vote of three-fourths (¾ ths ) of its members, expel a member for due cause. 
D.  Quorum and Voting Procedures 195 . A majority of all of the members of said board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and the vote upon any question shall be taken by yeas and nays at the request of one-fifth ( 1/5 th ) of the members present. 
E.  Authority to compel attendance 196 . Whenever any meeting of said board shall have been regularly called and no quorum shall be present, those members present may, by vote, request the Mayor of said City or the presiding officer of said board to issue, and, upon such request, the said Mayor or presiding officer shall issue a signed warrant to arrest and bring into such meeting such members of said board as will together with those present, constitute a quorum; and, at any meeting of said board, those members shall have the power to make any Orders to compel the attendance of other members, and any one of the officers or members above mentioned shall obey such Orders upon request, and summon such assistance as may be necessary to carry such Orders into effect. 
F.  Authority to enter in contracts for expert and professional services 197 . The President of the Board of Alders may execute all contracts approved by the board for experts and professional consultants where such services are necessary or convenient to the performance by the board of its duties, and such contracts shall be binding upon the City. 
G.  Authority of certain boards, committees, officers to compel attendance and testimony of witnesses 198 . The presiding officer of the Board of Alders, of the several committees of said board, and of the several boards of commissioners, and the Director of Public Works, shall respectively have power to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses before their respective boards, committees and departments over which they preside, by the issue of subpoenas and the administration of oaths in the manner and according to the rules governing the same in courts of justice. 
(1)  Application to the Superior Court. When it shall be necessary to secure the attendance or testimony of witnesses before said boards, committees, departments or Director of Public Works, such presiding officers and such Director of Public Works, shall have the right to apply to the superior court for an order compelling any witness so summoned before them to testify; which courts shall have the power to issue subpoenas and to enforce the presence and testimony of all witnesses summoned in the same way and to the same extent as they now have power to enforce and compel the presence and testimony of witnesses in each of said courts 199 . 
(2)  Failure to Comply. Grounds for removal from Office. Failure of the chief executive or any other employee of any Department, Board or Commission of the City to appear following the issuance of a subpoena therefore by the presiding officer of the Board of Alders or of one of the committees of said board, shall, upon vote of the Board of Alders, be grounds for removal from office pursuant to §§ 11.C, D and F of Article I of this Charter 200 . In the event of such a vote, a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the Personnel Director for inclusion in such employee's permanent personnel file and to the Mayor 201 .  
Sec. 3. - Procedure for enacting Ordinances, Resolutions, etc.; when Ordinances effective. 
A.  Ordinances: Committee Proceedings, First and Second Readings. 
(1)  Procedure. All Ordinances shall be submitted to the Board of Alders, referred to and reported by a suitable committee after Public Hearing, printed in the journal for a first reading, and enacted upon second reading which shall take place at least one (1) week after the first reading 202 . The second reading of Ordinances cannot be waived or dispensed with 203 . 
(2)  Effective Date 204 . No Ordinance shall be of force or effect until one (1) week after its enactment nor until there shall have been Publication of either the Ordinance in full or information pertaining to the enactment of such Ordinance including the title of such Ordinance, a brief statement of the subject matter thereof and the date of its enactment and of its taking effect. 
(3)  Publication of Codification of Ordinances 205 . Whenever the Board of Alders shall approve, adopt and enact any revision, compilation or codification of the Ordinances of the City, it shall be a sufficient Publication of such revision, compilation or codification and all Ordinances, chapters and sections therein contained, to announce and publicize the vote or Resolution of said Board of Alders, approving, adopting and enacting such revision, compilation or codification, together with a notification of the Public Officials from whom the printed copies of such revision, compilation or codification may be obtained upon application. 
B.  Other Legislative Measures. All other measures (Resolutions, Orders, votes) shall follow the same procedure for legislative action as Ordinances, except that, upon unanimous consent, immediate action may be taken, or upon receipt of a special message from the Mayor declaring that the measure is of an emergency nature and that immediate action is necessary, the second reading may take place upon the same day as the original reading, and the printing of the same dispensed with 206 . Every such vote, Order, Resolution or other measure shall be printed for examination at the request of one-fifth ( 1/5 th ) of the members present, except in the instance of an emergency message from the Mayor 207 .  
Sec. 4. - Special Act Authority to Adopt Ordinances, Resolutions and Orders. 
A.  Authority to provide for enforcement of Ordinances, rules 208 . Said board shall have power to prescribe the manner of enforcing the penalties for violation of Ordinances enumerated in the foregoing sections, and the rules of the departments responsible for public health, and parks by a civil action or forthwith process as in criminal cases. 
B.  The Board of Alders shall have power by majority vote of the entire membership of the Board of Alders then eligible to vote, with the written approval of the Mayor, or over said Mayor's veto, as herein provided to enact, alter or repeal Ordinances to be called the "Ordinances of the City of New Haven"; and to make, alter and repeal Resolutions or Orders by a majority vote of the members of the Board of Alders present; and to prescribe penalties not exceeding a fine of one hundred ($100.00) dollars or sixty (60) Days in jail or both for any violation of the same, and the mode of enforcing such penalties; which Ordinances, Orders or Resolutions may be for any of the following purposes, to wit 209 : 
(1)  To manage, regulate and control all City property; to authorize the purchase or sale of property in the name of the City; and to provide for the form and regulate the manner of making contracts; to regulate the collection and enforcement of taxes and liens and the borrowing of money by the City for any purposes for which said board is authorized to lay taxes; and to provide for the adjustment of claims against said City, and for the payment of the same 210 . 
(2)  To preserve the public peace and order; to prevent and quell disorderly assemblages; to punish the resistance, hindrance or obstruction of Public Officials in the discharge of their duty; to prevent vice; to suppress gambling and gambling houses, houses of ill-fame and disorderly houses 211 . 
(3)  To protect said City from fire and unsafe buildings, and to regulate the construction and materials of buildings; to regulate the cleansing of chimneys; to establish and designate district of said City as fire districts within which it shall not be lawful to erect, enlarge or elevate, or within which it shall not be lawful to remove any wooden buildings, except by license issued in such manner as said Board of Alders may provide; to prohibit the erection or use and require the destruction or repair of unsafe buildings; to regulate and provide for the safe and convenient egress in the case of fire or other accident from theatres or other buildings designed in whole or part for public use; and to prohibit manufacturing, keeping and sale of firearms, explosives and inflammable materials, or the conveyance thereof through the streets of said City; to regulate the erection and use of stationary and portable steam boilers, and to license competent persons to manage the same; to make, maintain and regulate public hydrants, and to provide the same with water; to protect the same from injury, and to prevent an unnecessary waste of water; to protect from injury fire alarm telegraphs in said City; to regulate the use and construction of electrical plants and wires on which electricity is conducted within said City; and to protect public gas and other public lamps therein 212 . 
(4)  To establish building lines in the streets and ways of said City beyond which it shall not be legal to erect buildings or other structures. To provide for the laying out, grading, discontinuing, altering, paving, opening, improving, lighting and making and repairing highways, streets, walks, squares, parks, public buildings, drains, sewers, gutters, and for the numbering of streets, and for the draining and raising of low lands 213 . In addition to the authority vested in the Board of Alders of the City respectively, concerning building lines, said Board of Alders is empowered to establish verandah, porch and bay window lines, and to change the same after such lines have been established in the same manner as now provided by Law for establishing and changing building lines 214 . 
(5)  To provide for the compensation of the owners of such property as may be taken by the City for public uses; and to provide for the foreclosure of all liens legally laid and filed 215 . 
(6)  To make, repair, light and keep open and safe from public use and travel, and free from encroachments or obstructions all streets and public highways, grounds and parks, or any part thereof; to require sidewalks to be kept free from ice and snow; to regulate all shows, processions, assemblages or parades in the streets and public places 216 . 
(7)  To regulate the speed of bicycles and all other vehicles; and to regulate the cleaning of their tracks by street railway companies 217 . 
(8)  To regulate or prohibit the running at large of animals in the streets or public places, and to provide for impounding the same 218 . 
(9)  To license and regulate trucks and other public conveyances, and the charges for the use thereof; to regulate and prohibit the excavation and opening of streets, highways and public grounds for public and private purposes, and the regulation of any work or thing therein, whether temporary or permanent, upon or over the surface thereof, and the removal of buildings through the same; to regulate the laying of gas pipes, water pipes and drains for public or private purposes in the streets of said City; to prevent any and all persons in said City from loitering on the streets or any part thereof, or loitering in or about entrances to public or private buildings 219 . 
(10)  To license and regulate bill posting and similar occupations 220 . 
(11)  To prevent the committing of trespasses and nuisances in gardens, enclosures, cemeteries and public places 221 . 
(12)  To provide for the health of the City and to prevent and summarily abate nuisances of any kind; to establish quarantine regulations; to regulate the burial and disinterment of the dead 222 . 
(13)  To regulate the planting, protection and removal of trees 223 . 
(14)  To prevent nuisances and summarily abate the same at the expense of the person maintaining them; to prevent the erection or use of any building within said City for the purpose of carrying on therein, any trade, manufacture or business, which in the judgment of said Board of Alders, shall be prejudicial to the public health or considered an unnecessary annoyance to those living or owning property in the vicinity 224 . 
(15)  To provide for the inspection of food of all kinds offered for sale, and to regulate the sale thereof 225 . 
(16)  To regulate trade, markets and commerce, and weights and measures in conformity with the lawful standards thereof; to prohibit, license or regulate dealing in fruit and the peddling of merchandise in the streets of said City; to license or regulate all sports, exhibitions, public amusements and performances, and billiard and bowling establishments in said City; to prohibit, license or regulate the sale in and upon the streets, parks and public places of tickets or privileges of admission to all sports, exhibitions, public amusements and performances and to prohibit, anywhere within said City, speculation in the issue or sale of such tickets or privileges of admission 226 . 
(17)  To authorize a census of the City; and to receive such gifts, donations and bequests, for public purposes and public trusts and for hospitals and dispensaries and for all purposes for which said City is authorized or required to expend money, and for no others 227 . 
(18)  To regulate the direction and construction of street railroads pursuant to the General Statutes; to prescribe the duties of all Public Officials and employees of every sort not expressly defined by the provisions of this Charter 228 . 
(19)  To require bonds from all persons undertaking work of any character, to protect the City from any loss by reason of their acts or defaults 229 . 
(20)  To require owners of property to bring connections with gas, water, sewer, and other pipes inside to their curb lines before permanent improvements in the street are made, and to provide for the restoration of the surface of the street to its former conditions 230 . 
(21)  To license, tax and regulate branch stores and other concerns established for temporary purposes only 231 . 
(22)  To restrain and punish vagrants and beggars; and to prevent cruelty to animals 232 . 
(23)  To provide for the manner of warning the City elections and meetings of the Board of Alders and times of holding the same; to provide for the filling of vacancies which may occur in any office, except as otherwise provided; to provide for the appointment or election of such employees as are not otherwise provided for and as may be required for the proper transaction of the business of the City, and to prescribe their duties, and compensation; to provide for the removal or expulsion of any Public Official on account of corruption, misfeasance or malfeasance in office, in addition to the methods herein provided; to provide for the appointment of special constables 233 . 
(24)  To regulate the conduct of elections, subject to the provisions of the provisions of the General Statutes pertaining to election law, pursuant to which all City elections shall be held 234 . 
(25)  To do all things necessary to make effectual the powers herein otherwise provided 235 .  
Sec. 5. - Special Act Authority of the Board of Alders. 
A.  Authority of Board of Alders over streets, highways, wharves, docks 236 . The Board of Alders shall have sole authority over all streets and highways, including sole authority to lay out, make or order new highways and streets and to discontinue the same. No person shall open, within the limits of said City, any public or private way, except under the provisions of an Order of said Board of Alders. Said Board of Alders is hereby authorized to order, lay out, construct, repair and alter public squares, parks, streets, highways, sewers, gutters, drains, bridges and walks, except as herein otherwise provided, when and where, in the opinion of said board, the public good shall so require, and to order the paving, macadamizing or other improvement of any street, alley or highway within said City. Said board is also authorized to construct and maintain wharves and docks; provided no wharf or dock shall be extended beyond the harbor line; and if, in the construction of any such wharf or dock, it is necessary to take any right or property of an individual, and it cannot agree with such individual upon the price to be paid for the same, said board may exercise all the powers of eminent domain. The Departments responsible for public works and parks shall execute all orders of the Board of Alders with reference to the matters referred to in this section. The Board of Alders may, upon the execution of any order for the paving, macadamizing or other improvement of any street or highway within said City, or upon the construction or alteration of any public sewer or other public work, assess upon the persons whose property is in the judgment of said board especially benefited thereby, after reference to the Department responsible for public works, and report thereon, as hereinafter provided, a proportional and reasonable part thereof, and shall estimate the amount of such expense to be paid by every such person upon such assessment. In estimating such reasonable part of the expense of any sewer, the cost of constructing any main or trunk sewer, into and through which such other sewer is discharged, may be taken into consideration. 
B.  Authority over bridges crossing railroads 237 . Said Board of Alders shall have supervision over all bridges crossing railroads in said City, and may, from time to time, order the building, widening or repairing of such bridges in such manner and within such times as in its judgment public convenience may require; and in case any railroad company, whose road is crossed by such bridge, shall neglect to obey such Order, said Board of Alders may cause the required building, widening or repairing to be executed at the expense of said City, and the City Treasurer may then collect the amount of such expense from such delinquent company. Any Order of said Board of Alders made hereunder shall be subject to appeal to the Superior Court by any railroad company affected thereby, by notice to said City of such appeal, given within thirty (30) Days from the service of such Order upon such railroad company. 
C.  Authority to provide, regulate drainage and sewerage 238 . The Board of Alders of said City is hereby authorized to take, occupy and appropriate, for the purpose of drainage and sewerage of said City, at such times and in such manner as the health and convenience of said City may, in the opinion of the board, require, any watercourse, natural or artificial, or any portion thereof, within said City, except West River which may be used solely for the purpose of receiving storm overflow from the boulevard sewer and for surface drainage; to deepen, clear, alter or straighten the same, or any portion thereof, for the purposes aforesaid; to establish the bounds thereof within which it shall not be lawful for any person to place any building, part of a building, wall, dam or obstruction, without first obtaining a special license from said Board of Alders; to remove all buildings, parts of buildings, walls, dams, earth, stones, rubbish and obstructions that may be situated within the bounds of such watercourse, to be designated as aforesaid; to construct sewers or other artificial channels for the flow of such water, and to remove all obstructions to the passage of water in any such water course, sewer or channel; also to raise, fill and drain low grounds. 
D.  Power of Eminent Domain 239 . Said Board of Alders may take by the right of eminent domain, in the name of the City, any property or property rights which may be needed for the purpose of laying out, extending or widening any street or park, or for the purpose of constructing or protecting any sewer, drain or other property, or for the purpose of any public building, or for the successful prosecution and management of the almshouse and the property connected therewith, upon payment of just compensation under the rules governing the right of eminent domain, provided said Board of Alders shall acquire no land under the provisions of this section within the Town of West Haven except land included within an area outlined in red on a map known as "Map of West River Park" and dated April 2, 1925, on file in the office of the town clerk in West Haven, and provided no land shall be acquired by said board in the manner above specified in any other town except by agreement with the officials of the town in which such land shall be located. 
E.  Authority over buildings, fire hazards 240 . The Board of Alders of the City of New Haven, by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Board of Alders, then eligible to vote, with the written approval of the Mayor, or over the veto of the Mayor, as provided in this Charter, may enact, alter or repeal Ordinances limiting the height of buildings to be thereafter erected within districts to be defined by Ordinance, to diminish danger from fire and unsafe buildings, and provide penalties for the violation of such Ordinances, not exceeding a fine of one hundred ($100.00) dollars, or sixty (60) Days in jail, or both, for each violation thereof. 
F.  Authority over awnings, marquees, overhanging signs, other projects 241 . The Board of Alders may provide by Ordinance for the construction and maintenance of ornamental projections, canopies, permanent awnings, marquees and signs extending from the front of buildings, whether erected prior to or after the approval of this Charter, beyond any established building or street line. Such Ordinance may provide for payment of license fees for the exercise of such privilege, and all such permits shall be revoked by said Board of Alders.  
Sec. 6. - Authority to abate taxes . 
The Board of Alders may abate the taxes, interest or liens of persons who are poor and unable to pay the same.  
ARTICLE V. - OTHER ELECTED OFFICIALS OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 1. - City Clerk . 
A.  Qualifications 244 . There shall be in the City and Town of New Haven a town and City Clerk, referred to in this Charter as City Clerk, who shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by Law on city and/or town and/or municipal clerks, shall act as clerk of the Board of Alders and of all the committees of the Board of Alders, and shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed in this Charter. The City Clerk shall reside in said City during the term of office. 
B.  City to pay expenses; reports required; bond 245 . The expenses of the office of City Clerk, including the salaries of clerks, the number of salaries of which shall be determined by the budget, shall be paid by said City. During the first week of each month the said City Clerk shall make report to the Mayor of all fees collected during the preceding month, and shall pay the amount of the same into the City treasury. On or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of January in each year said City Clerk shall submit to the Mayor an account of the doings of such office for the preceding fiscal year, which report shall contain a statement of all moneys received and expensed in said year. Said City Clerk shall be bonded in an amount to be set by the Controller. 
C.  Attestation required on records 246 . All public records in the care or custody of the City Clerk, now or hereafter compiled, may be attested by the volume, and it shall be deemed to be a sufficient attestation of such record when each volume thereof bears the attestation with the written signature of the Public Officials or employee charged with the care of such records and authorized by Law to record or file the same. 
D.  Duties. Bond 247 . Said City Clerk shall send, immediately after it shall take effect, a copy of any Resolution, Order, Ordinance, vote or other measure of the Board of Alders to each Department or Public Official affected thereby 248 . Said City Clerk shall perform such clerical services as may be required by the Ordinances of the City 249 . The City Clerk shall cause Publication, as soon as may be, after the enactment of any Ordinance, of a notice which shall contain the title of such Ordinance, a brief statement of the subject matter thereof and the date of its enactment and of its taking effect; but said City Clerk shall not Publish any such Ordinance in full, unless by special vote of the Board of Alders if such Ordinance shall contain in excess of one thousand (1,000) words 250 . Said City Clerk shall cause a reasonable number of printed copies of such Ordinances to be prepared and deposited in said Clerk's office for distribution to persons making application therefor 251 . Said Clerk shall make, upon the records of said City entries of said Clerk's acts in service and publishing notices of Orders and Ordinances passed by the Board of Alders and shall record in full in the records of said City all Ordinances so enacted 252 . The City Clerk shall designate in writing a person, who after having taken the oath or affirmation provided by Law and in the absence or disability of said clerk shall be the acting City and have power to perform all the duties of said clerk 253 . The designation in writing shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and in the office of the Controller 254 . The City Clerk shall make such designation annually 255 . Said clerk shall keep the office open during such hours as the Ordinances of the City shall direct 256 . Said City Clerk shall be bonded in an amount to be set by the Controller 257 .  
Sec. 2. - Registrars of Voters . 
The Registrars of Voters shall have all the powers vested in Registrars of Voters and perform all of the duties imposed upon them by the General Statutes.  
Sec. 3. - Members of the Board of Education . 
Effective on January 1, 2016, the Board of Education shall include two (2) members one each to be elected from two (2) education districts, as set forth in § 3 of Article II and § 3.A (2) of Article VII of this Charter.  
ARTICLE VI. - THE CITY GOVERNMENT: DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS 
 
Sec. 1. - The Authority to Establish the Departments of City Government . 
A.  Powers and Purposes. In addition to the Departments specifically set forth in this Charter, the City, acting within the powers and duties enumerated in the General Statutes, any applicable Special Acts and this Charter may establish, by Ordinance, such Departments necessary to carry out and organize the functions of government. The express intent of this Charter is to afford the Mayor and the Board of Alders the ability to organize the government in order to achieve a balance of efficiency and service to the people of the City. 
B.  Creation of Departments. The Board of Alders may, by Ordinance proposed by the Mayor, establish the Departments of the City. Each of these Departments shall be constituted to perform such functions and have such powers and duties as are set forth by the General Statutes, this Charter and Ordinances. Moreover, the head of each Department established by Ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of this Charter generally applicable to Department Heads. All Departments shall be entitled to office space provided by the City and shall remain open during such hours as the Mayor may direct. 
C.  Reorganization Plans. The delineation of departmental categories in this Charter is advisory and may be altered pursuant to a reorganization plan proposed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Alders. Accordingly, any departmental categories may be reorganized and Department Heads may be reassigned (unless otherwise prohibited by Law). The reorganization plan is subject to the limitation that all governmental functions set forth in this Charter shall continue to be provided to the residents of the City; unless such function was eliminated as the result of a repealed Federal or State mandate and not otherwise in the best interest of the City to continue. Moreover, any reorganization plan shall include specific reference to the departmental function(s) set forth in this Charter that will be carried out in said reorganization and shall be accompanied by an opinion of the Corporation Counsel verifying that the reorganized function complies with the Charter requirements.  
Sec. 2. - General Requirements Pertaining to All Department Heads and Mayoral Department Appointees . 
A.  Authority of Department Heads. Unless otherwise set forth in this Charter or by Law, once appointed as described in this Charter, the Department Head shall appoint, hire, discipline and remove all deputies, assistants and other employees of the Department as provided for in the budget. Such Department Heads and other Mayoral Department Appointees shall be subject to: (1) the authority and direction of the Mayor or designee in all matters pertaining to the responsibilities of office, unless otherwise specifically set forth by Law; (2) any specific provisions of this Charter or Law pertaining to the authority of the Department Head and the relationship with a governing Board or Commission or appointing authority, if not the Mayor; and, (3) the applicable rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission or collective bargaining agreement. 
B.  Elector Requirement. Unless other set forth in this Charter or by Law, all Department Heads and others appointed pursuant to this Article shall be in compliance with the requirements of § 12.C and D of Article II of this Charter. 
C.  Qualifications of Department Heads. The minimum job qualifications for Department Heads, as may be set forth in this Charter, if any, are foundational and not definitive. Said minimum qualifications shall be modified by recommendation of the Mayor (or other appointing authority, if not the Mayor) following consultation and written report from the Personnel Director and approval of an Ordinance by the Board of Alders as required by § 2.A of Article XV of this Charter. Said job qualifications shall be prepared in accordance with nationally accepted professional standards and best practices in the applicable field and shall be reviewed and updated, if necessary, every four (4) years and whenever a Vacancy occurs in the position. In the event there are no minimum qualifications set forth herein, they shall be established in the same manner as in the case of modification, referenced, above. However, said Ordinances shall not modify any specific provisions within this Article of the Charter. 
D.  Compensation. The salaries and compensation of all Public Officials, Coordinators, Department Heads 263 (and other Deputies and Assistant set forth in this Article 264 ) and employees of the City shall be set by Ordinance and through the budget, except where otherwise fixed by the General Assembly, this Charter or as otherwise covered by civil service rules, collective bargaining agreement(s) or contract. 
E.  Position Titles. The position titles of the Department Heads set forth in this Charter reflect the title at the time of the adoption of this Charter. Titles may be changed without altering the method of appointment unless otherwise set forth; however, the functions and fiduciary obligations specifically set forth in this Charter shall not be altered. 
F.  Full-time Service 265 . The general rule is that all Department Heads and Mayoral appointees shall devote full time to the duties of office; subject to modification by Ordinance or adoption of the budget, following a written determination by either the Mayor or the Board of Alders that full-time service is not required.  
Sec. 3. - The Appointment of Coordinators, Department Heads and Mayoral Department Appointees . 
(1)  Appointment 267 . 
(1)  Subject to Approval by the Board of Alders: The following Appointed Public Officials shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Board of Alders, as set forth in § 1.A(3) of Article IV of this Charter: (a) the Coordinators as authorized by § 2.A(2) of Article III of this Charter, who shall serve under the direction of the Mayor and are removable at the pleasure of the Mayor 268 ; and, (b) Chief of Police 269 and Fire Chief 270 , who shall serve subject to the authority of the Mayor. The person in office as Chief of Police 271 and Fire Chief 272 on the effective date of this Charter shall hold office until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified. 
(2)  Term of Four Years. Except as otherwise provided by General Statutes or this Charter, all Department Heads 273 shall be appointed by the Mayor for terms of four (4) years on the basis of qualifications 274 . Said appointees shall serve under the direction and subject to the authority of the Mayor as the chief administrative and executive officer of the City; although may not be removed from office during their terms except for cause, which shall not be political 275 . 
(3)  The General Rule. The following Department Heads shall be appointed in accordance with § 3.A(2) of this Article: (a) The City Controller 276 ; (b) Director of Public Works 277 ; (c) City Engineer 278 ; (d) City Assessor 279 ; (e) Director of Parks and Recreation 280 ; (f) Director of Traffic and Parking 281 ; and, (g) Planning Director 282 . The person in office as Director of Parks and Recreation 283 , Planning Director 284 and Director of Traffic and Parking 285 on the effective date of this Charter shall hold office until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified. 
(4)  The Corporation Counsel 286 shall be appointed by and subject to the authority of the Mayor and serve a term coterminous with the Mayor who appointed said official. 
(5)  The following shall be appointed by the Mayor to hold office for the term of one (1) year from said appointment or until their successor shall be appointed and qualified: (a) Deputy Corporation Counsels; (b) Assistant Corporation Counsels 287 . 
(6)  The following Department Heads and other officials shall be appointed by the Mayor: 
(a)  The City Purchasing Agent 288 . Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of City Purchasing Agent the Mayor shall designate a nonpartisan board of examiners, consisting of three (3) experienced citizens who have been Purchasing Agents or have employed Purchasing Agents in their business and are competent to determine and pass on qualifications of the candidates' eligibility for such office, which board after such examination of said candidates as it may consider necessary to determine their competency for the duties of such office, shall file with the Mayor a written report of its findings as to the relative proficiency and fitness of such candidates as in its judgment are qualified to receive such appointment, which report shall be signed by a majority of the members of said board 289 . The Mayor shall appoint one of the three (3) highest ranking candidates, but in no event shall any person be appointed to the position of City Purchasing Agent unless such person shall have had at least three (3) consecutive years of full time experience as a Purchasing Agent in commercial or governmental purchasing prior to appointment. 
(b)  Building, Plumbing and Electrical Inspectors 290 . The Mayor before appointing said inspector shall designate, in the case of each appointment, a separate nonpartisan board of examiners, consisting of three (3) experienced citizens competent to determine the qualifications of the candidates for such office, which board, after such examination of said candidates as it may consider necessary to determine their competency for the duties of such office, shall file with the Mayor a written report of its findings as to the relative proficiency and fitness of such candidates as, in its judgment, are qualified to receive such appointment, which report shall be signed by a majority of the members of said board. Each of said inspectors shall be appointed from among the candidates who, in the judgment of said board, are properly qualified for the duties of the particular office to which appointment is to be made. 
(c)  Personnel Director 291 . The Personnel Director shall be appointed by the Mayor from a list of three (3) persons with the highest ratings obtained in a civil service examination held to determine eligibles for said position. 
(7)  The following Department Heads, as follows: 
(a)  The Director of Public Health 292 . The Director of Public Health shall be appointed by the Board of Public Health, for a term of years as set forth in § 3.A(2) of this Article 293 . Notwithstanding any provisions of this Charter to the contrary, the director may not be removed from office during the term of office except for cause, which cause shall not be political 294 . 
(b)  The City Librarian. The City Librarian shall be appointed by the Board of Library Directors 295 , for a term of years as provided in § 3.A(2) of this Article 296 . 
(c)  The Superintendent of Schools. The Board of Education shall appoint a Superintendent of Schools, in accordance with the General Statutes 297 . Notwithstanding the provisions of § 3.A(2) of this Article the Superintendent may be appointed to such term as may be permitted by the General Statutes 298 . A written contract shall be entered into between the Board of Education and the Superintendent with all provisions and conditions of employment stipulated therein 299 . 
(8)  Historical Transition Provision 300 . Except as otherwise provided by State law, after July 1, 1993, the terms of all present Department Heads whose appointments are subject to the four (4) year limitation shall end on January 31, 1994, or on such later date when their successors have been appointed and qualified, and the new terms of all such Department Heads appointed thereafter shall commence on February 1, 1994 and on February 1 of every fourth (4 th ) year thereafter 301 . 
(9)  Vacancy 302 . In the event of a vacancy in the office of any such Department Head, a successor may be appointed for the balance of the four (4) year term, except that during the last two (2) months of the term of a Mayor who has not been reelected to office, the Mayor may not appoint any Department Head except on an acting basis for a temporary period ending not later than the succeeding January 31. 
(10)  All Department Heads shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified 303 .  
Sec. 4. - The Corporation Counsel . 
A.  Appointment. 
(1)  The Corporation Counsel. The Corporation Counsel shall be the chief legal advisor of and attorney for the City and of all Public Officials and Departments thereof in matters relating to their official duties 305 . The Corporation Counsel shall appointed pursuant to the provisions of § 3.A(4) of this Article 306 . The Corporation Counsel shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department responsible for providing legal services on behalf of the City 307 . 
(2)  The Deputy and Assistant Corporation Counsels 308 . The Mayor shall appoint deputy and assistant Corporation Counsels 309 , pursuant to the provisions of § 3.A(5)(a) and (b) of this Article. The appointment of the Deputy Corporation Counsel is further subject to the requirements of § 12.C of Article II of this Charter 310 . 
(a)  Duties. Said deputy and assistant Corporation Counsels shall perform such service as the Corporation Counsel may direct 311 . 
(3)  Additional Counsel. The Mayor may, if in said Mayor's opinion the interests of the City require it, appoint additional special assistant Corporation Counsel or counsels whose salary shall also be fixed by the budget 312 . 
B.  General Duties of the Corporation Counsel. 
(1)  Advice of the Corporation Counsel 313 . When so requested said Corporation Counsel shall give advice in writing to the Board of Alders, and committees of Board of Alders, the Mayor, any head of a department or office of the City or any person or committee appointed for inquiry or investigation upon any question of law involving their respective powers or duties. 
(2)  Written Opinions and Codification 314 . All written opinions so given by said Corporation Counsel shall be recorded in an index book, which book shall be kept in the office of the Corporation Counsel and shall be the property of the City. 
(3)  Responsibilities 315 . Said Corporation Counsel shall: 
(a)  When so directed by the Mayor or Board of Alders, represent the City in all matters pending before the General Assembly affecting the interests of said City 316 ; 
(b)  Perform all other legal services which may be required by the Board of Alders or by Law or Ordinance, which services may be performed said Corporation Counsel or the assistant Corporation Counsels at the direction of the Corporation Counsel 317 ; 
(c)  Prosecute or defend all suits for or against the City and shall prepare all contracts, bonds and instruments in writing in which the City is concerned and endorse on each approval of the form and correctness thereof 318 . 
(d)  Annual Report 319 . Said Corporation Counsel shall annually, on or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of January, make a written report to the Mayor of the doings of the office of the Corporation Counsel for the fiscal year preceding, showing the condition of all unfinished business in said Corporation Counsel's hand, and give all further additional information which the Mayor may desire in regard to the condition of said Corporation Counsel's department at any time. 
C.  Litigation Settlement Committee 320 . There shall be a litigation settlement committee consisting of the Mayor, the Controller, the coordinator for administration appointed by the Mayor, or their designees, two (2) members of the Financial Review and Audit Commission who shall not be of the same political party, elected by their fellow commissioners, and two (2) members of the finance committee of the Board of Alders, who shall not be of the same political party, elected by their fellow Alders. Neither the Corporation Counsel, nor any deputy or assistant Corporation Counsel, may enter into a settlement on behalf of the City of any matter in litigation, the result of which would bind the City to make a payment in excess of five thousand dollars, or such greater amount as the Board of Alders may approve from time to time, unless said settlement has been approved by the litigation settlement committee.  
Sec. 5. - The Office of the Controller. 
A.  Appointment. 
(1)  The City Controller. The City Controller shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for the finances and budget of the City 321 . The City Controller shall, under the Charter and Ordinances, be subject to the general direction of the Mayor in all matters relating to the financial affairs of the City, except as herein otherwise expressly provided 322 . The City Controller shall appointed pursuant to the provisions of § 3.A(2) of this Article 323 . 
(a)  Bond. The Controller shall be bonded in an amount set by the Mayor and shall have an office in City Hall 324 . 
(2)  The Deputy Controller. The Controller whenever absent or otherwise incapable of acting, may, by appointment in writing, filed in the office of the City Clerk and recorded in the records of the City, designate the deputy Controller in the Controller's office to act as Controller and when so appointed and acting thereunder, said deputy Controller shall have and exercise such of the powers, duties and authority of the Controller and only such, as may be specified in said appointment, unless and until revoked by the Controller, in writing, filed and recorded, as provided for said appointment 325 . 
(3)  Appointment of Tax Collector and City Treasurer 326 . It shall be the duty of the Controller to appoint and have the power to remove, subject to the provisions of this Charter and such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Civil Service Board, a Tax Collector and a City Treasurer; said Tax Collector and City Treasurer shall have the powers and duties imposed by Law on such offices and shall have such powers and duties as the Board of Alders may prescribe. 
(a)  Designation of Assistant Treasurer 327 . The City Treasurer by appointment in writing, filed in the office of the City Clerk and recorded in the records of the City, may designate the assistant treasurer to act as treasurer whenever the said City Treasurer is absent or incapable of carrying on the duties of such office by reason of mental or physical incapacity, and when so appointed and acting hereunder the said assistant treasurer shall have and exercise such of the powers, duties and authority of the City Treasurer and only such as may be specified in said appointment, unless and until revoked by the City Treasurer in writing, filed and recorded as provided for in this Charter 328 . 
(b)  Death, resignation or Removal of City Treasurer. In case of the death, resignation or removal of the City Treasurer, the said assistant treasurer shall have and exercise the full powers and authority of the City Treasurer until said City Treasurer's successor is appointed; provided, also, that the Mayor shall be empowered to designate the assistant treasurer to act as City Treasurer in the absence or disability of the City Treasurer, and said assistant treasurer shall have and exercise the full powers and authority of the City Treasurer until said treasurer shall resume such duties or until said City Treasurer's successor is appointed 329 . 
(c)  Bond of the Assistant Treasurer. Said assistant treasurer, upon assuming the duties of the City Treasurer, shall be bonded 330 . 
(d)  Bond of the Collector of Taxes. Said collector of taxes shall be bonded 331 . 
B.  General Duties of the City Controller 332 . It shall be the duty of the Controller: 
(1)  To keep accounts with each of the Departments, and such other accounts as the City Ordinances may direct 333 . 
(2)  To prescribe the form of all accounts and of all reports to be rendered, and to inspect and supervise the accounts of all other Departments, Public Officials and employees 334 . 
(3)  To audit immediately after the first (1 st ) day of each month the accounts of the several departments and all of said Public Officials and employees who receive, pay out or dispose of the money or other property of the City; to make proper comparisons of the same, and report any findings to the Mayor, the Financial Review and Audit Commission and to the Board of Alders, and a duplicate thereof to the City Treasurer; to daily audit the cash account of the City Treasurer for the last previous day, and certify at the foot of said account as to its correctness, and to submit to the Mayor, the Financial Review and Audit Commission and to the Board of Alders on or before the twentieth (20 th ) day of January, the twentieth (20 th ) day of April, the twentieth (20 th ) day of July, and the twentieth (20 th ) day of October in each year, a report of the condition of each of said accounts, together with a summary of all accounts of the City, verified by the oath or affirmation of said Controller, exhibiting the revenues, receipts and expenditures, the source from which the revenues and funds are derived and in what manner the same have been disbursed and the amount drawn against each item of the appropriations 335 . 
(4)  To keep a separate account for each specific item of the appropriations, and to require all warrants to state specifically against which of said items the warrant is drawn 336 . 
(5)  To make rules regulating the method of payments of all Public Officials and employees of said City and prescribing the forms of receipts to be required 337 . 
(6)  To determine and set the amount of bond required of all Public Officials and employees of the City who, in the opinion of the Controller or in accord with Law, this Charter or the Ordinances, should be bonded 338 . 
C.  Additional Duties of the City Controller. 
(1)  Duty to prevent overdrawing, misapplication of appropriations; liability for payments exceeding appropriations 339 . The Controller shall not suffer any appropriation or allotment thereof to be overdrawn, or the appropriation for one item of expense to be drawn upon for any other purpose, or by any department other than that for which the appropriation was specifically made, except in case of transfers made as hereinafter provided. No warrant shall be issued unless sufficient funds to pay the same shall actually be in the treasury. If the Controller shall certify any bill, contract or claim in excess of the appropriation properly applicable thereto, the City shall not be liable for such excess, but the Controller shall be personally liable therefor, and said Controller's sureties shall also be liable to the amount of the bond. 
(2)  Procedure for claims, accounts 340 . Each claim or account against the City shall be first verified by the oath or affirmation of the claimant or said claimant's authorized agent, then certified to be correct and justly due by the Public Official, employee or Board or Commission by whom, or under whose authority, the same was contracted. Such claim or account shall then be transmitted to the Controller, who shall carefully examine and compute each bill rendered, and, on finding it correct, shall so certify. When the Controller has certified the claims, the Controller shall number the several claims and enter them in books kept for that purpose; and when said claims are so numbered and entered, the City Clerk shall draw an order on the City Treasurer for the several amounts due, and shall place said orders in the hands of the Controller, who shall countersign and disburse the same. 
(3)  Inventory 341 . Each department head shall make and keep a perpetual inventory of all supplies, materials, fixed assets and other property of every description in the department's custody in such form and manner as the Controller shall direct. A copy of such inventory shall be submitted to the Controller who shall cause the same to be audited not less frequently than annually. 
(4)  Audits of Accounts of Public Officials and Employees 342 . The Controller shall, at the end of each fiscal year, or oftener, if so required by the Mayor, and also upon the death, resignation, removal, or the expiration of the term of any Public Official or other employee, audit or cause to be audited, examine, and settle the accounts of such Public Official or employee, and if said person shall be found indebted to the City, the Controller shall state an account and file the same with the Corporation Counsel, together with a copy of the official bond of such Public Official or employee, if any, and give notice thereof to such official or a designated legal representative; and the Corporation Counsel shall proceed to collect such balance from such Public Official, employee or designated sureties within six (6) months from the receipt of such account. Notice of the audit shall be given by the Controller to the Public Official or a legal representative(s) designated by the official before the final statement of the account, and, if desired by such Public Official, employee or the legal representative(s) designated by the official, opportunity shall be given for a hearing. A copy of such notice, with an affidavit to the fact of service thereof, shall be filed, with the statement of account, as evidence of service of notice. 
(5)  Daily Deposit and Payment of City Funds 343 . All City funds shall be deposited in such bank or banks as shall be designated by the Controller, whose duty it shall be to obtain the highest rate of interest therefor consistent with the safety of the deposits. All interest upon said deposits shall belong to said City. 
(6)  Payment of City Funds 344 . Orders drawn upon any bank or trust company which has been designated as a City depository by the Controller, for payment of any claims, including those drawn to the individual order of any person or persons whose names appear thereon as signer or signers thereof, may be signed or countersigned by the facsimile signature or signatures of the City Clerk and Controller, and if such order or orders are so signed by means of a facsimile signature, any bank or trust company shall, acting in good faith, and without notice of any defect or invalidity, be authorized to pay and be protected in paying, any orders so drawn, bearing or purporting to bear the facsimile signature or signatures of the City Clerk or Controller regardless of the persons by whom, or the means by which the actual or purported facsimile signature or signatures thereon, may have been affixed thereto, if such facsimile signature, or signatures closely resemble the facsimile specimens from time to time filed with such banks or trust companies, upon whom such orders are drawn by the City Clerk and the Controller; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall release such bank or trust company from any liability arising from any cause or fact, other than the fact that such facsimile signature is not a genuine facsimile signature affixed with appropriate authority. 
(7)  Payment by City Treasurer 345 . The City Treasurer shall pay all orders drawn on said treasurer by the City Clerk and countersigned by the Controller, or drawn by the Board of Education in the order in which they shall be presented to the City Treasurer. 
(8)  Authority to discount taxes, borrow in anticipation of taxes or bond sales 346 . The Controller may provide at any time for the discounts, at current rates of interest, of all sums assessed for taxes, and of all sums assessed for benefits on account of the construction of pavements, but not yet payable. The Controller shall have power, in the name of the City, to borrow such sums from time to time, as in its opinion may be needed for City purposes, in anticipation of such taxes as shall have been previously laid, and in anticipation of the sale of bonds which may have been ordered by the Board of Alders in accordance with Law, and for no other purpose; and the amount so borrowed shall be used only for the same purposes that the taxes, assessments or avails of bonds might have been used for, and shall be repaid from said taxes or assessments when collected, or from the sale of such bonds. 
D.  Role of the Collector of Taxes 347 . The Collector of Taxes shall have all the power and be subject to all of the duties imposed by Law upon collectors of town, City and school district taxes 348 . Said Collector of Taxes shall: 
(1)  Receive and collect all taxes, assessments and, except where otherwise provided by Charter or Ordinance, all license fees due the City of New Haven, from all persons liable to pay the same 349 . 
(2)  Proceed forthwith to enforce payment of all taxes and assessments 350 . 
(3)  Have the same power as the Mayor to sign certificates of tax liens and certificates of their release and discharge 351 . 
(4)  Notify the Corporation Counsel to proceed to take such legal steps as may be necessary, in the event legal proceedings are necessary to enforce payment of said taxes or assessments and to protect liens of the same 352 . 
(5)  Before 3:00 o'clock in the afternoon of each business day, deposit with the City Treasurer all moneys collected by said collector of taxes, during the twenty-four (24) hours then ended, and shall take the City Treasurer's receipt for same in triplicate, one copy of which the collector of taxes shall file in the Controller's office forthwith 353 . 
(6)  Power of the Mayor to Issue Tax Warrants 354 . The Mayor shall have power to issue a warrant for the collection of any of said taxes or assessments. 
(7)  Notice of Abatement. Whenever any tax due the said City is abated, the authority making the abatement shall cause notice thereof to be given forthwith to the collector 355 .  
Sec. 6. - City Purchasing Agent . 
A.  Appointment. The City Purchasing Agent shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for the procurements of the City 357 . The Purchasing Agent shall be shall appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(6) of this Article 358 . 
B.  Other Employees 359 . There shall be such other employees under the Purchasing Agent as shall be recommended by the Purchasing Agent and provided for in the budget. 
C.  General Duties. The City Purchasing Agent shall make all purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for all departments, offices, boards, institutions and other agencies of the City 360 . Moreover, the City Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for the central purchasing system for the City covering the purchase of all supplies, materials, equipment and other commodities for the use and needs of all Departments, Boards and Commissions and Officials of the City, including the Board of Education. With regard to the Board of Education, the City Purchasing Agent shall be required to take advantage of incentives, cooperative agreements and consortiums generally available to boards of education in order to expedite the acquisition of goods and services for said Board to meet the curriculum and scheduling requirements of the Board 361 . It shall be the duty of the Purchasing Agent 362 : 
(1)  To establish, after consultation with the heads of the departments concerned, and to enforce, specifications for all supplies, materials and equipment required by the City government 363 . 
(2)  To make, with the approval of the Controller, such regulations and prescribe such forms or requisitions for supplies, materials and equipment by departments for the City as considered reasonably necessary by the Purchasing Agent 364 . 
(3)  To assure that all supplies, materials and equipment purchased for the City conform to specifications and are of the quantity and quality contracted for 365 . 
(4)  To transfer or to sell all personal property determined by the Controller, after consultation with the head of the department concerned, not to be needed by that department or any other Department, or which has become unsuitable for public use 366 . 
(5)  To purchase at the expense of the City all surety bonds required by Law or by Ordinances for Public Officials and employees of the City 367 . 
(6)  To purchase at the expense of the City any insurance against liability or the damage or loss of property on the part of the City 368 . 
D.  Deputy Purchasing Agent 369 . The City Purchasing Agent may appoint a deputy Purchasing Agent, who shall be a member of the classified service and who shall devote full time service to the performance of the duties of office, shall act in the place of the City Purchasing Agent in the absence or incapacity of the City Purchasing Agent, shall assist the City Purchasing Agent in the performance of the duties of said Purchasing Agent and shall perform such other tasks as the City Purchasing Agent shall direct. 
E.  Adoption of a Procurement Ordinance and Regulations. In order to advance the provisions of this Charter, the Board of Alders shall establish by Ordinance the rules and regulations governing the operation of a central purchasing system in a manner consistent with the General Statutes, this Charter, Ordinance and standards established by organizations such as the National Institute of Governmental Purchasing and the National Association of State Purchasing Officials as well as the Model Procurement Code and Ordinances prepared by the American Bar Association. Any provisions referring to purchasing inconsistent with the terms of this section referred to elsewhere in this Charter are hereby expressly repealed. 
(1)  The Board of Alders shall, by Ordinance, establish the rules and regulations governing the purchasing process for the City, including but not limited to, the role and responsibilities of the Purchasing Agent, competitive procurement and solicitation of goods and services for use by the City, advertising and solicitation of bids and proposals and action thereof, consultation with the effected Department or Departments, award and execution of contracts, bonds, exclusions from competitive procurement, waiver of competitive procurement requirements, appeals from decisions of the City Purchasing Agent, disposition of surplus property and such other matters as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this provision of the Charter 
(2)  The City Purchasing Agent may adopt procedural rules and regulations concerning the operation of the Department responsible for public purchases. No such rule shall be inconsistent with the Ordinances adopted pursuant to § 6.F(1) of this Article. 
(3)  Nothing in this Charter shall prevent the City or any of its Departments from participating in any joint purchasing program administered by the State of Connecticut, the Regional Council of Governments, the Connecticut Conference of Municipalities, the Connecticut Association of Boards of Education or any other public agency, including another municipality or municipalities, or other nonprofit organization the members of which are public bodies.  
Sec. 7. - City Assessor . 
A.  Appointment. The City Assessor Agent shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for exercising the powers and performing all the duties that now are, or hereafter may be conferred upon or required of tax assessors of cities and towns by the General Statutes, this Charter or the Ordinances 371 and shall devote full time service to the performance of the duties of said office 372 . The City Assessor shall be shall appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(2) of this Article 373 . 
B.  Other Employees 374 . The department shall be under the charge of the City Assessor who shall appoint and remove all deputies, assistants and other employees of the department, subject to the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Board 375 . 
(1)  Transition Provision. Nothing in this section shall be construed to reduce, eliminate or change in any fashion the Civil Service status of present employees of the board of assessors 376 . 
C.  General Duties. The City Assessor shall adopt such rules and regulations for the guidance of the deputies, assistants and other employees in the performance of their duties as will establish an equitable and scientific system of determining the present true and actual value of all assessable property for taxation 377 . The rules and regulations so adopted and all amendments thereof shall be made available to any taxpayer of the City upon application to the City Assessor 378 .  
Sec. 8. - Director of Public Works . 
A.  Appointment. The Director of Public Works shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for the public works and infrastructure of the City 380 . The Director of Public Works shall be shall appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(2) of this Article 381 . 
B.  Bond 382 . Before taking office, the director shall be bonded in an amount set by the Controller 383 . 
C.  General Duties of Director. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Director of Public Works shall 
(1)  Be responsible for the care and management: 
(a)  Of all streets, avenues, highways, alleys, bridges, sidewalks and public grounds of said City, and the opening, grading, improving, repairing and cleaning of the same 384 ; 
(b)  Of the construction, protection, repair, furnishing, cleaning, heating, lighting and general care of all public buildings, except such as are by the express terms of this Charter under the control of some other Public Official, Department or Board or Commission 385 ; 
(c)  of the construction, repair, cleaning and general care of all sewers, drains, culverts, sluiceways and catch basins, and the collection and disposing of sewage, ashes, garbage and refuse 386 . 
(2)  Cause all Orders of the Board of Alders concerning any of said subjects to be executed 387 . 
(3)  Make all suitable rules and regulations in regard to said department and the conduct of its business 388 . 
(4)  Have the same powers and duties in regard to fence viewing as were formerly vested in the board of selectmen of the Town of New Haven 389 .  
Sec. 9. - City Engineer . 
A.  Appointment. The City Engineer shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for the engineering functions of the City 391 . The Director of Public Works shall be shall appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(2) of this Article 392 . 
B.  General Duties 393 . The City Engineer shall make all surveys, maps, plans, drawings, specifications and estimates relating to work of said department and the Department of Public Works; shall superintend the construction and repair of sewers, bridges and new pavements, and do any other engineering work which said Department of Public Works may require; shall care for and preserve all maps, papers and books of said department, and perform such other duties as may be by Ordinance prescribed. 
C.  Other Employees 394 . The City Engineer shall hire such professional and clerical staff as the City budget may provide.  
Sec. 10. - Chief of Police . 
A.  Appointment 396 . The Chief of Police shall be the Department Head of the department providing police services 397 . The Mayor shall appoint the Chief of Police in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(1) of this Article and the Chief shall be subject to the authority of the Mayor. 
B.  Duties 398 . Said Chief of Police shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the Department of Police Service.  
Sec. 11. - Fire Chief . 
A.  Appointment 400 . The Fire Chief shall be the Department Head of the department providing fire services 401 . The Mayor shall appoint the Fire Chief in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(1) of this Article and the Chief shall be subject to the authority of the Mayor. 
B.  Duties 402 . Said chief shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the Department of Fire Service. 
C.  Fire Marshal 403 . 
(1)  Duties. One of the officers of said Department of Fire Service shall be a Fire Marshal whose duty it shall be to inspect from time to time all school houses and other public buildings, and all buildings in which any public assemblies, exhibitions, entertainments or shows are held, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such buildings are in danger of damage or destruction from fire, and whether the Ordinances concerning means of exit from such buildings are obeyed. It shall also be said marshal's duty to inspect, whenever deemed necessary in the discretion of the marshal, any building in the City, with a view of ascertaining whether the Ordinances and the General Statutes relating to the use and condition of buildings are obeyed, and the marshal shall perform all other duties required by Law in regard to the inspection of buildings 404 . It shall be the marshal's duty whenever deemed necessary in the discretion of the marshal to report all unsafe buildings and all violations of such laws to the building official and the State's Attorney for New Haven County 405 . 
(2)  Acting Fire Chief. In the absence of a Fire Marshal the Fire Chief shall act as Fire Marshal 406 .  
Sec. 12. - General Provisions Concerning the Police and Fire Services . 
A.  Duties of Chief of Police and Fire Chief 408 . 
(1)  The chief of each of the departments responsible for police and fire services, respectively, shall be the chief executive officer of the department and shall be chargeable for its efficiency and responsible for the execution of all laws and rules and regulations of the department 409 . 
(2)  Each chief shall have control of all the property of said City used for and by said departments and shall provide for heating, lighting and repairs of the buildings used by such departments 410 . 
(3)  The chief of each department respectively shall assign to duty all the members of the department, making such changes from time to time as in their respective judgment the efficiency of the department may require 411 . 
(4)  Each chief shall have the power to suspend, without pay, any member of the regular force; provided, however, that no such suspension shall be continued for a period of not more than fifteen (15) Days without affirmative action by the commissioners of the department which action shall not be taken until after a hearing upon charges preferred in writing; a copy of such charges shall be left with said member of the regular force at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time fixed for such hearings 412 . 
(5)  Each chief shall have power to grant leaves of absence to members of the force for a period not exceeding five (5) Days, reporting to the board of commissioners all changes or assignments of office and absence granted 413 . 
B.  Effect of Charter on existing police, fire personnel 414 . When this Charter takes effect all officers and employees of said departments shall continue to hold their respective positions subject to the provisions thereof. 
C.  Existing Ordinances continued in effect 415 . All lawful City Ordinances relating to either of said departments and to any officer thereof and all of the regulations of either of said departments in force at the time fixed for the taking effect of this Charter and not inconsistent herewith, are hereby continued in effect until the same shall be duly amended by competent authority.  
Sec. 13. - Director of Parks and Recreation . 
A.  Appointment. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for parks and recreation 417 . The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Parks and Recreation in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(3) of this Article and the Director shall be subject to the authority of the Mayor 418 . 
B.  General Powers and Duties 419 . Said director shall have charge: 
(1)  [Of] control and management and use of all public parks, squares and open places which are included in the park system of the City of New Haven on the effective date of this Charter, and which may hereafter be acquired or dedicated to public use, as parts of or additions to the public park system of the City or Town of New Haven, whether within or without the limits of said City, but not including streets in parks within the City limits 420 . 
(2)  Of the selection, cultivation, procuring, planting, spraying, trimming, preservation and removal of all trees in the streets of the City of New Haven and in parks and public places of said City 421 . 
(3)  Of the preservation, development and adornment of said parks and places 422 
C.  Other Employees. Role of the City Engineer 423 . Said director shall have power to appoint or employ such superintendents, engineers and other officers and employees as said director may deem necessary, under the direction and in accordance with the rules of the department responsible for personnel and the Civil Service System. Said director may call on the City Engineer for such services as may be deemed necessary. 
D.  Director to provide division of recreation 424 . Said director shall provide for a division of recreation which shall be under the supervision of the Director of Parks and Recreation, who shall have charge of all municipal recreation, supervising and organizing recreation activities in this City.  
Sec. 14. - Director of Building Inspection and Enforcement . 
A.  Appointment. The Director of Building Inspection and Enforcement shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for building, plumbing and electrical inspection as well as the regulation of buildings and construction 426 . 
(1)  The department shall also include the following inspectors: Building Official, Plumbing Inspector and Electrical Inspector 427 . 
(2)  The Mayor shall appoint the Director of Building Inspection and Enforcement, Building Official, Plumbing Inspector and Electrical Inspector in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A (6) of this Article and the Director shall be subject to the authority of the Mayor 428 . 
B.  Salary. Said Mayoral appointees shall receive for their services such salaries as shall be determined by the budget 429 . 
C.  Term. They shall hold their respective offices until they vacate them or are removed for sufficient cause, duly shown, which cause shall not be political 430 . 
D.  Other Employees 431 . The Director of the Office of Building Inspection and Enforcement shall appoint and remove such other employees in the office subject to the provisions of this Charter. 
E.  Restrictions 432 . No building official or inspector shall, during such term of office, engage in any other business, or be interested, directly or indirectly, in the doing of any work or the furnishing of any materials or supplies for the construction, maintenance or repair of any building, or for any plumbing work or electrical work, or in the making of plans for specifications therefor. 
F.  General Powers and Duties of the Building Official and Inspectors 433 . 
(1)  Building Inspection 434 . With regard to the building inspection function the duty of the Building Official shall be to inspect, or cause to be inspected, buildings and other structures within said City, to secure the enforcement of all Ordinances of said City concerning the use, construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other structures, and to perform such other duties as may be by Ordinance prescribed. 
(2)  Plumbing Inspection 435 . With regard to the plumbing inspection function the duty of the plumbing inspector shall be, under the direction of said Director, to inspect, or cause to be inspected, plumbing and piping work within said City, to secure the enforcement of all Ordinances of said City concerning the use, construction, alteration and repair of plumbing and piping work, and to perform such other duties as may be by Ordinances prescribed. 
(3)  Electrical Inspection 436 . With regard to the electrical inspection function the duty of the electrical inspector shall be, under the direction of said Director, to inspect, or cause to be inspected, electrical plants and wires on which electricity is conducted within said City, to secure the enforcement of all Ordinances of said City concerning such plants and wires, and to perform such other duties as may be by Ordinance prescribed.  
Sec. 15. - Director of Public Health. 
A.  Appointment. The Director of Health shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for public health 437 . The Board of Public Health shall appoint the Director of Health in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(7) of this Article 438 . The Director of Public Health shall be on the unclassified service 439 . 
B.  Other Employees. 
(1)  Generally 440 . With the approval and consent of the Board of Health, and subject to the articles of this Charter pertaining to personnel, the Director of Public Health shall appoint and remove all assistants and employees of the department, shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of same, and for the care and custody of all property of the City belonging to or used by said department. 
(2)  Registrar of Vital Statistics 441 . The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be appointed by the Director of Public Health and shall be under the supervision of said director as shall be all assistants and employees of the department 442 . The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall perform those duties imposed by Law upon Registrars of Vital Statistics and shall reside in said City during such term of office 443 . 
(3)  Salaries 444 . The director's and assistants' salaries shall be recommended by the board and provided for in the budget. 
C.  General Powers and Duties 445 . The Director shall also: 
(1)  Have and exercise in the City and over the navigable waters adjacent thereto all the jurisdiction and powers conferred and all the duties imposed upon City, town, or district health officers of this State in their respective jurisdictions by the General Statutes 446 . 
(2)  Have the power and it shall be duty of the director to regulate the production, process and distribution of food stuffs in the City; to order the forthwith vacation of any land or building unfit for human habitation; and to abate nuisances after reasonable notice, at the expense of the owner or the person creating or maintaining same 447 . 
(3)  Perform such other duties and take such other measures for the prevention of disease and the preservation of public health as provided by the Ordinances 448 . 
(4)  Serve as secretary of the board ex officio, and attend its meetings 449 . 
(5)  Keep the board apprised of the activities of the department, render an annual report to the board and the Mayor on or before the first of March of the succeeding year 450 . 
(6)  May incur such expenditures which are deemed necessary, in case of serious medical emergencies and with the advice and consent of the Mayor, until the Board of Alders shall have taken action in the premises 451 . 
D.  Duty of police to enforce health regulations, orders 452 . It is hereby made the duty of the Department of Police Service to render, upon the request of said director, such assistance in the enforcement of its bylaws, rules, regulations and orders as said request may require.  
Sec. 16. - City Librarian . 
A.  Appointment. The City Librarian shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for the operation and management of the public library facilities for the City 454 . The Board of Library Directors shall appoint the City Librarian in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(7) of this Article 455 and may remove said Librarian in accordance with the provisions accorded to the Mayor in § 15.B, D and E of Article II of this Charter. 
B.  Other Employees: Compensation, Appointment and Promotion. Said board shall recommend the compensation of such officers and employees to be established in the budget 456 . Appointments and promotions to the positions of librarian, assistant librarians, and superintendents of the different departments may be made by said board subject to the provisions of this Charter 457 . 
C.  Library Appropriations 458 . The Board of Alders of the City shall annually appropriate a sum of money for the purpose aforesaid, and may from time to time appropriate, in addition thereto, sums of money for building sites, repairs, improvements in real estate or new buildings. All moneys which have been or shall be appropriated, and all moneys received from any other source for such purposes, shall be kept by the City Treasurer as a separate fund to be paid out only on the order of the board of directors herein provided for.  
Sec. 17. - Superintendent of Schools. 
A.  Appointment. The Superintendent of Schools shall be the Department Head of the public school system for the City 459 . The Board of Education shall appoint the Superintendent of Schools in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(7) of this Article and in conformity to the requirements of the General Statutes 460 and may remove said Superintendent in accordance with the provisions accorded to the Mayor in § 15.B, D and E of Article II of this Charter or as may otherwise be required by Law. 
B.  Other Employees: Compensation, Appointment and Promotion. The appointments made by the Superintendent of Schools of all certified and qualified personnel and all other employees are subject to the approval of the Board of Education 461 . The Superintendent of Schools with the approval of the Board of Education shall have the power to discharge any employee for cause after due notice and hearing by the Board of Education 462 . Subject to the provisions of this Charter and the rules and regulations thereunder, the board may establish such positions, the conditions and terms of employment and salaries as it deems necessary for the proper functioning of the department 463 . 
C.  Duties. In addition to such duties and responsibilities assigned by the Board of Education, the Superintendent shall be responsible for effectuating and facilitating the administration of the provisions of this Charter pertaining to student representation on the Board of Education, as set forth in § 3.A(2) of Article VII. In that regard, the Superintendent shall be responsible for promoting student engagement; establishing programs facilitating the recruitment and involvement of students; mentoring and supporting the student representatives; and, providing such assistance as may be required.  
Sec. 18. - Personnel Director. 
A.  Appointment. The Personnel Director 464 shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for personnel and the Civil Service System 465 . The Mayor shall appoint the Personnel Director in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(6) of this Article 466 . 
B.  Powers and Duties of Personnel Director 467 . The Personnel Director shall have the power and the duty: 
(1)  To assist employees in availing themselves of any provisions relating to personnel grievances and labor relations 468 . 
(2)  To furnish and recommend to the Civil Service Board job descriptions, qualifications and the compensation range relating to positions to be filled 469 . 
(3)  To prepare in accordance with nationally accepted professional standards and recommend to the Civil Service Board qualifications for each department head, whether or not a member of the classified service, which standards shall be reviewed and updated every five (5) years and when a vacancy occurs in the position 470 . 
(4)  To maintain a roster of all persons in the City's service, in which there shall be set forth as to each officer and employee, the class title of the position held, the salary or pay, any changes in class, title, pay or status; and such other data as may be deemed desirable or useful to produce significant facts pertaining to personnel administration 471 . 
(5)  To certify all payrolls for persons in the classified service, and no payment for personal service to any person in the classified service of the City shall be made unless the payroll voucher bears the certification of the Personnel Director or said directors authorized agent that the persons mentioned therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter 472 . 
(6)  To assist in developing programs of training and education for persons in the municipal service 473 . 
(7)  To investigate periodically the operation and effect of the personnel provisions of this Charter and report semiannually any findings and recommendations to the Mayor 474 . 
(8)  To appoint and remove, subject to the provisions of this Charter, all employees in the office of the Personnel Director 475 . 
(9)  To advertise for candidates for examination for all positions, and to determine the eligibility of applicants for all positions in accordance with this Charter, the rules established by the Civil Service Board, and the qualifications of the position. Public Notice of all competitive examinations shall be given not less than fifteen (15) Days prior to the date set for each such examination 476 . 
(10)  To prepare, conduct and score examinations of qualified applicants for all positions in the classified service and to certify the results thereof to the Civil Service Board 477 . 
(11)  To maintain records of all applicants, their qualifications and scores. The records of successful candidates shall be public records 478 .  
Sec. 19. - Planning Director . 
A.  Appointment. The Planning Director shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for all matters pertaining to the planning functions of the City 480 . The Mayor shall appoint the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A(2) of this Article 481 . 
B.  General Duties 482 . The Planning Director shall be the technical advisor of the City Planning Commission and, subject to the provisions of this Charter and the rules and regulations hereunder, shall appoint and remove such assistants and employees and within the limits of the appropriation therefor, employ planners, engineers, architects or other technical assistants, with the approval of the City Planning Commission.  
Sec. 20. - Director of Traffic and Parking . 
A.  Appointment. The Director of Traffic and Parking shall be the Department Head of the department responsible for all matters pertaining to the traffic functions of the City 484 . The Mayor shall appoint the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions of § 3.A (2) of this Article 485 . 
B.  General Duties. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the director of traffic and parking and the traffic engineer shall: 
(1)  Be responsible for all aspects of traffic safety and control and all on-street parking in said City including, but not limited to, such matters as traffic planning and analysis, installation and maintenance of traffic control devices, signs, signals and markers, parking planning, meter distribution and operation, public transportation planning and other aspects related to the safe and convenient use of the transportation facilities of the City of New Haven 486 . 
(2)  Make all suitable rules and regulations in regard to said department and the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the General Statutes and Ordinances of the City 487 . 
(3)  Subject to the articles of this Charter pertaining to personnel: 
(a)  appoint and remove all assistants and employees of the department; 
(b)  be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of same, and for the care and custody of all property of the City belonging to or used by said department 488 .  
ARTICLE VII. - APPOINTIVE BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - General Requirements Concerning Membership on Appointive Boards and Commissions . 
A.  Appointment 491 . Except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes or this Charter all members of Boards and Commissions shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval by the Board of Alders. Moreover the Mayor shall fill, by appointment, any vacancy in any Board or Commission in which the Mayor is given the power to appoint the incumbent of such office, subject to approval by the Board of Alders; however, if the Mayor fails to propose a candidate for a vacancy on a Board or Commission within sixty (60) Days following the effective date of that vacancy, then the Board of Alders may fill the vacancy within sixty (60) Days thereafter by a majority vote of the members of the Board of Alders, present. If the Board of Alders fails to fill the vacancy, then the remaining members of the Board or Commission in which the vacancy exists may fill the vacancy by appointment. 
B.  Publication of Boards and Commissions 492 . During the month of December in each year, the City Clerk shall cause Publication for, at least, thirty (30) Days a list of all the Boards and Commissions of the City. Any Elector desirous of serving on any Board or Commission may express such desire in writing addressed to such clerk, who shall retain such Public Notice on file for two (2) years. The appointing authority of any member of any Board or Commission shall review such Public Notices prior to making an appointment to such Board or Commission. 
C.  Minimum Qualification for Membership 493 . No person may serve on a Board or Commission unless such person is an Elector of the City. If any such person who is a member of a Board or Commission shall move from the City, such person's membership on such Board or Commission shall be immediately terminated. 
D.  Limitations of Service. 
(1)  No person may be appointed to a new term on any Board or Commission if at the time of the commencement of such new term such person shall have served nine (9) consecutive years on such Board or Commission. Such person may be reappointed to such Board or Commission after a lapse of one (1) year 494 . 
(2)  Except where otherwise provided by General Statutes or Special Acts, no person may serve as an appointed member of more than one (1) Board or Commission at the same time unless such person is an Alder appointed to such Board or Commissions to represent the Board of Alders 495 . 
E.  Compensation of Board and Commission Members 496 . All Members of Boards and Commissions shall serve without pay, except as otherwise expressly provided. 
F.  Vacancies 497 . Members of Boards and Commissions shall serve until completion of the current term of office (unless unable to complete the term of office) and until a successor has been appointed and qualified; upon death; removal from office (as set forth in this Charter or in accordance with Law); incapacity; upon failure to comply with the Elector requirements of this Charter; or other reason as may be defined by this Charter. 
G.  Minority Party Representation 498 . Unless otherwise required by the General Statutes or as otherwise set forth in this Charter, the political affiliation of the members of all appointed Boards or Commissions or panel of alternates shall reflect the requirements of the General Statutes with respect to minority party representation. This provision shall apply to all Boards or Commissions established or required by this Charter or established by Ordinance. Where a Board or Commission is comprised of multiple appointing authorities, the Mayor shall endeavor to assure that the composition of the Board or Commission is in compliance with this provision. 
H.  Quorum 499 . A majority of the total voting membership of each such Board and Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business; unless, otherwise required by the General Statutes. 
I.  Organization and Procedure. Boards and Commissions shall: (1) elect a Chair and such other officers as deemed necessary; (2) file such notices, keep records and post agendas as required by the General Statutes; and, (3) actively solicit public participation (including, but not limited to, public speaking). The agendas of Boards and Commissions shall be approved by the Chair of such entity.  
Sec. 2. - Required Provisions for All Appointive Boards and Commissions . 
A.  In addition to those Boards and Commissions established by § 3 of this Article, the Board of Alders may, by Ordinance, adopt such additional provisions necessary for the operation of the Boards and Commissions required by § 4 of this Article and establish such additional Boards and Commissions of the City as may be necessary. Unless this Charter or Special Acts provides otherwise, the Board of Alders shall set forth, by Ordinance: 
(1)  The number of Board and Commission members (and alternates) and terms of office, which may be staggered. Except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes, the number shall always be odd and the term of office shall not exceed a term of five (5) years, which may be staggered. 
(2)  Any such Ordinance shall make provision for (a) the appointment of a chair and a delineation of the responsibilities of the presiding officer; (b) the keeping of records and posting of agendas as required by the General Statutes; (c) minority party representation in accordance with § 1.F(1) of this Chapter; (d) public participation (including, but not limited to, notice of affected property owners, residential or commercial tenants and neighborhood organizations, establishing methods and means designed to encourage and increase public input and consultation of affected residents and to assure the opportunity for public speaking); and, (e) the frequency and location of public hearings and meetings of all Boards and Commissions. The agendas of Boards and Commissions shall be approved by the Chair of such entity prior to distribution to the members. 
B.  The Board of Alders may, by Ordinance, establish minimum qualifications, training requirements or attributes for members of Boards and Commissions for the sole purpose of assuring diversity of experiences, backgrounds or attributes and continuing education necessary to the functioning of said Board or Commission. Said qualifications may not alter or modify any requirements of this Charter or the Special Acts. This provision applies to Boards and Commissions established by this Charter to the extent such Ordinance is consistent with the provisions of the Charter.  
Sec. 3. - Boards and Commissions Established by the Charter 
A.  The Board of Education 501 . 
(1)  Establishment 502 . There shall be a Board of Education which shall be responsible for the management and control of the department responsible for public education in the City. 
(2)  Composition. Effective on January 1, 2016, the Board of Education shall consist of seven (7) members as follows: the Mayor, four (4) members appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Board of Alders; and two (2) elected by district, which districts shall be established as set forth in § 3 of Article II of this Charter. 
(a)  Student Representation. There shall be two (2) non-voting positions on the Board of Education for students of the City's public high schools, to be elected to serve following the completion of their sophomore year and serve through the completion of their senior year for a two (2) year term, which terms shall be staggered. The Board of Alders shall establish a process (i) establishing the staggered terms and (ii) for the election of such representatives through direct election by public high school students or through a citywide student assembly such as the citywide student council. The non-voting members shall be exempted from the provisions of this Charter pertaining to qualifications; however, they shall be residents of the City. 
(3)  Term of Office. 
(a)  Appointed Members 503 . Effective on January 1, 2014, on or before the first (1 st ) day of September, 2014 and in every year thereafter the Mayor shall submit, to the Board of Alders, nominees for appointment to fill the vacancies about to occur in positions on said board by appointing one or two members, as the case may be, to serve for four (4) years commencing on January 1 of the year following said submission. 
(i)  Transition Provision regarding the terms of Appointed Members of the Board of Education. Until 11:59:59 P.M. on December 31, 2015 the Board of Education shall consist of the Mayor and seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor, subject to the provisions of this Charter and said appointed members shall remain in office subject to their term of four (4) years; however, said terms shall be extended until 11:59:59 PM on December 31 st of the final year of the respective term. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Charter to the contrary, the Mayor shall not reappoint, the two (2) members whose terms will end on December 31, 2015, for the express purpose of establishing two (2) vacant seats to be filled by the election of members, by district, in the municipal election to be held on the first (1 st ) Tuesday after the first (1 st ) Monday of November, 2015. 
(b)  Elected Members. The members elected, by Education District (as set forth in §§ 3 and 4 of Article II of this Charter), on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2015 shall serve for a term of four (4) years and two (2) years, respectively. The seat of the member subject to the two (2) year term shall subject to election on the first (1 st ) Tuesday after the first (1 st ) Monday in November, 2017 and the member then elected shall serve for a term of four (4) years. The members elected to four (4) year terms shall be elected quadrennially thereafter and shall serve a term of four (4) years. 
(i)  Transition Provision regarding the terms of the Elected Members of the Board of Education. The Board of Alders shall designate the Education District subject to the transitional two (2) term upon adoption of two (2) districts required by this Charter, subject to the provisions of §§ 3 and 4 of Article II of this Charter. 
(4)  Vacancies 504 . The Mayor shall fill all vacancies caused by death, resignation or otherwise, by appointment, for the unexpired term of Appointed members of the Board of Education. The vacancies of the elected members shall be filled in accordance with § 7.D of Article I of this Charter. 
(5)  General Duties and Powers of the Board of Education. The Board of Education shall: 
(a)  Have the entire charge, control and management of all the public schools in the City, and of the expenditure of all moneys appropriated for the support and maintenance of the same unless otherwise provided herein; 
(b)  Have charge and control of the construction, repair and maintenance of all school buildings, grounds and equipment, and shall possess all other powers and be subject to all other duties of boards of education, school committees, and school visitors in this State, so far as the same are consistent with the provisions of this Charter 505 . 
(c)  Annually choose a President and Vice President from among its own members, make its own bylaws, keep a journal of its proceedings of which a suitable number shall be printed for public distribution, define the duties of its officers and committees, and prescribe such rules and regulations for the proper operation of the public schools of the City as are not inconsistent with the General Statutes 506 ; 
(d)  Annually, on or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day of January, prepare and submit to the Mayor a report of the Department of Education for the preceding fiscal year of which a reasonable number shall be printed for public distribution 507 ; 
(e)  Have the authority to determine all school boundaries of the City of New Haven is hereby expressly granted to this board 508 ; and, 
(f)  Identify and adopt nationally-recognized best practices for engaging the public in the education system 509 . 
(6)  Budgets for department 510 . Estimates of the receipts and expenditures of the Department of Education shall be included in the annual City budget, and the Board of Education shall supply the Mayor and the Controller with information for the preparation of the annual budget as fully and in like detail as shall be required of other departments, offices, and agencies of the City government. The action of the Mayor and the Board of Alders on the requests of the board shall relate to their total only (unless otherwise permitted by the General Statutes or Law); and if the board shall receive an appropriation greater or less than its original request, it shall forthwith revise its detailed estimate of its expenditures in accordance therewith. 
(7)  Purchases for department 511 . The department shall purchase supplies and materials for the schools through the Purchasing Agent. However, the Purchasing Agent shall not vary the specifications as to standards or quantity contained in the requisitions of the department for such supplies and materials. 
(8)  Power to take property for schools 512 . The City of New Haven, upon the recommendation of the Board of Education, shall have power to take sites for school houses, or for the enlargement of sites already acquired, in the manner provided by Law for the taking of land for public parks. 
B.  The Board of Ethics 513 . 
(1)  Establishment 514 . There shall be a Board of Ethics which shall be responsible for the adoption of rules and regulations for the administration of the Code of Ethics for the City. 
(2)  Composition 515 . The Board of Ethics shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the Mayor. 
(3)  Board members 516 . During the month of January, 1961, and biennially thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint the members of the board of ethics who shall serve for a period of two (2) years. 
(4)  General Duties and Powers of the Board of Ethics. 
(a)  The board shall adopt and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the administration of this code pursuant to this Charter and Ordinances which may be enacted hereunder 517 . 
(b)  The rules and regulations so adopted and promulgated and all amendments thereof shall be made available to any person upon request to the board 518 . 
(c)  The board shall render advisory opinions to the Board of Alders or to any of its committees, and to Public Officials and employees pursuant to written request or upon its own initiative and shall make public such advisory opinions making such deletions as may be necessary to prevent disclosure of the identity of the Public Official or employee involved 519 . 
(d)  The board is further authorized to hold Public Hearings in its discretion on matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this code 520 . 
C.  The Financial Review and Audit Commission 521 . 
(1)  Establishment 522 . There shall be a Financial Review and Audit Commission which shall be responsible for reviewing and reporting on the financial condition of the City. 
(2)  Composition 523 . The Financial Review and Audit Commission shall consist of nine (9) members. 
(a)  Terms 524 . Members shall be appointed for five (5) year terms, except that of the nine (9) first appointed, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, and two (2) shall be appointed to terms of two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years, respectively. 
(b)  Restriction on Service 525 . No member of the commission shall hold any other office or position in the government of the City, appointed or elected, except as a member of said commission. 
(c)  Additional Ground for Removal from Office 526 . In addition to the reasons set forth in this Charter, a member of said commission may be remove for failure to attend a specified number of meetings of the commission within a specified period as the commission may set forth in its bylaws" 
(d)  Experience 527 . Not fewer than seven (7) members shall have training and experience in financial matters as evidenced by being a certified public accountant, having earned a bachelor's degree in business or public administration, having not less than five (5) years service as the financial officer of a business, having not less than five (5) years service as a public administrator, or having a similar degree or experience. 
(e)  Chair of the Commission 528 . The commission shall elect a chairman from among its members to hold office for a term or terms of one (1) year each and may adopt bylaws to govern its procedures. 
(3)  Staff: Executive Director and Deputy Executive Director. The commission by affirmative vote of seven (7) of its members shall appoint or reappoint, for a term or terms not to exceed four (4) years each, an executive director and a deputy director, who shall not be members of the classified service, and who may be removed by the affirmative vote of seven (7) of the members of the commission 529 . The commission may appoint such other personnel as the City budget may provide, who shall be members of the classified service 530 . The expenses of the commission, including the salaries of its employees, shall be paid by the City 531 . 
(4)  General Duties and Powers of the Financial Review and Audit Commission. 
(a)  The commission shall meet not less frequently than monthly to review the financial condition of the City as described in the monthly financial reports described in § 5 of Article VIII of this Charter and in the audited financial statements, and to conduct such other business as may come before it 532 . 
(b)  The Mayor, the Controller and other Public Officials shall make available to the commission all information concerning the financial performance of the City as the commission may request 533 . 
(c)  Not later than the tenth (10 th ) day of each month, the commission shall submit a report to the Mayor and the Board of Alders containing such comments and recommendations concerning the financial report issued by the Mayor during the preceding month pursuant to § 5 of Article VIII of this Charter and the City's financial condition as the commission may deem appropriate 534 . 
(d)  The commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Alders concerning the selection of the auditor of the City 535 . 
D.  Board of Assessment Appeals 536 . 
(1)  Establishment 537 . There shall be a Board of Assessment Appeals. Said Board shall possess all of the powers and shall annually perform all of the duties in and for the City imposed by Law on the boards of tax review and assessment appeals. 
(2)  Composition. The Board shall consist of three (3) members 538 . 
(a)  Terms 539 . In the month of January 1952, and annually thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint one (1) member of the Board of Assessment Appeals to serve for three (3) years from the first (1 st ) day of February next following appointment to office. 
(b)  Experience 540 . Such appointments made after July 1, 1993, shall be made so that as soon as possible and continuously thereafter two (2) members of said board shall have either an appraiser's license or a real estate agent's license issued by the State. 
E.  Board of Police Commissioners 541 . 
(1)  Establishment 542 . There shall be a Board of Police Commissioners. Said Board shall advise and consult with the Chief of Police concerning matters pertaining to the chief's duties and to the conduct of the department, and together with the chief shall make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the department which it may deem necessary or advisable, which rules shall be printed and made available to the public. 
(2)  Appointment and Membership 543 . The Board shall consist of six (6) members. 
(a)  Terms 544 . During the month of January each year the Mayor shall appoint two (2) members of said board for a term of three (3) years from the first (1 st ) day of February next succeeding. 
(b)  Police commissioners not to deal in intoxicating liquors 545 . No commissioner on said police board excepting a licensed druggist shall, either as principal, agent, or employee, be engaged in or directly or indirectly interested in the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors. 
(3)  General Duties and Powers of the Board of Police Commissioners. In general, the Board of Police Commissioners shall be responsible for policy making, with the advice of the chief of police, and for the evaluation of such policies 546 . 
F.  Board of Fire Commissioners 547 . 
(1)  Establishment. There shall be a Board of Fire Commissioners 548 . Said Board of Fire Commissioners shall advise and consult with the Fire Chief concerning matters pertaining to the chief's duties and to the conduct of the department, and together with the chief shall make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the department which it may deem necessary or advisable, which rules shall be printed and made available to the public 549 . 
(2)  Appointment and Membership 550 . The Board shall consist of five (5) members. 
(a)  Terms 551 . During the month of January each year the Mayor shall appoint for a term of three (3) years from the first (1 st ) day of February next succeeding such number of commissioners as may be necessary to fill vacancies arising by reason of the expiration of terms. 
(3)  Duties 552 . Said Board of Fire Commissioners shall have authority to make a contract with corporations and individuals outside of the areas now served by the municipality and outside of the limits of said City, granting such corporations and individuals fire protection for such compensation as may be deemed just and proper, subject to the approval of the Board of Alders. 
G.  General Provisions Concerning the Police and Fire Commissioners. 
(1)  Power of boards of commissioners over employees 553 . Each of said boards of commissioners shall have sole power of appointment and promotion of all sworn members and employees of their respective departments, under such rules and regulations as they may adopt for the purpose, and in accordance with rules governing the Civil Service System. 
(2)  Vote required for appointments, promotions by the Board of Police Commissioners 554 . No appointments or promotions in the police department shall be made except by the affirmative vote of not less than four (4) commissioners, except where otherwise provided. 
(3)  Removal, demotion, suspension 555 . Each of said boards of commissioners shall have power, for cause, after a hearing on charges, made in writing, to remove, reduce in rank, or suspend without pay any sworn member or employee in its department that it has power to appoint. 
(4)  Authorized Procedure 556 . No removal, reduction in rank, or suspension shall be made for political reasons. Charges against any sworn member or employee shall be preferred by the chief, served upon the person accused at least forty-eight (48) hours before the time fixed for a hearing, and presented to the board of commissioners of the department to which such sworn member or employee may belong. 
(5)  Appeal from removal, demotion, suspension. Any office or employee aggrieved by the action of said board may make application to any judge of a court of competent jurisdiction within and for New Haven County in the nature of an appeal from such order of the Board of Commissioners, which application shall be made returnable not more than twelve (12) nor less than three (3) Days from the date of such order of the commissioners, and a copy thereof shall be served upon the City Clerk at least forty-eight (48) hours before the day on which it is made returnable 557 . 
(6)  Said judge having given such further notice as deemed necessary by the court, shall forthwith hear said application, and may approve, modify, or revoke such order, and may award costs at the discretion of the court 558 . 
(7)  During the pendency of said application such order of the commissioners shall have full force and effect, subject, however, to the power of said judge if such order shall be modified or revoked to make such judicial decree relate back to the date of such order 559 . 
H.  Board of Park Commissioners 560 . 
(1)  Establishment. There shall be a Board of Park Commissioners 561 . The Board of Park Commissioners shall advise and consult with the Director of Parks and Recreation pertaining to duties of the director and to the conduct of the department 562 . 
(2)  Membership 563 . The Board shall consist of eight (8) members. 
(a)  Classification of Members 564 . 
(i)  Three (3) permanent or citizen commissioners of the East Rock Park Commission shall be commissioners of said board; 
(ii)  Three (3) commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor, as hereinafter provided, and 
(iii)  Two (2) commissioners shall be elected by the Board of Alders, on a bipartisan basis, in each year 565 . 
The three (3) citizen commissioners of the East Rock Park Commission shall continue to hold their respective positions, and their successors shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of the act incorporating East Rock Park in the City of New Haven and the amendments thereto 566 . 
(b)  Terms 567 . In January every year the Mayor shall appoint one (1) commissioner to hold office for three (3) years from the first (1 st ) day of February. 
(c)  Political affiliations 568 . Not more than two (2) members of said board appointed by the Mayor shall belong to the same political party. 
(d)  Rules of Procedure 569 . The board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business consistent with this Charter. 
(4)  Role of the Board. 
(a)  In general the board shall be responsible for policy making with the advice of the Director of Parks and Recreation and for the evaluation of these policies 570 . This shall include, but not be limited to the adoption of such rules and regulations, on recommendation of the Director of Parks and Recreation and not inconsistent with the General Statutes or the provisions of this Charter, related to the use, preservation and enjoyment of all public parks and recreation areas of the City of New Haven 571 . 
(b)  The Board of Park Commissioners is hereby empowered to make and alter, from time to time, all needful rules and regulations for the maintenance of order, safety and decency in said parks and places, use of recreation facilities, the prevention of any depredation therein or misuse of the same, and the protection and preservation of said parks and places, both within and without the limits of the City, and to affix penalties for disobedience thereto, which rules and regulations shall have the force of Ordinances of the City of New Haven; provided, that no such rule or regulation shall be of any effect unless it shall have been first approved by the Board of Alders, and then available in a Public Notice, at full length, in one or more media in the City and also printed and posted in conspicuous places within the limits of the parks or places to which such regulation is intended to apply 572 . 
(c)  For the purpose of enforcing such rules and regulations, all such parks and places, whether within or without the limits of the City of New Haven, are hereby placed under the police jurisdiction of the City of New Haven, and complaints for violation of such regulations may be made by the State's Attorney for New Haven County; but nothing contained in this section shall be construed to affect the general police or governmental jurisdiction of any town within whose limits any portion of such public park or place may be situated 573 . 
(d)  Any member of the police department or the superintendent of any park may arrest, without warrant, in any of such parks or places, whether within or without the limits of the City of New Haven, any person who has broken any park rules or committed any other offense in said parks; and the proper State court shall have jurisdiction of all misdemeanors committed within the limits of said parks 574 . 
(e)  Said board, with the approval of the Board of Alders, shall have power, in the name and on behalf of the City of New Haven, to procure by gift, purchase, lease exchange or other contract, or by condemnation as herein provided, real property, whether within or without the limits of the City of New Haven, for the purpose of providing public parks or the enlarging of existing parks, provided no expenditures shall be made in excess of the amount previously appropriated for such purpose, and provided no land shall be acquired by said board in the manner above specified within the Town of West Haven except within an area outlined in red on a map on file with the town clerk in West Haven, dated April 2, 1925, and known as "Map of West River Park" and provided no land shall be acquired by said board in the manner above specified in any other town except by agreement with the officials of the town in which such land shall be located 575 . 
(f)  Authority of board to accept, control property 576 . The Board of Park Commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to accept, with the approval of the Board of Alders, any and all devises, legacies or gifts of property, either real or personal, of any kind or class, that may be given or left to it by will or devise; and the Board of Park Commissioners is hereby given full power and authority, as trustees or otherwise, to invest, reinvest property of any class or kind, already given, or which may hereafter be given, either to said Board of Park Commissioners, or to the City of New Haven in trust for the use of said Board of Park Commissioners. 
(5)  Applicability of budgeting, financial provisions to Director and park commission 577 . The Director of Parks and Recreation and the Board of Park Commissioners shall be subject to all the provisions of this Charter pertaining to budgetary control and financial administration which are applicable to other departments, agencies and offices of the City except when the same is in conflict with the discretion of the director and the board in the management and control of trust funds for park purposes. 
I.  Board of Public Health 578 . 
(1)  Establishment. There shall be a Board of Public Health 579 . The Board of Public Health shall advise with the Director of Public Health on matters pertaining to the duties of office and to the conduct of the department 580 . 
(2)  Appointment and Membership 581 . The Board shall consist of six (6) members. 
(a)  Terms. Members of the board shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of five (5) years 582 . The Mayor shall appoint one (1) member every year from the first (1 st ) day of February, except in the year when two (2) members have completed their term of office in which year two (2) appointments shall be made 583 . 
(b)  Qualifications 584 . At least two (2) of the members shall be doctors of medicine, from an accredited school of medicine, and who shall each have not less than five (5) years of experience in any or all of the following: Clinical medicine, public health administration, or college or university teaching in any of the branches of medical sciences. 
(c)  Employees 585 . The department shall have such a number of professional and clerical assistants as said board shall prescribe. 
(3)  Duties. On recommendation of the Director of Public Health it shall have the power to adopt such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the General Statutes or the provisions of this Charter, as in its judgment the prevention of disease and the preservation of public health shall require 586 . Such rules and regulations shall be enforced in the same manner as City Ordinances, provided, however, no such rules or regulations shall be in full force and effect until Public Notice of the same on at least four (4) separate occasions 587 . 
J.  Board of Library Directors 588 . 
(1)  Statement of Purpose 589 . The City of New Haven recognizes the right of all its citizens to have full and unlimited access to information and knowledge so that they can meet the needs of daily living, have the opportunities for self education and participate successfully in self government. 
(2)  Establishment. There shall be a Board of Library Directors 590 . Said board of directors shall have charge of all the property of said City used for the purposes of said library, and shall direct the expenditures of all money placed at its disposal by the City from whatever source derived 591 . 
(3)  Appointment and Membership 592 . Notwithstanding the provisions of this Charter to the contrary, the board shall consist of nine (9) directors and the Mayor who may preside ex officio over said board and who shall vote only to dissolve a tie. 
(a)  Terms. 
(i)  In January, 1952 and in every third year thereafter, and in January, 1953, and in every third year thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint two (2) directors to hold office for three (3) years from the date of their appointment 593 . 
(ii)  In January, 1952, and annually in said month thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint one (1) Alder of the City to hold office as director for one (1) year; provided, however, that if said appointee shall at any time during the year cease to be a member of the Board of Alders, then said appointee's term of office as director shall also expire, and the Mayor shall fill the vacancy by the appointment of another Alder to hold the said office of director for the remainder of one (1) year 594 . 
(4)  General Duties of the Board 595 . Said board of directors shall make and enforce such rules and regulations as it may deem proper, for the management, protection and preservation of the property of said library. 
(a)  Regulation of use of library 596 . Said board of directors may make rules, extending, upon such terms and under such conditions as to the board may seem best, all of the privileges of said library to any or all of the following classes of persons, viz.: First, to nonresidents attending school or college within the limits of said City of New Haven; second, to nonresidents doing business in said City of New Haven who pay taxes therein; third, to all nonresidents on the payment of such sums as may be fixed by the board of directors. 
(b)  Disposition of library receipts; books and records; debts exceeding available funds prohibited 597 . All receipts of said library from fines, sales of books, catalogues and all other receipts shall be added to said fund, and shall be at the disposal of said board of directors. All bills and vouchers for expenses incurred shall be kept on file in said library, subject to inspection by the City Controller, the Corporation Counsel and the members of the board of directors of said library. In no case shall the board of directors incur any debt for the free public library beyond the amount of current funds on hand and the previous unexpended appropriations of the budget. 
(c)  Gifts, devises, legacies for library purposes 598 . The Department of the Public Library is hereby authorized and empowered to accept any and all devises, legacies or gifts of property, either real or personal, of any kind or class, that may be given or left to it by will or devise; and the Board of Directors of the Public Library is hereby given full power and authority, as trustees or otherwise, to invest, reinvest and to have complete direction and management over all such property of any class or kind, already given, or which may hereafter be given, either to said free public library of New Haven, or to the City of New Haven in trust for the use of the said free public library, and may, in connection therewith, engage the services of any bank or trust company maintaining a trust investment section, for advice and recommendations in connection with the management, investment and reinvestment of said trust funds. All funds, moneys, bonds, mortgages and securities of any class or kind which have been or may be hereafter given to the free public library of New Haven, or to the City of New Haven in trust for the use of the free public library, shall be kept by the City Treasurer who shall give a bond, in addition to the bond otherwise required by him, in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Library Directors, for the care and safekeeping of the said securities, and who, upon notification of a vote of the board of directors of said free public library, shall allow any bank or trust company chosen by the vote of said board of directors to have possession of the trust funds in common with said City Treasurer so that neither said City Treasurer nor such bank or trust company shall alone have access to the trust funds. The board of directors may maintain a common trust fund in which may be included all funds and investments of one or more trusts held by the City of New Haven or the Board of Library Directors for the benefit of the Department of the Public Library. 
K.  Civil Service Board 599 . 
(1)  Establishment. There shall be a Civil Service Board 600 . 
(2)  Appointment and Membership 601 . The Board shall consist of five (5) members. 
(a)  Terms 602 . Annually in the month of January, the Mayor shall appoint a member of said Civil Service Board for a term of five (5) years from the first (1 st ) day of February next succeeding the appointment. 
(b)  Restriction on Service 603 . None of such citizen members shall hold any other City office. 
(c)  Expenses 604 . The necessary expenses of said board shall be paid by the City after approval by the Controller. 
(3)  Appointment, duties of President and Secretary. Biennially the Civil Service Board shall elect from its members a President who shall call and preside at all meetings of the board, execute documents on the board's behalf, and perform such other duties as are customary to the office 605 . The board shall choose a Secretary for a term of ten (10) years who shall be subject to a civil service examination before appointment and shall hold said position for such term during good behavior, provided, upon the termination of any such term said board may reappoint the Secretary for an additional ten (10) year term without competitive examination 606 . Any such Secretary may be removed for cause, which shall be nonpolitical, after due hearing upon written notice served on the Secretary ten (10) Days before the date of the hearing. It shall be the duty of the Secretary 607 : 
(a)  To attend all meetings of the Civil Service Board 608 ; 
(b)  To keep correct records of the Civil Service Board 609 ; 
(c)  To prepare and keep in the register on file in the office of the Personnel Director a list of those eligible for positions in all departments, said list to be filed within twenty-four hours after it shall have been certified by the Civil Service Board 610 ; 
(d)  To send out all official notices 611 ; 
(e)  To perform all other official duties as instructed by the Civil Service Board 612 . 
(4)  Rule-making power of board; duty to provide examinations. It shall be the duty of said board: 
(a)  To prescribe rules for ascertaining the competency of applicants for positions or promotions for all positions in the City government except for Elected Officials, commissioners, Public Officials appointed by the Mayor or other appointing authority, superintendents, assistant superintendents, principals and teachers employed by the Board of Education and the librarian, all professional librarians, and superintendents of the different departments of the public library 613 ; 
(b)  To review and approve or disapprove job descriptions and job qualifications and revisions to the classification plan as proposed by the Personnel Director, and to notify the Personnel Director in writing of such actions, with reasons therefore in the event of disapproval 614 ; 
(c)  To hear and decide appeals from the decisions of the Personnel Director pursuant to § 17.C(9) of this Article relating to the determination of eligibility of persons and their qualifications for positions in the classified service 615 ; and 
(d)  To certify lists of eligible candidates for positions in all Departments, based upon the determinations of qualifications and scores of examinations certified to the board by the Personnel Director and the board's determination that its rules have been complied with 616 . 
(5)  Effect of Charter on existing rules of board 617 . The rules of the Civil Service Board in effect at the effective date of this Charter are hereby confirmed; but within a period of one hundred eighty (180) Days subsequent to the effective date of this Charter, the Civil Service Board shall restudy its rules and make any changes according to the provisions of this Charter, and such revised rules shall be published immediately for distribution to all interested persons. The Controller shall provide funds for such publication. 
L.  City Planning Commission. 
(1)  Establishment 618 . There shall be a City Planning Commission. 
(2)  Appointment and Membership 619 . The Board shall consist of the Mayor and the City Engineer, as non-voting members; one (1) member of the Board of Alders selected by said Board; and, four (4) members 620 appointed by the Mayor. 
(a)  Terms 621 . When the terms of the members respectively expire and biennially thereafter the Mayor shall appoint two (2) members of said commission for a term of four (4) years, each from the first (1 st ) day of February following their appointment. 
(b)  Leadership and Rule 622 . The commission shall choose one of its own members to be chairman and shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business consistent with this Charter. 
(3)  Duties of the Planning Commission. It shall be the duty of the City Planning Commission: 
(a)  To prepare and recommend development plans for the improvement of the entire City or any portion thereof. These plans shall be designed to promote the coordinated development of the municipality and shall show the future general location, character, and extent of streets, bridges, boulevards, esplanades, squares, parks, playgrounds, playfields, aviation fields, parking spaces, public buildings, and the facilities and terminals of public utilities whether publicly or privately operated 623 ; 
(b)  To exercise all powers and responsibilities in regard to the subdivision of land as conferred upon planning commissions by the General Statutes 624 ; 
(c)  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be conferred on planning commissions by the General Statutes or by the Ordinances 625 ; 
(d)  To be vested with all the powers and duties conferred upon a zoning commission for the City by Special Act as codified in §§ 2.A through H of Article XIII of this Charter 626 .  
Sec. 4. - Boards and Commissions Required by the Charter 
A.  Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(1)  Establishment. There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeals 627 . 
(2)  Appointment and Membership 628 . The Board shall consist of three (3) members appointed by the Mayor, in accordance with the requirements of § 1.A of Article VII of this Charter; and, two (2) members appointed by the Board of Alders, of whom not more than three (3) may be officials of said City. 
(3)  Procedure for Appeals 629 . Any person claiming to be aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision made by the administrative official charged with the enforcement of any Ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of this Charter, may file an appeal in writing from such order, requirement or decision to said Board of Zoning Appeals, which, after due notice to the authority from whose decision said appeal shall be taken, shall hear and determine the legality and reasonableness of such order, requirement or decision 630 . 
(a)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse such order, requirement or decision 631 . 
(b)  Such appeal shall stay all proceedings in the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal shall have been taken shall certify to the board of appeals after notice of appeal shall have been filed with said officer that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the officer, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal shall have been taken, said Board of Zoning Appeals shall, within thirty (30) Days, set a time for a hearing thereon and shall give due notice to the parties in interest, including the authority from whose order, requirement or decision the appeal has been taken, of the time and place of such hearing 632 . 
(c)  The chairman of said board of appeals, or, in the absence of the chairman, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses 633 . 
(d)  All meetings of said board shall be open to the public 634 . 
(e)  Said board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and also keep records of its examination and other official actions 635 . 
(f)  Every rule or regulation and every document or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement or decision of the board shall immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record 636 . 
(g)  Said board of appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify such order, decision or requirement appealed from, and it shall have all the powers of the authority from whose decision such appeal shall have been taken 637 . 
(h)  When it shall appear to at least four (4) members of said board that difficulty or unreasonable hardship might result in carrying out the strict letter of any Ordinance concerning which an appeal has been taken, said board shall have the power, after such hearing is concluded, to vary or modify the application of the rules, regulations and provisions, relating to the construction, structural changes in, equipment or alteration of, buildings or structures, provided such change, modification or variance shall not violate the spirit of the Ordinance 638 . 
(i)  Said Board of Zoning Appeals may also hear and act upon any other matters for which provision is made in the ordinance 639 . 
(j)  Any person, including any official charged with the enforcement of any order, requirement or decision, claiming to be aggrieved by the decision of said board, may, within fifteen (15) Days from the date when such decision shall have been rendered, take an appeal to the superior court for New Haven County and such appeal shall be made returnable to such court in the same manner as that prescribed for civil actions 640 . 
(k)  Notice of such appeal shall be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof with such board not less than twelve (12) Days before the return day to which such appeal shall have been taken 641 . 
(l)  The appeal shall state the reasons upon which the same shall have been predicated and shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court to which such appeal shall be returnable may, on application, on notice to the board and on cause shown, grant a restraining order 642 . 
(m)  The authority issuing the citation in such appeal shall take from the appellant a bond of recognizance to said board, with surety, to prosecute such appeal to effect and comply with the orders and decrees of the court 643 . 
(n)  If it shall appear to the court on the trial of such case that there has been an abuse of reasonable discretion on the part of the board, or that its decision was based upon a mistake or misconstruction of the law, or that such decision was the result of mistake or fraud, then such order, requirement or decision shall be set aside and vacated; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect 644 . 
(o)  Appeals from the decision of said board shall be preferred cases to be heard by the court, unless cause shall be shown to the contrary, as soon after the return day as shall be practicable, and may be referred by the court to a committee or in accordance with the General Statutes to one of the State referees, to be heard and proceeded with by such committee or such referee in the manner provided for civil actions 645 . 
B.  Civilian Review Board 646 . 
(1)  Establishment. There shall be a Civilian Review Board. 
(2)  Objectives. It is in the interest of City residents and citizens generally and of the department responsible for police services ('department") that investigations of complaints concerning misconduct by police officers involving members of the public be complete, thorough and impartial. These inquires shall be conducted fairly and independently, and in such a manner that the public has confidence. 
(3)  Membership. The Board shall consist of a number of members as shall be established by Ordinance. The Board of Alders shall consider, at a minimum, a number of members equal to the number of police districts throughout the City ("district representatives") as well as, at least, two (2) additional at-large appointees. The number of members shall be odd. 
(4)  Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint such members subject to the approval of the Board of Alders. The ordinance implementing the Commission shall require the Mayor to choose district representatives from among the names recommended by the community engagement organization or similar neighborhood based organization from each of the police districts or geographical areas of the City; subject to recognition by the Board of Alders. 
(5)  Term. The term of office shall be two (2) years and such terms shall be staggered. 
(6)  Duties. The Civilian Review Board shall have the following authority and such other and additional authority as may be set forth by ordinance: 
(a)  To examine complaints made by civilians pertaining to unprofessional conduct by members of the department and to review the processing of such complaints 
(b)  Hear appeals from complainants brought within ninety (90) days of the completion of an internal affairs report by the department; 
(c)  Require the internal affairs group of the department to investigate civilian complaints in the event no investigation has been commenced or to re-open and continue to investigate a complaint, if, in the opinion of the Board, the initial investigation was incomplete or unfair; 
(d)  Recommend that revisions to departmental, policies, processing of civilian complaints, training protocols and/or provisions of the General Orders (or a successor written directive document as may replace the said General Orders) be considered; and, 
(e)  Develop policies and procedures for the filing and processing of civilian complaints, for the operations of the board and for training members of the board and community-based agencies and organizations designated by the board. 
(7)  Operations. 
(a)  The Board of Alders shall, by ordinance, establish such additional authority necessary to effectuate the purposes and duties of the Board. 
(b)  The City shall provide for the requisite staff assistance, supplies, equipment and facilities to the department responsible for police services or such other department designated by the Board in order to facilitate the administration of board business.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BUDGETARY PROCEDURES; REPORTING; FINANCIAL REVIEW AND AUDIT COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 1. - Budgetary procedures; duties of the Mayor, City Clerk, Board of Alders. 
A.  No later than March 1 st each year, the Mayor shall present to the Board of Alders a budget for the ensuing fiscal year consisting of 647 : 
(1)  A budget message outlining the financial policy of the City government and describing in connection therewith the important features of the budget proposal indicating any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues and the reasons therefor, and containing a clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  An itemized statement of proposed appropriations for current expenses for each budgeted City agency for the ensuing year, with comparative statements of appropriations and expenditures for the current and preceding year, the increase and decrease between the current and ensuing fiscal years in the appropriations recommended; 
(3)  An itemized statement of the estimated revenues of the City including all sources other than the property tax with comparative statements for the current and preceding fiscal year; and 
(4)  A statement of the bonds to mature and the interest payable on bonds outstanding. 
In recommending said estimates of appropriations and rate of taxation, the Mayor shall not estimate the receipts from current taxes levied in any one year in excess of one percent less than the actual rate of collection during the last preceding fiscal year, on the amount laid on the estimated grand list at the rate recommended. 
B.  The budget shall be filed with the City Clerk concurrently with its submission to the Board of Alders, and within four (4) business days after its filing the clerk shall cause Publication of the proposed budget, and include in the notice that it is available for public inspection at the clerk's office 648 . 
C.  The Board of Alders committee or committees to which the budget has been referred shall hold at least two Public Hearings thereon. The first hearing shall be no later than fifteen (15) Days after the Publication of the budget and another Public Hearing shall be held at least seven (7) Days before the first reading by the Board of Alders 649 . 
D.  The Board of Alders shall consider and act upon such budget so proposed by the Mayor. The Board of Alders shall have the power by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Board of Alders, then eligible to vote, to increase and decrease individual lines of appropriations and to decrease the total appropriation and rate of taxation. By a two-thirds ( 2/3 rds ) vote of the entire membership of the Board of Alders, then eligible to vote, the Board of Alders may increase the total appropriation or increase the rate of taxation as recommended by the Mayor 650 . 
E.  The Board of Alders shall not reduce any item proposed by the Mayor for the payment of interest or principal of the municipal debt 651 . 
F.  If on or before the first Monday in June the Board of Alders shall fail to consider and act on the budget recommended by the Mayor, then such budget recommended by the Mayor shall be final and the appropriations, revenues and the rate of taxation contained therein shall be the legal appropriations and the legal rate of taxation for the City of the ensuing year 652 . 
G.  If the Mayor shall disapprove the budget as approved by the Board of Alders, or any part of such budget, the Mayor shall issue a veto message and proceed as provided in § 2.B of Article III of this Charter, and a two-thirds ( 2/3 rds ) vote of the entire Board of Alders shall be required to override said veto 653 . 
H.  The total amount of the annual appropriations for any year shall not exceed the estimated income for that year 654 .  
Sec. 2. - Allotments. 
A.  After the annual budget has been approved for the ensuing fiscal year and before the beginning of such fiscal year, each Department and Board or Commission shall submit to the Controller a work program which shall show the proposed allotments of the department's appropriation for the entire fiscal year by monthly or quarterly periods as prescribed by the Controller. The Controller shall approve such allotments for each department, with such amendments as determined by said Controller in consultation with said department. Revisions to allotments during the year may be made upon request of the department and approval of the Controller 655 . 
B.  The Controller shall not authorize any expenditure to be made from any appropriation except on the basis of the approved allotments. No obligation shall be incurred against and no payment shall be made from any appropriation and the duly authorized allotments unless the Controller shall first certify that there is an unexpended and unencumbered balance in the proper appropriation and allotment sufficient to meet the same 656 . 
C.  No Department, Public Official or Board of Commissioners shall incur any liability or expense by contract or otherwise for which said City shall be responsible in excess of the appropriations so made by said Board of Alders 657 . 
D.  Every expenditure authorized or incurred in violation of this Charter shall be void. Every payment made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be deemed illegal and every official who knowingly authorizes or makes such payment or takes part therein and every person who knowingly receives such payment or any part thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the full amount so paid or received. If any officer knowingly incurs any obligation or authorizes or makes any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this Charter or takes part therein, such action shall be cause for removal from office 658 . 
E.  After the close of the fiscal year the unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall lapse except for capital and nonrecurring expenditures as provided under Chapter 108 of the General Statutes and the excess of cash receipts over expenditures plus encumbrances shall be used only for capital and nonrecurring expenditures as provided under Chapter 108 of the General Statutes for financing the succeeding year's appropriations 659 .  
Sec. 3. - Transfers During Fiscal Year . 
The Board of Alders may establish by Ordinance from time to time an amount of appropriation under the approved budget which the Controller with the approval of the Mayor shall be authorized to transfer between line items within any department or from one department to another. No such transfer in excess of such authorized amount shall be implemented unless it shall be proposed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Alders, provided that an increase in the total appropriation shall be approved only by vote of two-thirds of the entire Board of Alders. Each approved transfer shall be described in the monthly financial report prepared by the Mayor pursuant to § 5 of this Articles.  
Sec. 4. - Emergency/Special Appropriations. 
A.  Appropriations, in addition to those contained in the annual appropriations, for meeting a necessary emergency expenditure may be made before the close of any fiscal year on the recommendation of the Mayor and approval by a two-thirds vote of the entire Board of Alders, only if the Controller certifies that there are available unappropriated revenues in excess of the appropriated revenues in the annual budget. The Resolution of the Board of Alders approving any emergency appropriation shall specify the nature of the emergency and source of revenue. Unless the Mayor certifies that the emergency threatens the immediate public health or safety, the Board of Alders shall hold a Public Hearing on any proposed special or emergency appropriation 661 . 
B.  If a special appropriation in excess of the unappropriated revenues of the City is required for any purpose, the Controller shall prepare an estimate of same and shall submit it to the Mayor for submission to the Board of Alders for approval as described above; however, no such appropriation shall be made unless a special tax is laid sufficient to cover the amount of the excess of such appropriation over the unappropriated revenues of the City 662 .  
Sec. 5. - Monthly Financial Report. 
A.  Not later than twenty-eight (28) Days after the end of each month of the fiscal year, the Mayor shall submit to the Board of Alders and the financial review and audit commission a report showing: (1) budgeted and actual revenues up to the last day of the preceding month and an estimate of such revenues for the fiscal year; (2) budgeted and actual expenditures for each budgeted agency of the City up to the last day of the preceding month; and an estimate of such expenses for the fiscal year, and (3) the projected budget surplus or deficit for the fiscal year. If the Mayor shall project a deficit, the Mayor shall in such monthly report make recommendations to the Board of Alders for actions to be taken to eliminate the full amount of such projected deficit. Each monthly report shall also be filed in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be available for public inspection 663 . 
B.  The Board of Alders may by Ordinance require that additional information be included in such report 664 . 
C.  The Controller and the Mayor each shall have the full power to require each Department or Public Official to furnish all of the information, and to make available all books, contracts, resolutions, reports, financial information or other materials in its possession, requisite to prepare such monthly reports 665 .  
ARTICLE IX. - IMPROVEMENT BONDS 
 
Sec. 1. - Issuance Authorized . 
The City of New Haven shall have the power to incur indebtedness by issuing its bonds and notes for such purposes, upon such terms, and to such extent as is authorized by the General Statutes.  
Sec. 2. - Approval by Alders, Mayor . 
Such bonds shall not be issued unless such issue shall have been approved by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Board of Alders, then eligible to vote, and approved by the Mayor, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.  
Sec. 3. - Petition for Referendum on Issuance . 
Upon petition addressed to the Board of Alders, signed by not less than fifteen (15%) percentum of the Electors of said City, and stating in each case the address, giving street and number, of such voters, said board shall order a special election to be held within thirty (30) Days from the date when such petition shall be presented, at which election a referendum vote shall be had upon the question of issuing said bonds, electors in favor of their issuance voting "Yes" and those opposed "No", provided no such petition shall be considered by said board unless presented at the office of the City Clerk during office hours, within thirty (30) Days from the date of approval as provided in § 2 of this Article or within thirty (30) Days after the overriding of a veto.  
Sec. 4. - Signatures required on referendum petition when Alders approve issues unanimously . 
If the action of the Board of Alders at any meeting, as provided in § 2 of this Article shall be unanimous, the petition for a referendum vote as provided in § 3 of this Article shall contain the signatures of at least twenty (20%) percentum of such Electors.  
Sec. 5. - Authorization to be specific; relationship of term to life of project . 
In every case the authorization for such bonds shall be specific as to the purpose of such issue, and in no case shall the term of any bond issue be greater than the life of the public improvements therein provided for, as determined by the Board of Alders.  
ARTICLE X. - CAPITAL PROJECTS COMMITTEE AND CAPITAL BUDGET 
 
Sec. 1. - Created; Membership . 
There shall be a Capital Projects Committee consisting of the Controller, two members of the Board of Alders, not from the same party, to be elected annually by (2) said board, a member of the City Plan Commission appointed by the Mayor, the Planning Director and four (4) members appointed by the Mayor, whose terms shall be for the same period for which the Mayor was elected.  
Sec. 2. - Capital projected defined; contents of capital budget . 
A capital project within the meaning of this Charter shall be any physical public betterment or improvement or any preliminary studies and surveys relative thereto; the acquisition of property of a permanent nature; and equipment for any public betterment or improvement when first erected or acquired; major alterations and repairs to existing buildings or structures; and major pieces of equipment. The capital budget shall state the proposed expenditures for capital projects and the respective amounts proposed to be raised therefor in the annual operating budget and the amounts, if any, proposed to be raised from the issuance of bonds, from special assessments, or from other sources.  
Sec. 3. - Preparation, submission of capital projects program, budget . 
Not later than February 15 th in each year, the Capital Projects Committee shall prepare and propose to the Mayor a program of capital projects which program shall be based on estimates of the costs of such projects as submitted by each department, office or agency annually in the same manner as estimates of other budgetary requirements are prepared. The Mayor shall thereupon prepare and submit a capital budget to the Board of Alders as a part of the annual budget submitted on March 1 of such year for the ensuing fiscal year. Said capital budget shall be acted upon by the Board of Alders as part of the annual budget.  
ARTICLE XI. - RETIREMENT AND PENSION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 1. - Retirement and pensions . 
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, all pensions and pension boards shall be governed by the General Statutes and Ordinance.  
ARTICLE XII. - CERTAIN LAWS INCLUDED BY REFERENCE 
 
Sec. 1. - Taxes, liens . 
An act concerning taxes and liens laid by the City of New Haven, amended by an act approved May 8, 1931 (Sp. L. 1931, pp. 17) and as amended May 24, 1933 (Sp. L. 1933, pp. 32) is made a part of this Charter.  
Sec. 2. - Water company . 
An act amending the Charters of the City of New Haven and the New Haven Water Company and validating a certain contract, is made a part of this Charter.  
ARTICLE XIII. - HISTORIC AND SPECIAL ACT PROVISIONS OF THE CHARTER 
 
Sec. 1. - Personnel and Civil Service . 
A.  Procedure for changing rules; rules to be public records 678 . Whenever said board shall have adopted any rules under any of the different provisions of this section, said rules shall not be changed except after Public Hearing Notice on, at least three (3) separate occasions, giving at least two (2) weeks' notice of such proposed change. All rules of said board shall be public records. 
B.  Appointments, promotions, removal to conform to rules. 
(1)  Whenever said board shall have adopted rules relative to the appointment or promotion of any class of such officials or employees, no appointments or promotions within such class shall be made except from those applicants with the three (3) highest scores of those who shall have passed an examination with a score of at least seventy percentum (70%) and have received a certificate to that effect from said board, and are upon the list of those eligible to such position or promotion under the rules of said board, excepting supernumerary police and substitute fire personnel 679 . 
(2)  And after the adoption of such rules no removal shall be made of persons holding positions in any Department, subject to the provisions of such rules, except for sufficient cause duly shown, which cause shall not be political 680 . 
C.  Appointments, removals violating Charter declared void; certification of payrolls 681 . Any appointment or removal made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be null and void; and it is hereby made the duty of the Controller to refrain from making any payment to any persons in the classified service unless the making of such payment is certified by the Personnel Director. And said Controller shall be chargeable by the City with all moneys unlawfully paid to persons appointed in violation of the provisions of this Article. 
D.  Penalty for violating Provisions Relating to Civil Service 682 . Any violation of any of the provisions of the provisions pertaining to the creation of a department responsible for the administration of civil service and the appointment of a personnel director and members of the Civil Service Board thereunder shall be a misdemeanor, and any official found guilty of such offense may be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars or thirty (30) Days in jail or both. 
E.  Classified and unclassified services established 683 . The Civil Service of the City shall be divided into the unclassified and classified service. The unclassified service shall comprise: (a) Elected Officials and persons appointed to fill vacancies in the elective offices; (b) members of Boards and Commissions appointed by the Mayor and other appointing authorities as set forth in this Charter; (c) City Assessors; the City Planning Director, the Librarian, assistant librarians and the superintendents of the different departments of the public library and the Director of Parks and Recreation and the Department Heads appointed by the Mayor and other appointing authorities as set forth in this Charter, excepting the Personnel Director; (d) the secretary, superintendents, assistant superintendents, supervisors, directors, principals and teachers employed by the Board of Education; (e) the secretary and employees to the Mayor; (f) the Corporation Counsel, assistant Corporation Counsels and any deputy Corporation Counsels; (g) persons employed in a professional or scientific capacity to make or conduct a temporary or special inquiry, investigation or examination and special investigators in any department; (h) patient or inmate help in the City, charitable, penal and correctional institutions from the effective date of this Charter; (i) truck drivers, operators, and entry level field persons, maintenance persons and laborers who are not presently under Civil Service, in the Department of Public Works; (j) supernumerary police and substitute fire personnel who shall, however, be selected by Civil Service examination and thereafter shall be eligible for appointments to the lowest classified grade in the respective departments, and (k) appointed employees of the registrar of voters in accordance with § 9-192 of the General Statutes. The classified service shall comprise all positions not specifically included by this section in the unclassified service and all appointments and promotions therein shall be made according to merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examinations. 
F.  Classification plan; establishment, contents, changing 684 . Within two (2) years after the effective date of this Charter amendment, the Personnel Director shall prepare and submit to the Civil Service Board for approval and thereafter shall maintain an up to date classification plan containing a record of the qualifications, authority, duties and responsibilities of each position in the classified service. After such classification plan is approved, the Personnel Director shall review the plan in its entirety and recommend such changes as deemed appropriate to the Civil Service Board not less frequently than every nine (9) years. Changes in the classification plan shall become effective when approved by the Civil Service Board. The class title set forth in the classification plan shall be used to designate such positions in all official records, documents, vouchers and communications, and no persons shall be appointed to or employed in a position in the classified service under any class title which has not been recommended by the director and approved by the Civil Service Board as appropriate to the duties to be performed. The classification plan shall include the normal lines of promotion from one class to another. Employees affected by the allocation or reallocation of a position to a class or by any changes in the classification plan shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard thereon by the Civil Service Board after filing with the secretary of the board a written request for such hearing. 
G.  Pay plan; establishment, contents 685 . For all positions not included within collective bargaining agreements nor part of the Board of Education, the director shall prepare and submit annually to the Board of Alders a pay plan consisting of a salary range for each class in the classification plan and also for all other officials and employees of the City. Each such range shall be determined with due regard to the salary ranges for other classes and to the relative difficulty and responsibility or characteristic duties of positions in the class, the minimum qualifications required, the prevailing rate paid for similar employment outside the City's service, and any other factors that may properly be considered to have a bearing upon the fairness or adequacy of the range, provided that the pay plan in force at the effective date of this Charter shall remain in effect until amended in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
H.  Filling vacancies in higher classified positions 686 . Vacancies in higher positions in the classified service of the City shall as far as practicable be filled by promotion from lower classes upon the basis of competitive tests including a consideration of service rating; provided that in case no persons in the classified service meet the necessary qualifications, the Personnel Director may direct that such position shall be filled by competitive tests open to any qualified persons. 
I.  Effect of Charter on previous appointments 687 . All nonprofessional workers including employees of any Board or Commission holding permanent positions in the service of the City who were appointed at least one year previous to February 16, 1950, whose positions are included in the classified service by the terms of this Charter, shall immediately become members of the classified service with full Civil Service status. All persons appointed under Civil Service rules prior to the effective date of this Charter are hereby confirmed as having full Civil Service status. 
J.  Discrimination, fraud, bribery, etc. prohibited 688 . No person in the classified service of the City or seeking admission thereto shall be appointed, promoted, reduced, removed, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of race, sex, age, national origin, or political or religious opinion or affiliation. No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification, promotion, reduction, removal or appointment held or made under the provisions of this Charter or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution thereof or of the rules and regulations made in accordance therewith. No person shall either directly or indirectly pay, render or give any money, service or any valuable thing to any person, for or on account of or in connection with any test, appointment, promotion, reduction or removal of any person affected by this section. Any person who alone or with others willfully or corruptly violates any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) Days or by both. 
K.  Preference Points. 
(1)  Veteran's preference 689 . Any person who has served in time of war, in the army, navy, air corps, marine corps or coast guard of the United States and has been honorably discharged therefrom shall be entitled to have added to such person's rating in the entrance examination held under the provisions of this Charter ten (10) points on a scale of one hundred if such person is eligible for disability compensation or pension from the United States through the veterans' administration, or five (5) points on a scale of one (100) hundred if such person is not so eligible, provided that such person shall be within the age limit specified for appointment to the position or class of position for which the examination is held, is physically capable of performing the duties of such position and attains in the examination without such added points the minimum rating prescribed for passage of such examination. No credits shall be allowed for promotion examination. 
(2)  Persons Domiciled in the City 690 . Any person domiciled in the City on the date of the announcement of an open competitive examination who attains the minimum rating prescribed for passage of such examination shall thereafter be accorded ten (10) additional points on a scale of one (100) hundred points in determining their rank on the eligible list approved by the Board for such examination. These points shall be in addition to any preference points accorded to veterans pursuant to the Charter; however, the cumulative total of the two preferences shall not exceed fifteen (15) points in total. No preference points for being domiciled in the City shall be allowed for any promotional examination. The term "domiciled in the City" shall the meaning ascribed to it by the rules of the Civil Service Board. 
L.  Filling vacancies when no list of eligibles exists 691 . When no Civil Service list of eligibles exists for a particular class, the Personnel Director with the approval of the Civil Service Board may fill any vacancy in such class by a temporary appointment for not more than ninety (90) Days and within that period the Civil Service Board shall hold examinations of candidates for the class. 
M.  Temporary appointments 692 . The Personnel Director, when the interests of the City require, shall have authority to extend a temporary appointment for a period of ninety (90) Days but shall not exercise this power more than once in the case of any given appointee.  
Sec. 2. - Planning and Zoning . 
A.  Referral of Zoning Ordinances, Resolutions to City Planning Commission 694 . Every Ordinance or Resolution of the Board of Alders relating to the location and use of any street, bridge, boulevard, esplanade, square, park, playground, playfield, aviation field, parking space, public building, the facilities or terminals of any public utility, or the establishment or change in the boundaries of or regulations concerning zoning, shall be at once referred to the City Planning Commission and final action shall not be taken on any such Ordinance or Resolution until the commission shall have reported thereon, provided that the Board of Alders may establish by ordinance a period of not less than sixty (60) Days within which the commission shall file its report with the City Clerk and if no report is filed within such period the approval of the commission shall be presumed. 
B.  Zoning authority of Board of Alders 695 . The Board of Alders is authorized, by Ordinance, to regulate the height and bulk of structures to be erected and to limit the use of lot areas; the minimum areas or dimensions of rear, side and front yards or outer and inner courts and other open spaces within and surrounding any structure; the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes; to classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of structures designed for special uses; to divide the City of New Haven into districts of such number, shape and areas as may be best suited to carry out the provisions of this act. Regulations may be imposed in each district specifying the uses that shall be excluded or subjected to reasonable requirements of a special nature and designating the uses for which buildings may not be erected or altered. The regulations shall be uniform for each class of buildings or structures throughout any district. Regulations in one or more districts may differ from those in another district. Such regulations may provide that a board of appeals may determine and vary their application in harmony with their general purpose and intent and in accordance with general or specific rules therein contained. 
C.  Zoning regulations to conform to comprehensive plan; purposes; factors considered 696 . Such regulations shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and shall be designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. Such regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration, as to the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout such municipality. 
D.  Procedure for adopting zoning regulations; enforcement 697 . The City Plan Commission shall recommend the boundaries of districts and appropriate regulations and restrictions to be enforced herein. Such commission shall make a tentative report and hold a Public Hearing thereon. Public Notice of such hearing shall be given in accordance with Law. Such hearing may be adjourned from time to time. Within thirty (30) Days after the final adjournment of such hearing, the commission shall make a report to the Board of Alders and submit a proposed Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such proposed Ordinance may be, by said Board of Alders, referred to the commission for further consideration. All Ordinances, when adopted under the provisions of this section, shall be enforced under the authority of a Public Official to be designated by such Ordinance. 
E.  Altering regulations, district 698 . The regulations imposed and the districts created under the provisions of this section may be changed or altered from time to time by Ordinance, but no such change or alteration shall be made until the proposed change shall have been referred to the City Plan Commission for a Public Hearing. Said commission shall, upon receipt from the Board of Alders of such proposed change, give Public Notice and proceed with a hearing in the same manner as is herein provided and shall report to said Board of Alders its recommendations in the matter, within thirty (30) Days after receipt by it of the proposal for a change. Thereafter the Board of Alders may, by Ordinance adopted in the usual manner, make the proposed change. When the owners of fifty percentum (50%) of the frontage in any district or part thereof shall present a petition to the Mayor requesting an amendment or repeal of any such regulation, the Mayor shall forthwith refer such proposed amendment or repeal to the commission for its further consideration and recommendation, and said commission shall, within ninety (90) Days from the receipt of petition, submit a report of the Board of Alders of said City of such approval or disapproval. If twenty percentum (20%) of the owners of the frontage of the property immediately affected by the proposed amendment or repeal or, if the owners of twenty (20%) percentum of the frontage of the rest of the block or blocks affected or the owners of twenty percentum (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the property immediately affected by such amendment or repeal, shall, within fifteen (15) Days after the filing of the report of said commission, file a protest in writing, signed by them with the City Clerk, such amendment or repeal shall not be adopted unless recommended by the City Plan Commission or unless three-fourths (¾ ths ) of the members of the Board of Alders shall vote in favor of such amendment or repeal. 
F.  Authority to prevent, abate, correct zoning violations 699 . If any building or structure shall have been erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land shall have been used, in violation of any of the provisions of this Charter or of any Ordinance or other regulations made under authority conferred hereby, any official having jurisdiction, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
G.  General enforcing authority; jurisdiction 700 . Such regulations shall be enforced by the Public Official, Board or Commission or authority designated therein, which shall be authorized to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereon in violation of any provision of the regulations made under authority of the provisions of this act. The owner or agent of any building or premises where a violation of any provision of such regulations shall have been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of any entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation shall have been committed or shall exist, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who shall commit, take part or assist in any such violation or who shall maintain any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall be fined not less than ten nor more than one hundred dollars for each day that such violation shall continue; but, if the offense be willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than one hundred nor more than two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for each day that such violation shall continue or imprisoned not more than ten (10) Days for each day such violation shall continue, or both; and the municipal court of the City of New Haven shall have jurisdiction of all such offenses, subject to appeal as in other cases. 
H.  Civil penalty for failure to discontinue violation 701 . Any such person who, having been served with an order to discontinue any such violation shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) Days after such service or who shall continue to violate any provision of the regulations made under authority of the provisions of this section specified in such order, shall be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred and fifty ($250.00) dollars, payable to the City Treasurer.  
Sec. 3. - Assessment of Benefits and Damages. 
A.  Alders to refer public works matters to department 702 . Before the Board of Alders shall decide to take any land, or to lay out any square, park, street, highway, bridge or walk, or to establish any building line or discontinue any highway, it shall refer all pending measures relating thereto to the Department of Public Works. 
B.  Department to prepare assessments of benefits, damages 703 . Said department shall, after notice to all owners and mortgagees of land proposed to be taken or affected by such measures, and after Public Hearing thereon, cause a survey of such land or layout of such public work to be prepared, and an assessment of benefits and damages to be made and said department shall report its doings to the Board of Alders in writing, and shall annex thereto a survey showing the particular designation of the land to be taken or the layout of the proposed public improvement. 
C.  Notice to persons interested in property affected by public works 704 . All such notices shall be signed by a clerk of the department, and a notice shall be delivered or mailed to each person, interested as aforesaid in such land, who resides in the City or to the agent in charge of such land, or be left at the usual place of abode of said person or agent, at least six (6) Days prior to such hearing. In case any person so interested shall not at the time reside in the City, or shall be under any legal disability, or in case the owner of any such property is unknown, such notice shall be given as a judge of the superior court may order. 
D.  Action by Alders on special assessments 705 . Said Board of Alders may, after all necessary appropriations have been made, accept said report, and adopt such layout or assessment, or may modify the same as it may deem best, and when such report or modification shall have been accepted and recorded in the records of the Board of Alders, and when the damages shall have been paid to the persons whose property has been taken or damaged for such public purpose, or shall have been deposited with the City Treasurer to be paid to such persons when they shall apply for same, then each of said assessments shall be legally deemed to have been made, and if the matter relates to the taking of the land, the land described in the Order of said Board of Alders shall be and remain devoted to the public use for which it shall have been designated. 
E.  Notice to owner of special assessments; when payable 706 . Within one week after compliance with the foregoing provision in regard to the payment of damages, and after the report of the Director of Public Works that the improvements have been completed, the City Clerk of said City shall deposit, in the post office a letter or postal card addressed to the person against whom any such assessment may have been laid, notifying such person of the amount of such assessment and the date when the same is payable, and thereupon such assessment shall be valid and of full force. Each assessment of benefits shall be payable five (5) Days after the date of depositing notice thereof as aforesaid. 
F.  Payment, collection of assessments for benefits or damages; interest 707 . If any person shall refuse to receive the amount found due him, or in case no one shall be found having authority to receive the sum found due to any particular person, such amount shall be deposited in the treasury of said City, to be paid to the persons entitled to receive the same whenever they shall apply therefor. No assessment for benefits shall be collectible nor bear interest until the work for which such assessment was laid shall have been completed. Every such assessment shall bear interest at the rate of six (6%) percentum per annum from and after the date of such completion until a certificate of lien therefor shall have been filed. 
G.  Authority to require property owner to construct, repair, maintain sidewalks, curbs; lien for costs when done by City 708 . The Board of Alders may Order the owner or owners of any land fronting on any highway or street in said City to construct or repair sidewalks, curbs within the highway adjacent to said land, in the manner and within the time specified in such Order, at such grade as said City may have constructed in said highway. Notice of such Order shall be given by the Director of Public Works to each property owner affected by said Order, in the manner prescribed for serving notices of hearing of said department. If any such owner(s) shall neglect or refuse to comply with such Order, or to remove snow, ice or sleet from the sidewalk adjacent to their land in the manner required by Ordinance, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets (or such other position as may be designated by the Director or by law), at the expense of the City, to perform the things required by such Order or Ordinance, and the expense so incurred shall, from the time when such superintendent begins to act and make expense in the premises, be and continue a lien and real encumbrance in favor of said City upon such land. Such amount may also be recovered in an action in the name of said City. 
H.  Special assessment liens 709 . All assessments of benefits made under this Charter shall be and remain a lien upon the property especially benefited by the public works or improvement in view of which assessments were made, but the whole amount of assessments for benefits, by reason of any such work or improvement, shall in no case exceed the cost thereof, including the damages payable; and such liens, and liens for the expenses of the laying of any sidewalk, curb by said City, or for the cleaning of any sidewalk, shall take precedence and priority of all other liens or encumbrances on the property whereon the same is imposed (except taxes and other City liens prior in date), and may be foreclosed in the same manner as though said liens were mortgages on such property in favor of said City to secure the amount of such assessment or expense; provided, that no such lien shall continue to exist longer than sixty (60) Days after such assessment shall have become payable, or, as the case may be, after such expense shall have been incurred, unless within that period a certificate of lien, in the manner and form elsewhere provided, shall be lodged with the City Clerk, to be recorded in a book kept for that purpose. When any lien is put upon any land or buildings under the Charter and bylaws of said City, such land and buildings shall be liable for the assessment and interest on the amount of such lien from the date thereof until paid, and also for the City Clerk's fee and a fee of one ($1.00) dollar for the drafting of a lien certification, and, before such lien shall be removed, such assessment, interest and fees shall be paid to the collector. 
I.  Apportioning assessments among joint owners 710 . In case any land in front of which any sidewalk, curb is ordered, or against which an assessment of benefits for any public work is to be made, shall be held by two or more persons jointly, or two or more persons shall have different estates therein, the Department of Public Works may apportion between such persons the amount of such assessment or the expense of carrying out such Order. Said department shall report its doings to the Board of Alders, and the action of said Board of Alders thereon shall determine the amount to be paid by the said persons respective. 
J.  Appeals from assessments 711 . Any party who shall be aggrieved by any Order of the Board of Alders, making any such assessments of benefits or damages, or requiring the construction of any sidewalk, curb or the payment of any part of the expense thereof, may make written application for relief to the Superior Court, to be held in and for New Haven County; provided, such party shall cause a copy of said application to be served upon the City Clerk within thirty (30) Days after the doing of the act complained of. Said court may, by a committee or otherwise, inquire into the allegations of such application, and may confirm, annul or modify the assessment or other action therein complained of, or make such Order in the premises as equity may require, and may allow costs to either party at its discretion; and said court may inquire into the validity of all the proceedings upon which said assessments or other action is based. No land taken as aforesaid shall be occupied by the City until the time for taking appeals shall have expired, and until all appeals have been finally disposed of; provided, however, if the City shall, on any such appeal, if such appeal is not taken from the layout itself, file an offer to give such security as said court may require for the payment of all such damages as may be finally awarded to the appellant, said court, or in vacation, any judge thereof, after hearing the parties upon such notice as said court or judge may deem sufficient, shall proceed to fix the security to be given by said City for the payment of said damages; and when said City shall have given the security fixed as aforesaid, said City may immediately enter upon, take possession of, and use such land for the purpose or purposes for which said land is taken. All such appeals shall be privileged cases in the superior court, and it shall be the duty of the Corporation Counsel to cause such appeals to be heard as speedily as possible. 
K.  Duration of liens; collection of assessments by suit; when sewer, street paving assessments effective 712 . Such assessments shall be and remain a lien upon the land or other property assessed by said Board of Alders as aforesaid; provided that such lien shall not remain for a longer period than sixty (60) Days after such actual expense has been ascertained, and the owner of such property notified, unless the tax collector shall sign and file with the City Clerk a certificate describing the property on which the lien exists and the amount claimed as a lien thereon; and the City of New Haven may collect the amount assessed against any street railway company in accordance with the provisions of this Charter by suit at law in any proper court. Authorized assessments for sewers and for street pavements need not be Published, but all such assessments shall be valid and of full force whenever the City Clerk shall have deposited in the post office a letter or postal card addressed to owner of the abutting property and to the street railroad company, against which any assessment may have been laid notifying such owner or railroad company of the amount of any such assessment.  
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Mandatory Decennial Charter Review . 
At least once every ten (10) years after July 1, 1993, the Board of Alders shall appoint a Charter Revision Commission pursuant to § 7-190 of the General Statutes to consider such amendments to this Charter as the Board of Alders may direct and such other amendments as the commission may deem appropriate.  
Sec. 2. - Severability . 
In the event that any of the amendments to this Charter voted in November, 2013, are found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such finding shall not invalidate any other of these amendments.  
Sec. 3. - Effective date . 
Unless otherwise set forth in this Charter, these amendments shall be effective at 12:01 A.M. on January 1, 2014.  
ARTICLE XV. - HISTORIC PURCHASING AND DEPARTMENT HEAD QUALIFICATION PROVISIONS SUBJECT TO SUNSET AS AUTHORIZED BY THIS CHARTER 
 
Sec. 1. - Purchasing Provisions. 
A.  Transition Provision Regarding Purchasing 716 . Until the effective date of the procurement ordinance required by § 4.F of Article VI of this Charter, matters pertaining to purchasing and bidding procedures shall be subject to the provisions of § 1.B—H of this Article. Following the effective date of this Charter, the Mayor shall appoint a task force for the purpose of preparing such ordinance for adoption. Said task force (following consultation with the City Purchasing Agent) shall report a proposed ordinance to the Mayor and Board of Alders within six (6) months from the adoption of this Charter. The pertinent provisions of § 1.B—H of this Article shall remain in full force and effect until the effective date of the replacement Ordinance. Upon the effective date of the Ordinance the pertinent provisions of § 1.B—H of this Article shall be null and void, unless otherwise set forth in the replacement Ordinance. 
B.  Role of the Purchasing Agent 717 . Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all contracts to be made or let for work to be done or for supplies to be furnished to said City, and all sales of personal property in the custody of the several Public Officials, Departments or Boards or Commissions of said City shall be made by the Purchasing Agent. 
C.  Written Contracts. When Required 718 . Whenever any work is necessary to be done, or any supply is needed, and the several parts of said work or supply shall together involve the expenditure of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or such other amount established by the Board of Alders by Ordinance, such work shall be done or supply acquired pursuant to written contract, under such regulations as the Board of Alders may establish by Ordinance. All such contracts shall be founded on sealed bids or proposals made in compliance with Public Notice published at least ten (10) Days before the time fixed for opening said bids or proposals. If the Purchasing Agent shall not deem it for the interest of the City to reject all bids, the Purchasing Agent shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder. 
D.  Exemptions from § 1.B and C of this Article 719 . The following contracts shall be exempt from the provisions of § 1.B and C: 
(1)  contracts for architects, engineers, land surveyors, physicians, dentists, lawyers, accountants or artists, and such other professional or technical services as the Board of Alders may provide by Ordinance; and 
(2)  contracts made by the Board of Alders pursuant to § 2.F of Article IV of this Charter. 
E.  Exemptions from § 1.C of this Article. The following contracts shall be exempt from the provisions of § 1.C of this Article 720 : 
(1)  Contracts that can only be performed or provided by one party in the judgment of the City Purchasing Agent and the head of the department seeking the supplies, services or work; 
(2)  Contracts made through cooperative purchasing arrangements with other government entities when, in the judgment of the City Purchasing Agent, such contracts are in the best interests of the City and such arrangements involve competitive purchasing procedures; 
(3)  Contracts made in accordance with procedures approved by the Board of Alders applicable to cases of emergency involving a threat to the public health, safety or welfare; and 
(4)  Contracts made in a manner approved by the Board of Alders upon the recommendation of the City Purchasing Agent, where the City Purchasing Agent has advised and opined to the Board of Alders, that it would not be practicable or in the best interest of the City to proceed in the manner required by said § 2.B of this Article, and where the Board of Alders shall find that making a contract in such manner is in the best interest of the City. 
F.  Form of contract; contractor's security; procedure for opening bids; effect of low bidder failing to accept contract or abandoning work; contracting with defaulters, debtors; copies of contracts 721 . The form of each contract, which shall include the specifications, shall be approved by the Corporation Counsel. A performance bond satisfactory to the City Purchasing Agent in the full amount of the contract price shall be required for all contracts for the construction, alteration or repair of any public building or public work in excess of seventy-five [thousand] dollars ($75,000.00), or such larger amount that may be approved by the Board of Alders by Ordinance, and may be required in the discretion of the Purchasing Agent for any contracts for the provision of supplies, materials or equipment. All bids or proposals shall be publicly opened by the Purchasing Agent advertising for the same. If the lowest bidder shall neglect or refuse to accept the contract, after written notice that the same has been awarded according to the successful bid or proposal, or if the lowest bidder fails to execute the contract or to give proper security, it may be readvertised and relet in the manner provided, or, such Purchasing Agent may cause said work to be finished without making a new contract, and the original contractor shall be liable to the City for any excess in the cost of said work over the amount of the original contract. No bid shall be accepted from or contract awarded to any person, corporation or other entity who is in arrears to the City upon a debt or contract, or who is a defaulter as surety or otherwise upon any obligation to the City. 
G.  Deposits accompanying bids 722 . Whenever proposals for furnishing supplies or doing work are invited by advertisement by the Purchasing Agent, the Purchasing Agent may require, as a condition precedent to the reception of any proposal, the deposit with the Purchasing Agent of a certified or bank check drawn to the order of the City, or of a surety bond issued by a company authorized to write such surety bonds in the State and in such form as shall be satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel. The Purchasing Agent shall require such a deposit in any instance where the contract would require a performance bond. Such check or surety bond shall accompany the proposal and shall be for an amount determined by the Purchasing Agent and stated in the advertisement for proposals. Within three (3) Days after the lowest responsible bidder has been determined, the Purchasing Agent shall return all such checks or surety bonds to the persons depositing the same, except the check or surety bond deposited by the lowest responsible bidder/proposing party. If the lowest responsible bidder or proposing party shall refuse or neglect to execute the contract after due notice that the contract has been awarded, the tendered deposit of the lowest responsible bidder or proposing party shall be forfeited to and retained by the City as liquidated damages for such neglect or refusal and such check or the amount of such bond shall be paid into the treasury of said City; but if said lowest responsible bidder or proposing party shall execute the contract within the time aforesaid, the amount of the tendered deposit shall be returned to said party or, in the alternative the surety bond deposited shall be canceled. 
H.  Wage Provisions required in Public Works Contracts 723 . Except in those contracts below an amount which may be established from time to time by the Board of Alders by Ordinance, in all contracts for the construction, repairing or remodeling of public buildings or public works of any kind by the City of New Haven or any of its divisions there shall be incorporated a provision that wages paid any mechanic, laborer or workman employed under such contract shall be at the rate of wage based upon the customary or prevailing rate of wages for the same type of work in the same trade or occupation prevailing in the City of New Haven, and based upon the wage schedule and rates therein set by the United States Department of Labor for the New Haven area or as otherwise provided by Law.  
Sec. 2. - Department Head Qualifications. 
A.  Transition Provision Regarding Department Head Qualifications 724 . Until the effective date of the ordinance(s) required by § 2.C of Article VI of this Charter, matters pertaining to the qualifications of Department Heads shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Following the effective date of this Charter, the Mayor shall instruct the Personnel Director to commence the process of preparing a report delineating Department Head Qualifications as required by this Charter. The Mayor shall (following consultation with the Personnel Director) propose such modifications and recommendations to the Board of Alders within six (6) months from the adoption of this Charter. The pertinent provisions of § 2.B(1)—(17) of this Article shall remain in full force and effect until the effective date of the replacement Ordinance. Upon the effective date of the Ordinance the pertinent provisions of § 2.B(1)—(17) of this Article shall be null and void, unless otherwise set forth in the replacement Ordinance. 
B.  The following are the current qualifications of Department Heads as set forth in this Charter: 
(1)  The Corporation Counsel. In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.C of this Article, at the time of appointment, the Corporation Counsel shall have been an attorney and counselor at law of this State for not less than ten (10) years 725 . 
(2)  The Deputy and Assistant Corporation Counsels 726 . Subject to modification as set forth in § 2.C of this Article, at the time of appointment, the Deputy and Assistant Corporation Counsels shall have been admitted to the bar of this State and shall have been practicing attorneys for at least two (2) years. 
(3)  The City Controller 727 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the Controller shall be chosen on the basis of training and at least five (5) years of broad experience in accounting and finance based upon nationally accepted standards, and shall have at least a bachelor's degree in accounting, finance or a similar field. 
(4)  The Purchasing Agent 728 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads, qualifications shall be established as set forth in § 2.B of this Article. 
(5)  The City Assessor 729 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the City Assessor shall have completed at least eight (8) years responsible full-time professional experience in the field of property appraisal prior to appointment, of a character such as to develop working knowledge in the field of assessing property for municipal tax purposes, and shall be a certified municipal Assessor pursuant to § 12-40a of the General Statutes. 
(6)  The Director of Public Works 730 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads, qualifications shall be established as set forth in § 2.B of this Article. 
(7)  The City Engineer 731 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the City Engineer shall be a civil engineer licensed to practice such profession in this State and shall have had at least five (5) years experience in the design and supervision of the construction of public works. 
(8)  The Chief of Police 732 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the Chief of Police shall have an adequate knowledge of the organization and administration of a City police department and shall also have had experience of at least five (5) years in the management and direction of supervisors of operations of a police department with at least two hundred (200) employees serving a population of at least one hundred (100,000) thousand residents. Said Chief of Police shall have earned at least a bachelor's degree from an accredited institution of higher education prior to being considered for the position. 
(9)  The Fire Chief 733 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the chief shall have an adequate knowledge of the organization and administration of a department of fire service and shall also have had experience of at least five (5) years in the protection of a municipality against danger from fire and in the management and direction of the operations of a fire department with at least two hundred (200) employees serving a population of at least one hundred (100,000) thousand residents. 
(10)  The Director of Parks and Recreation 734 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and the qualifications established as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall be a person experienced in the management and administration of City parks and recreation and shall be the head of the department. 
(11)  The Building Officials or Inspectors 735 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, no person shall receive an appointment as building official or inspector who has not had at least five (5) years practical experience (a) as a builder, civil engineer or architect, in the case of the building official, (b) as a master or journeyman plumber, in the case of the plumbing inspector, or (c) as an electrician, electrical contractor or electrical engineer, in the case of the electrical inspector, or who lacks the qualifications and license required by Law. 
(12)  The Director of Public Health 736 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the Director of Public Health shall either be a licensed physician or shall hold a graduate degree in public health as a result of at least one (1) year's training, including at least sixty (60) hours in local public health administration, in a recognized school of public health or shall have such combination of training and experience as meets the approval of the State Commissioner of Health Services or its successor in function. 
(13)  The City Librarian 737 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads, the qualifications for the City Librarian shall be established as set forth in § 2.B of this Article. 
(14)  The Superintendent of Schools 738 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads, the qualifications for the Superintendent of Schools shall be established as set forth in § 2.B of this Article. 
(15)  The Personnel Director 739 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads, qualifications for the Personnel Director shall be established as set forth in as set forth in § 2.B of this Article in a manner consistent with the classification plan adopted in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
(16)  The Planning Director 740 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in § 2.B of this Article, the Planning Director shall be qualified by training and experience in City planning. 
(17)  The Director of Traffic and Parking 741 . In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads, the qualifications for the Director of Traffic and Parking shall be established as set forth in § 2.B of this Article. 
APPENDIX: ENDNOTES 
GENERAL HISTORIC NOTE: 
This version of the Charter replaces the Charter that was last amended on November 3, 1992 and effective on July 1, 1993 ("The 1993 Charter"). The 1993 Charter was the most recent revision of the historic pre-home rule Charter, much of which was adopted by Special Act of the General Assembly in 1899. The final report on the amended and revised Charter was approved by the Charter Revision Commission on July 18, 2013 and received by the Board of Alders on July 22, 2013. The Commission was comprised of the following members: Hon. Michael Smart, Chair; Nilda Aponte; Kevin Arnold; Hon. Delphine Clyburn; Arlene DePino; Edward Fertik; Joelle Fishman; William Ginsberg; Caleb Kleppner; Melissa Mason; Brian Perkins; Carmen J. Reyes; Hon. Mark Stopa; and, Elizabeth Torres. Attorney Steven G. Mednick served as Special Counsel and Albert Lucas, the Director of Legislative Services served as the chief administrator of the charter revision process. 
The Board of Alders approved the proposed revised Charter on August 5, 2013. The Board of Alders was comprised of the following members: Hon. Jorge Perez, President (5 th ward); Hon. Jacqueline James, President Pro Tempore (3 rd Ward); Hon. Alphonse Paolillo. Jr., Majority Leader (17 th Ward); Hon. Tyisha Walker, Deputy Majority Leader (23 rd Ward); Hon. Sarah Eidelson (1 st ward); Hon. Frank E. Douglass, Jr., 2 nd Ward; Hon. Andrea Jackson-Brooks, 4 th Ward; Hon. Dolores Colon, 6 th Ward; Hon. Douglas Hausladen, 7 th Ward; Hon. Michael Smart, 8 th Ward; Hon. Jessica Holmes, 9 th Ward; Hon. Justin Elicker, 10 th Ward; Hon. Barbara Constantinople, 11 th Ward; Hon. Mark Stopa, 12 th Ward; Hon. Brenda D. Jones-Barnes, 13 th Ward; Hon. Santiago Berrios-Bones, 14 th Ward; Hon. Ernie G. Santiago, 15 th Ward; Hon. Migdalia Castro, 16 th Ward; Hon. Salvatore E. Decola, 18 th Ward; Hon. Alfreda Edwards, 19 th Ward; Hon. Delphine Clyburn, 20 th Ward; Hon. Brenda Foskey-Cyrus, 21 st Ward; Hon. Jeanette l. Morrison, 22 nd Ward; Hon. Evette Hamilton, 24 th Ward; Hon. Adam J. Marchand, 25 th Ward; Hon. Sergio Rodriguez, 26 th Ward; Hon. Angela Russell, 27 th Ward; Hon. Claudette Robinson-Thorpe, 28 th Ward; Hon. Brian Wingate, 29 th Ward; and, Hon. Carlton Staggers, 30 th Ward. 
The electors of the City of New Haven ________ the amended and revised Charter on November 5, 2013. 
COMMENT ON THE END NOTES: 
These end-notes are prefatory in nature (Note: Don't be hoodwinked by the placement at the back of the book). They are designed to meet a couple of objectives. First, the 2013 Charter Revision represents the most comprehensive reorganization and restructuring of the Charter since the enactment of the Home rule Charter in 195_. The footnotes reference the sections of the 1993 Charter so that the reader may actually be able to reconstruct the changes. The thrust of these notes is to establish a pathway to understand and follow the transition from the current Charter to the proposed revised Charter. Furthermore, these end-notes refer to the Special Acts, other historical documents and source materials. The annotation was commenced within both budget and time constraints and should be viewed in that context. For example, if a section has no historical reference may simply mean that there was not sufficient time to burrow through all the versions of the charter or special acts to locate the historical foundation for the provision. These footnotes should not be relied upon as a definitive research tool or as the foundation for authoritative conclusions of the facts contained herein. They should be simply guideposts to the further research that will be necessary to reach any reach such conclusions or objectives. 
1 Modification of the current Preamble. Note: A the time this Charter was considered in 2013 federal law made it illegal to discriminate based upon: Race; Color; National origin; Religion; Sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, and related medical conditions); Disability; Age (40 and older); Citizenship status; and, Genetic information. The laws of the State of Connecticut render it illegal to discriminate based upon: Race; Color; National origin; Religion; Sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, and related medical conditions); Disability: present or past physical, mental, learning, or mental retardation; Age; Genetic information; Marital status (includes civil unions); Sexual orientation (includes having a history of or being identified with a preference); AIDS/HIV; and, Gender identity or expression. Original Preamble was adopted by Amend. of 7-1-93. 
2 Currently "Incorporation". 
3 NEW. 
4 NEW. 
5 NEW. 
6 Modification and recodification of current § 56 (First Paragraph), in lieu of the following: "For the purposes of this section and except as otherwise provided by Law, the term "board" shall include all public appointive boards, agencies, commissions, authorities or like entities of the City". 
7 Required by C.G.S. § 7-193(a)(1)(C). 
8 NEW. 
9 NEW. 
10 Current § 1 (last sentence). 
11 Recodification of current § 1 (last sentence). 
12 NEW. 
13 NEW. 
14 NEW. 
15 NEW. 
16 NEW. 
17 At the time of the approval of this Charter there provisions was C.G.S. § 9-372. 
18 NEW. C.G.S. § 9-1. Definitions: "...(e) "'Elector' means any person possessing the qualifications prescribed by the Constitution and duly admitted to, and entitled to exercise, the privileges of an elector in a town"; See also, C.G.S. § 9-20. Admission of electors; procedure: (a) Each person who applies for admission as an elector in person to an admitting official shall, upon a form prescribed by the Secretary of the State and signed by the applicant, state under penalties of perjury, his name, bona fide residence by street and number, date of birth, whether he is a United States citizen, whether his privileges as an elector are forfeited by reason of conviction of crime, and whether he has previously been admitted as an elector in any town in this or any other state. Each such applicant shall present his birth certificate, drivers' license or Social Security card to the admitting official for inspection at the time of application...". 
19 NEW. 
20 NEW. 
21 NEW. 
22 Required by C.G.S. § 7-193(a)(2)(C). 
23 NEW. 
24 NEW. 
25 NEW. 
26 NEW. 
27 NEW. 
28 NEW. 
29 NEW. 
30 NEW. 
31 NEW. 
32 NEW. 
33 Currently "Territorial Limits". Incorporates current Articles II and III ("Territorial Subdivisions"). 
34 Recodification of current § 2. See, Sp. L. 1921, pp. 813-821; see also, Sp. L. 1931, 1937, pp. 667-668; and, 1939, p. 72. 
35 Recodification of current § 1. See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 288, § 2. See also, Special Laws 1969, Act No. 15, § 2. 
36 Recodification of current § 3. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
37 NEW. 
38 Consolidation of current §§ 4, 5, 6 and 7. 
39 Recodification of current § 4(a). See, Special Laws 1969, Act No. 15, § 2(a); see also Special Laws 1969, Act No. 154 and Special Laws 1967, Act No. 9. 
40 Recodification of current § 4(b). See, Special Laws 1969, Act No. 15, § 2(b); ); see also Special Laws 1969, Act No. 154 and Special Laws 1967, Act No. 9. 
41 See, Special Laws 1969, Act No. 15, § 2(c); ); see also Special Laws 1969, Act No. 154 and Special Laws 1967, Act No. 9. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
42 Recodification of current § 4(c)(First portion of the first sentence). 
43 Modification and recodification of current § 4(c)(Remainder of the first sentence). 
44 Recodification of current § 4(c)(Second sentence). 
45 Recodification of current § 4(c)(Third sentence). 
46 Recodification of current § 5 entitled "If Assembly districts not changed after decennial census, Board of Alders to appoint committee to determine order of reapportionment; report; redistricting plan". See also, Special Laws 1969, Act No. 15, § 3; ); see also Special Laws 1969, Act No. 154 and Special Laws 1967, Act No. 9. 
47 Recodification of current § 5. (First sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
48 Recodification of current § 5 (Second sentence). 
49 Recodification of current § 6 entitled "If provisions of Section 5 not met, Mayor to appoint commission; duty of commission; redistricting plan". See also, Special Laws 1969, Act No. 15, § 4; ); see also Special Laws 1969, Act No. 154 and Special Laws 1967, Act No. 9. 
50 Recodification of current § 7 (First Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
51 Recodification of current § 7 (Second Paragraph). 
52 Recodification of current § 8 from current Article IV entitled "Elections and Electors". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
53 Third sentence of current § 8 derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 392, § 4. 
54 Recodification of current § 9 (First sentence of first paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
55 Recodification of current § 9 (Second sentence of first paragraph). The two year term for Mayor and clerk is derived from Sp. L 1899, p. 392, § 6; Sp. L. 1901, p.1114, § 3; Sp. L. 1911, p. 605, § 1; and, Sp. L. 1923, p. 505, § 1. The two year term for Board of Aldermen is derived from Sp. L 1899, p. 392, § 7; Sp. L. 1905, p. 909, § 2; Sp. L. 1911, p. 605, § 2; and, Sp. L. 1923, p. 506, § 2. 
56 Recodification of current § 9 (Third sentence of first paragraph). See, fn immediately, above. 
57 Recodification of current § 9 (Fourth sentence of first paragraph). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 9; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and 12; Sp. L. 1909, p. 710; Sp. L. 1927, § 9. 
58 Recodification of current § 9 (Second Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
59 Recodification of current § 15 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 10; SP. L. 1901, p. 1115, § 6; Sp. L. 1917, p. 723; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 10. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
60 Recodification of current § 15 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 10; SP. L. 1901, p. 1115, § 6; Sp. L. 1917, p. 723; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 10. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
61 Recodification of current § 15 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 10; SP. L. 1901, p. 1115, § 6; Sp. L. 1917, p. 723; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 10. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
62 Recodification of current § 15 (Fourth and fifth paragraphs). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 10; SP. L. 1901, p. 1115, § 6; Sp. L. 1917, p. 723; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 10. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
63 Recodification of current § 53 (Fourth Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
64 Recodification of current § 53(Opening sentence). 
65 Recodification of current § 53(a). 
66 Recodification of current § 53(b). 
67 Recodification of current § 53 (Final sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
68 NEW. 
69 NEW, 
70 NEW, 
71 NEW. 
72 Recodification of current § 53 (Final sentence). 
73 Modification and recodification of current § 142, in lieu of the following: "Whenever any office of an Appointed Public Official said City, filled by appointment, shall become vacant by reason of the death, resignation, inability, disability or removal of the person appointed to fill the same, said vacancy may be filled by the authority which made the former appointment, subject to the provisions of this Charter. If said last incumbent was appointed for a definite term, the successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of said term". Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 433, § 149; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 363. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
74 Recodification of current § 146. 
75 Recodification of current § 13 (First sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
76 Recodification of current § 13 (Second sentence). 
77 Recodification of current § 13 (Third sentence). 
78 Recodification of current § 13 (Fourth sentence). 
79 Recodification of current § 13 (Fifth sentence). 
80 Recodification of current § 13 (Sixth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
81 Current Article XXXVI entitled "Salaries of Elected and Appointed Officials". Note: The phrase "and Appointed" is deleted since there is no provision pertaining thereto. 
82 Recodification of current § 208 (First sentence). 
83 Recodification of current § 208 (second sentence). See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 401, § 40; See also, Sp. L. 1907, p. 395; See also, Amendments of 1-31-53, 1-1-56, 1-1-58, 1-1-62, 10-27-66, 10-23-67, 1-1-68, 7-1-69, 1-1-74, 7-1-75 and 7-1-93. 
84 Recodification of current § 141 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 433, § 146 See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 361. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
85 Recodification of current § 141 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
86 Recodification of current § 176 (First sentence of first paragraph). 
87 Recodification of current § 176 (Second sentence of first paragraph). Incorporates the following current provisions regarding "residency": (1) Corporation Counsel (Current § 17, first sentence "...shall reside in said city during the term of office"); (2) City Controller (Current § 21, third sentence) "...shall reside in said City during the term of office"; (3) City Assessor (Current § 81(b), second sentence, "If the City Assessor is not a resident of the City of New Haven at the time of appointment, then in such event, within six (6) months after appointment, the City Assessor shall become a resident of the City of New Haven and shall reside in the City during said Assessor's tenure of office"; ( 4) Police Chief (Current § 101, second sentence, "Said Chief of Police shall at all times be a resident and elector of said City while serving in the capacity of Chief of Police"); (5) Fire Chief (Current § 103, second sentence, "Said chief shall at all times be a resident and elector of said City while serving in the capacity of Fire Chief"; (6) Director of Building Inspection and Enforcement (Current § 123, third sentence, "The Director, building official and inspectors must reside in said City during tenure of office"; (7) Director of Public Health (Current § 127, first sentence of second paragraph, " The director of health shall reside in said City while serving in that capacity"; (8) City Librarian (Current § 133, eleventh sentence, "The City Librarian shall reside in said City during such term of office"; (9) Planning Director (Current § 178, second sentence, " Said director shall reside in the City during the term of office"; (10) Director of Traffic and Parking (Current § 214, third sentence, "The director shall reside in said City while serving in said capacity..."); and, (11) Deputy Corporation Counsels (Current § 19, second sentence, "All deputy Corporation Counsels shall reside in said City during their term of office". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
88 Recodification of current § 176 (Second sentence of first paragraph). 
89 Recodification of current § 176 (Second paragraph). 
90 Recodification of current § 176 (First sentence of third paragraph). 
91 Recodification of current § 176 (Second sentence of third paragraph). 
92 Recodification of current § 176 (Third sentence of third paragraph). 
93 Current Article XXVIII entitled "Miscellaneous Provisions" include current 139—147. 
94 Recodification of current § 143. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 433, § 152; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 365. 
95 Recodification of current § 140 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 433, § 145; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 360. 
96 Recodification of current § 145. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 434, § 155; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 368. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
97 Recodification of current § 140 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 436, § 160; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 372. 
98 Recodification of current § 147. 
99 Recodification of current § 139. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
100 Current Article XXXVII entitled "Code of Ethics". 
101 Recodification of current § 209(a) (First sentence). See, Amend. of 1-1-61. 
102 Recodification of current § 209(a) (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 1-1-61. 
103 Recodification of current § 209(a) (Third sentence). See, Amend. of 1-1-61. 
104 Recodification of current § 209(b). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
105 Recodification of current § 212(a). 
106 Recodification of current § 212(b). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 436, § 161; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 373; and, Amend. of 1-1-61. 
107 Recodification of current § 210 (First sentence). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
108 Recodification of current § 210 (Second sentence). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
109 Recodification of current § 14. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 10; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1115, § 6; Sp. L. 1917, p. 723; and, Sp. L. 1917, p. 1224. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
110 Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 431, § 139; see also, Sp. L 1927, § 354. 
111 Recodification of current § 11(c) (First sentence). 
112 Recodification of current § 11(c) (Second sentence). 
113 Recodification of current § 11(d) (First sentence). 
114 Recodification of current § 11(d) (second sentence). 
115 Recodification of current § 11(d) (Third sentence). 
116 Recodification of current § 189. Note: Current Article XXXII entitled "Procedure for Removal from Office" included §§ 189—199. 
117 Recodification of current § 190 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 394, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, p. 16, § 12.5. 
118 Recodification of current § 190 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 394, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, p. 16, § 12.5. 
119 Recodification of current § 190 (Third sentence). 
120 Recodification of current § 191 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 394, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, p. 16, § 12.5. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
121 Recodification of current § 191 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 394, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, p. 16, § 12.5. 
122 Modification and recodification of current §191 (Third sentence), as follows: "No officer removed by the Mayor shall exercise any of the duties or powers of office during the pendency of an appeal from the order of removal ing him ". Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 394, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, p. 16, § 12.5. 
123 Current § 211(a). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
124 Recodification of current § 211(a)(i). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
125 Recodification of current § 211(a)(ii). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
126 Recodification of current § 211(a)(iii). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
127 Recodification of current § 211(a)(iv). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
128 Recodification of current § 211(a)(v). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
129 Recodification of current § 211(a)(vi). Amend. of 1-1-61. 
130 Amend. of 1-1-61. 
131 Note: The recall provision was adopted in 1952 under authority granted by 16 Spec. Acts 817, No. 159; 17 Spec. Acts 1224, No. 449; 18 Spec. Acts 512, No. 181; 23 Spec. Acts 618, No. 551. The provision was validated by the State Supreme Court in Simons v. Canty , 195 Conn. 524 (1985). 
132 Recodification of current § 192 (Opening clause). 
133 Recodification of current § 192 (First sentence). 
134 Recodification of current § 192 (Second sentence). 
135 Recodification of current § 192 (Third sentence). 
136 Recodification of current § 193. 
137 Recodification of current § 194. 
138 Recodification of current §195, as follows: "A recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the filing of the affidavit provided for in section 10.E 192 of this Article Charter , and to be sufficient must bear the signatures of electors equal in number to at least twenty (20%) percentum of those who voted at the last preceding regular City election". 
139 Recodification of current § 196 (First sentence). 
140 Recodification of current § 196 (Second sentence). 
141 Recodification of current § 196 (Third sentence). 
142 Recodification of current § 196 (Fourth sentence). 
143 Recodification of current § 197 (First sentence). 
144 Recodification of current § 197 (Second sentence). 
145 Recodification of current § 197 (Third sentence). 
146 Recodification of current § 197 (Fourth sentence). 
147 Recodification of current § 198. 
148 Recodification of current § 199. 
149 Currently Article V. 
150 Recodification of current § 10(a) (First sentence). 
151 Recodification of current § 10(a) (first two clauses of second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 10; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1115, § 6; Sp. L. 1917, p. 723, Sp. L. 1927, § 10 (first sentence). 
152 Recodification of current § 10(a) last clause of second sentence). 
153 Recodification of current § 10(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-75; and, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
154 Recodification of current § 11 
155 Recodification of current § 11(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.2. 
156 Recodification of current § 11(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.2. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
157 Recodification of current § 11(i) (First sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-75 
158 NEW. 
159 Recodification of current § 11(b) (Second Paragraph). 
160 Recodification of current § 11(e). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.4. 
161 Recodification of current § 11(f). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
162 Recodification of current § 11(g). 
163 Recodification of current § 11(h). 
164 Recodification of current § 12 
165 Recodification of current § 12(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.1. 
166 Recodification of current § 12(b) (first sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.7. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
167 Recodification of current § 12(b) (second sentence). 
168 Recodification of current § 12(b) (third sentence). 
169 Recodification of current § 12(b) (fourth sentence). 
170 Recodification of current § 12(b) (fifth sentence). 
171 Recodification of current § 12(b) (sixth sentence). 
172 Recodification of current § 12(b) (seventh sentence). 
173 Recodification of current § 12(b) (seventh sentence, first proviso). 
174 Recodification of current § 12(b) (seventh sentence, second proviso). 
175 Recodification of current § 12(c). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.5; and, Sp. L. 55-495; See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
176 Recodification of current § 12(d). ;b0 177 Recodification of current § 12(e). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.3. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
178 Modification and recodification of current § 12(f). See, Amend. Of 12-4-53; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 495; See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
179 This provision is derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 393, § 11; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 14, § 11.8. 
180 Recodification of current § 16(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 401, § 39; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 910, § 10; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 39. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
181 Current § 16(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
182 Current Article IX. 
183 Recodification of current § 37(a) (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 424, § 125, Board of Council abolished by Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 41. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. ;b0; 184 Recodification of current ;s; 37(a) (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 424, ;s; 125, Board of Council abolished by Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, ;s;;s; 1, 2 and, p. 1117, ;s; 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, ;s; 41. 
185 Recodification of current § 55 entitled "General authority to exercise powers of City". 
186 NEW. 
187 Recodification of current § 37(b) (First Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
188 Recodification of current § 37(b) (First sentence of second paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
189 Recodification of current § 37(b) (Second sentence of second paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
190 Recodification of current § 37(b) (Third sentence of second paragraph). 
191 Recodification of current § 37(b) (Fourth sentence of second paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
192 Recodification of current § 38. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 424, § 126; See also, Sp. L. 1913, p. 756; See also, Sp.L. 1927, § 42. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
193 Recodification of current § 39 (First sentence). Derived Sp. L. 1899, p. 424, § 127, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 43. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
194 Recodification of current § 39 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 424, § 127, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 43. 
195 Recodification of current § 39 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 424, § 127, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 43. 
196 Recodification of current § 40. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 424, § 128, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 43. See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
197 Recodification of current § 43. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
198 Minor modification and recodification of current § 44 (First clause of the first sentence) by separating the first and second clauses. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 131, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 48. 
199 Minor modification and recodification of current § 44 (Second clause of the first sentence) by separating the first and second clauses. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 131, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 48. 
200 Recodification of current § 44 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 131, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 48. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
201 Recodification of current § 44 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 131, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 48. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
202 Recodification of current § 41 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 129; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1116, § 11; Sp. L. 1023, p. 121, § 1; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 45 (First sentence). See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
203 Recodification of current § 41 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 129; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1116, § 11; Sp. L. 1023, p. 121, § 1; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 45 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
204 Recodification of current § 41 (Fifth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 129; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1116, § 11; Sp. L. 1023, p. 121, § 1; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 45 (Fourth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
205 Recodification of current § 42. Modification of second paragraph of Sp. L. 1927, § 45; See, Sp. L. 1923, p. 122, § 3. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
206 Recodification of current § 41 (Third sentence). 
207 Recodification of current § 41 (Fourth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 425, § 129, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1116, § 11; Sp. L. 1923, p. 121, § 1; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 45 (third sentence). 
208 Recodification of current § 54. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 431, § 138, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 55. 
209 Recodification of current § 49 (First Paragraph). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; and Sp. L. 1927, § 53. 
210 Recodification of current § 49(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(a). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
211 Recodification of current § 49(b). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(b). 
212 Recodification of current § 49(c). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(c). 
213 Recodification of current § 49(d) (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12a, d, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(d). 
214 Recodification of current § 49(d) (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1917, p. 1224, § 1; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(d). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
215 Recodification of current § 49(e). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(e). 
216 Recodification of current § 49(f). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(f). 
217 Recodification of current § 49(g). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(g). 
218 Recodification of current § 49(h). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(h). 
219 Recodification of current § 49(i). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(i). 
220 Recodification of current § 49(j). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(j). 
221 Recodification of current § 49(k). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(k). ;b0; 222 Recodification of current ;s; 49(l). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, ;s; 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, ;s;;s; 1, 2 and, p. 1117, ;s; 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, ;s; 53(l). 
223 Recodification of current § 49(m). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(m). 
224 Recodification of current § 49(n). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and Sp. L. 1927, § 53(n). 
225 Recodification of current § 49(o). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(o). 
226 Recodification of current § 49(p). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 430; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1907, p. 264, § 4; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(p). 
227 Recodification of current § 49(q). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(q). 
228 Recodification of current § 49(r). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(r). 
229 Recodification of current § 49(s). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(s). 
230 Recodification of current § 49(t). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and Sp. L. 1927, § 53(u). 
231 Recodification of current § 49(u). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(v). 
232 Recodification of current § 49(v). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(w). 
233 Recodification of current § 49(w). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(x). 
234 Recodification of current § 49(x). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(y). 
235 Recodification of current § 49(y). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 428, § 137, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and, p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 53(z). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
236 Recodification of current § 45. Derived from Sp. L. 1915, p. 220; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 49; See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
237 Recodification of current § 47. Derived from Sp.L. 1899, p. 426, § 134; Sp.L. 1901, p. 1114, § 1, 2 and p. 1117, § 12; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 51. See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. 
238 Recodification of current § 46. Derived from Sp.L. 1899, p. 426, § 133; Sp.L. 1923, p. 130; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 50. See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. ;b0; 239 Recodification of current ;s; 48. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 427, ;s; 135, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, ;s;;s; 1, 2 and, p. 1117, ;s; 12; SP. L. 1925, p. 1075, ;s; 2; and, Sp. L. 1927, ;s; 52. See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. 
240 Recodification of current § 50. Derived from See, Sp. L. 1913, p. 906 and p. 1162, § 5. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 54 (First paragraph). See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. 
241 Recodification of current § 51. Derived from Sp. L. 1915, p. 218. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 54 (Second paragraph). See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. 
242 Recodification of current § 52. Derived from Sp. L. 1905, pp. 604, 605; See also, Sp. L 1915, pp. 327-329; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 68. See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. 
243 Recodification of current Article VIII. 
244 Recodification of current § 33. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 400, § 35; Bd. of Aldermen, Dec. 26, 1919; Sp. L. 1923, p. 121, § 2; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 35. See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
245 Recodification of current § 34. See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
246 Recodification of current § 35. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
247 Recodification of current § 36. See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
248 Recodification of current § 36 (First sentence). 
249 Recodification of current § 36 (Second sentence). 
250 Recodification of current § 36 (Third sentence). 
251 Recodification of current § 36 (Fourth sentence). 
252 Recodification of current § 36 (Fifth sentence). 
253 Recodification of current § 36 (Sixth sentence). 
254 Recodification of current § 36 (Seventh sentence). 
255 Recodification of current § 36 (Eighth sentence). 
256 Recodification of current § 36 (Ninth sentence). 
257 Recodification of current § 36 (Tenth sentence). 
258 Current Article XXVII entitled "Town Officers". Recodification of current § 138 entitled "Registrars - To have statutory powers, duties". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
259 NEW. 
260 Current Articles XIX and XXXIII entitled "Welfare" and "Department of Airports", respectively, are repealed. 
261 NEW. 
262 NEW. 
263 In lieu of current § 72 (Third sentence), as follows: "The salary of the Purchasing Agent shall be fixed by the budget and said Purchasing Agent shall give bond in such amount as may be fixed by the Controller". 
264 In lieu of current § 19 (Fourth sentence), as follows: "The salary of each such deputy and assistant Corporation Counsel shall be fixed by the budget, which sum shall be in lieu of any and all compensation for any services required by the City of said officials". 
265 Consolidation and recodification of current §71(a) as follows: "There shall be in the City of New Haven a bureau of purchases which shall be under the direction of a City Purchasing Agent who shall devote full time service to the performance of the duties of said office". 
266 NEW. 
267 Current § 57 entitled "General requirements concerning department heads; appointments, terms". 
268 Recodification of current § 11(i) (Second sentence). 
269 Recodification and modification of current § 101 (First sentence) ("subject to the authority of"). 
270 Recodification and modification of current § 103 (First sentence) ("subject to the authority of"). 
271 Consolidation and recodification of current § 101 (Sixth sentence), in lieu of the following: "The person in office as Chief of Police on the effective date of this Charter shall hold office until the successor of such chief has been duly appointed and qualified". 
272 Consolidation and recodification of current § 103 (Third sentence), in lieu of the following: "The person in office as Fire Chief on the effective date of this Charter shall hold office until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified". 
273 In lieu of "heads of departments and heads of bureaus". 
274 Recodification of current § 57(a) (First paragraph). 
275 Recodification of current § 57(a) (First paragraph). 
276 Recodification of current § 21 (Fourth sentence) ("under the direction of"). 
277 Derived from current § 82. 
278 Derived from current § 96. 
279 Recodification of current § 81(Second sentence). 
280 Recodification of current § 113 (Third sentence) ("subject to the authority of"). 
281 Recodification of current § 214 (Second sentence) ("subject to the authority of"). 
282 Recodification of current § 178 (First sentence) ("qualified by special training and experience in city planning"). 
283 Consolidation and recodification of current § 113 (Fourth sentence), in lieu of the following: "The person in office as Director of Parks and Recreation on the effective date of this Charter shall hold office until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified". 
284 Recodification of current § 178 (Third sentence), in lieu of the following "The person in office as Planning Director on the effective date of this Charter shall hold office until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified". 
285 Recodification of current § 214 (Third sentence), in lieu of the following: "The director (of traffic and parking) hold office during good behavior and shall not be removed except for cause, which cause shall not be political.". 
286 Modification and recodification of current § 17 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
287 Recodification of current § 19 (Final clause of the first sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 396, § 18; Sp. L. 1905, p. 910, § 8; Sp. L. 1927, p. 17, § 18. 
288 Current § 72 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
289 Recodification of current § 72 (First sentence), entitled "Procedure for appointment". 
290 Recodification of current § 124 entitled "Same; procedure for appointing". 
291 Recodification of current § 165. 
292 Recodification of current § 127. 
293 Modification and recodification of current § 127 (First sentence of first paragraph), in lieu of the following: "Board of Public Health shall appoint a Director of Public Health for a term of four (4) years commencing February 1, 1998". Currently entitled "Appointment of Director of Public Health; qualifications, term; salaries of Director and assistants". 
294 Recodification of current § 127 (Fourth sentence of first paragraph). Current § 127 (First and second sentence of first paragraph) is repealed, as follows: "The incumbent Director of Public Health on July 1, 1993, shall serve until January 31, 1998 or until a successor is appointed and qualified. The Board of Public Health shall appoint a Director of Public Health for a term of four (4) years commencing February 1, 1998". 
295 Modification and recodification of current § 133 (Ninth sentence). 
296 Modification and recodification of current §133 (Tenth sentence), as follows: " The City Librarian shall be appointed for a term of years as provided in §3.A(1) of this Article Section 57 of this Charter ". 
297 Recodification of current § 150 (Second sentence). 
298 Modification and recodification of current § 152 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "The Superintendent of Schools, if such appointee has not held the office in the City of New Haven before, shall be appointed for a term not to exceed one (1) year and when continued in office thereafter may be reappointed for terms not to exceed five (5) years each". 
299 Recodification of current § 152 (Second sentence). 
300 Recodification of current § 57(a) (Second paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
301 Current § 57(b) is repealed as follows: "Unless otherwise terminated pursuant to law, the terms of the following officials, if they are holding office on permanent appointments on November 3, 1992, shall continue until January 31, 1998: Planning Director, Airport Manager, Personnel Director, Controller, City Librarian, Director of Public Health, Director of Parks and Recreation, Purchasing Agent, City Assessor, Fire Chief, Chief of Police, City Engineer, Director of Traffic and Parking, and Director of Legislative Services." 
302 Recodification of current § 57(a) (Third paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
303 Recodification of current § 57(a) (Fourth paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
304 Current Article VI. 
305 Recodification of current § 18 (First sentence). . Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 396, § 16; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 17, § 16. 
306 NEW. 
307 Recodification of current § 17 (Third sentence). See, Amend. Of 7-1-75. 
308 Recodification of current § 19 entitled "Deputies and assistants" 
309 Recodification of current § 19 (A portion of the first clause of the first sentence). With regard to Assistant Corporation Counsels; see, Amend. of 6-5-54; Amend. of 1-1-58; Amend. of 7-1-75. 
310 NEW. 
311 Recodification of current § 19 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 396, § 17; Sp. L. 1927, p. 17, § 18. 
312 Recodification of current § 19 (Fifth sentence). Current § 19 (Sixth sentence) is repealed. See, Sp. L. 51-604. 
313 Recodification of current § 18 (Second sentence). The first sentence was moved to § 4.A(1), above. 
314 Recodification of current § 18 (Third sentence). 
315 Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 396, § 16; Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, § 1, 2; Id., p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, p. 17, § 16. 
316 Recodification of current § 18 (First clause of the fourth sentence). 
317 Recodification of current § 18 (Second clause of the fourth sentence). 
318 Recodification of current § 18 (Fifth sentence). 
319 Recodification of current § 18 (Sixth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
320 Recodification of current § 20. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
321 Modification and recodification of current §21 (First sentence), as follows: "The City Controller re shall be the Department Head of the a department responsible for the of finance s and budget under the direction of the City Controller ". Formerly Article VII entitled "Department of Finance". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
322 Recodification of current § 21 (Fourth sentence). 
323 NEW. 
324 Consolidation and recodification of current §§ 21 (Fifth sentence) and 25. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
325 Recodification of current § 21 (Sixth sentence). 
326 Modification and recodification of current § 22(e) by adding the following term to the beginning of the sentence: "It shall be the duty of the Controller...". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
327 Currently § 29 entitled "Designation of Assistant Treasurer to serve in absence, disability of City Treasurer". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
328 Recodification of current § 29 (First sentence). 
329 Recodification of current § 29 (Second sentence). 
330 Recodification of current § 29 (Third sentence). 
331 Recodification of current § 32 (second sentence). 
332 Current § 22 entitled "General Duties". 
333 Recodification of current § 22(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 397, § 20. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 20. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
334 Recodification of current § 22(b). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 397, § 21. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 21. 
335 Recodification of current § 22(c). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 397, § 22; See, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, § 1, 2 and p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 22. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
336 Recodification of current § 22(d). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 397, § 23. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 23. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
337 Recodification of current § 22(f). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
338 Recodification of current § 22(g). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
339 Recodification of current § 23. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 397, § 24. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 24. 
340 Recodification of current § 24. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 397, § 25. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 25. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
341 Current § 26(a). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
342 Recodification of current § 26(b). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 398, § 27. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 27. 
343 Current § 27(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 399, § 29. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 29. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
344 Recodification of current § 27(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
345 Recodification of current § 27(c). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 399, § 30. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 30. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
346 Recodification of current § 28. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
347 Current § 30 entitled "Qualifications; general powers, duties; power of the Mayor to issue tax warrants". 
348 Recodification of current § 30 (First sentence). 
349 Recodification of current § 30 (Second sentence). 
350 Recodification of current § 31 (First sentence) entitled "...Duty to enforce taxes, assessments; reports of abatements to Tax Collector". 
351 Recodification of current § 30 (Fourth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 399, § 31; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 31 (seventh line). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
352 Recodification of current § 31 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 399, § 32; SP. L. 1907, p. 206, § 1. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 32. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
353 Recodification of current § 32 (First sentence) currently entitled "Daily deposit of receipts required; bond". Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 400, § 33. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 33. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
354 Recodification of current § 30 (Third sentence). 
355 Current § 31 (Third sentence). 
356 Currently "Article XIV. Bureau of Purchases". 
357 Modification and recodification of current §71(a) as follows: "There shall be in the City of New Haven a bureau of purchases which shall be under the direction of a City Purchasing Agent who shall devote full time service to the performance of the duties of said office ". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
358 NEW. 
359 Recodification of current § 72 (Fourth sentence). 
360 Recodification of current § 73 (First paragraph). 
361 NEW. 
362 Recodification of current § 73 (First paragraph). Amend. of 7-1-93. 
363 Recodification of current § 73(a). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
364 Recodification of current § 73(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
365 Recodification of current § 73(c). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
366 Recodification of current § 73(d). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
367 Recodification of current § 73(e). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
368 Recodification of current § 73(f). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
369 Recodification of current § 71(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
370 Current "Article XVI. Department of Assessments". 
371 Recodification of current § 81(c) (First sentence), in lieu of the following:" The City Assessor shall have all the powers and perform all the duties that now are, or hereafter may be conferred upon or required of tax assessors of cities and towns by the General Statutes or the ordinances". 
372 Modification and recodification of current § 81(a), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in the City a Department of Assessments consisting of a full time City Assessor and such deputies, assistants and other employees as shall be provided by the ordinances". 
373 Modification and recodification of current § 81(a) (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "The City Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor on the basis of qualifications hereinafter stated.". 
374 Current § 72 (Fourth sentence). 
375 Current § 81(a) (Second sentence). 
376 Current § 81(a) (Third sentence). 
377 Recodification of current § 81(c) (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 1-1-61. 
378 Recodification of current § 81(c) (Third sentence). 
379 Current "Article XVII. Department of Public Works". 
380 Recodification of current § 82 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "Created; supervision by Director; appointment, term, qualifications, bond of Director. There shall be in said City a Department of Public Works which shall be under the charge of one director, who shall be known as the Director of Public Works". Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 410, § 73; Sp.L. 1901, p. 1020, § 1; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 911, § 15; and, Sp. L. 1927, § 121. 
381 NEW. 
382 Current § 72 (Third sentence). 
383 Recodification of current § 82 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
384 Recodification of current § 83 (First clause of first sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 410, § 74. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 122. 
385 Recodification of current § 83 (Second clause of first sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 410, § 74. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 122. See, Amend. of 7-1-93 
386 Recodification of current § 83 (Third clause of first sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 410, § 74. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 122. 
387 Recodification and modification of current §83 (Second sentence), as follows: " The director shall cause all orders of the Board of Alders concerning any of said subjects to be executed". Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 410, § 74; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, secs,. 1, 2; Id. p. 1117, § 12; See also, Sp. L. 1927, §122 (Last sentence). 
388 Recodification and modification of current §83 (Third sentence), as follows: " The director shall make all suitable rules and regulations in regard to said department and the conduct of its business". 
389 Current §84 entitled "Powers, duties of Director concerning fence viewing", as follows: " The Director of Public Works shall have the same powers and duties in regard to fence viewing as were formerly vested in the board of selectmen of the Town of New Haven". Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 410, § 74; See also, Sp. L. 1927, §122 (Second paragraph). See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
390 Currently, "Article XVIII. Department of Engineering". Recodification of current § 96 entitled "Creation; City Engineer qualifications and duties". 
391 Recodification of current § 96 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in the City a Department of Engineering, which shall be under the direction of an experienced civil engineer, who shall be known as the City Engineer". 
392 NEW. 
393 Recodification of current § 96 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 411, § 76. 
394 Recodification of current § 96 (Fourth sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 124.3. 
395 Current § 101 entitled "Supervision by chief; appointment, qualifications, term, removal, duties of chief". 
396 Recodification of current § 101 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be a Chief of Police who shall be the head of the Department of Police Service, appointed by and subject to the authority of the Mayor". See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
397 Note: Authority for the department is derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 403, § 46 and 47; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1; Sp. L. 1905, p. 899, § 1; Sp. L. 1907, p. 179; and, Sp. L. 1927, §§ 95 and 96. 
398 Recodification of current § 101 (Fifth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
399 Recodification of current § 103 entitled "Supervision by Fire Chief; appointment; qualifications, term, removal of chief". 
400 Recodification of current § 103 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "The Fire Chief shall be the head of the department, appointed by and subject to the authority of the Mayor". See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
401 Note: Authority for the department is derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 495, §§ 54 and 55; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 669; Sp. L. 1905m p. 1063, § 1; Sp. L. 1911, p. 626, § 6; Sp. L. 1927, §§ 102 and 103. 
402 Recodification of current § 103 (Sixth sentence). 
403 Current § 105. 
404 Recodification of current § 105 (First sentence). Derived from SP. L. 1927, § 105; See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 406, § 57; See also, Sp. L. 1911, p. 626, § 7. 
405 Recodification of current § 105 (Second sentence). 
406 Recodification of current § 105 (Third sentence). 
407 Current "Article XXII. General Provisions Concerning the Police and Fire Services". 
408 Current § 106. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
409 Recodification of current § 106 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 407, § 60; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 108 (First paragraph). 
410 Current § 106 (Second sentence). 
411 Current § 106 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 407, § 60; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 108 (Second paragraph). 
412 Recodification of current § 106 (Fourth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 407, § 60; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 108 (First sentence of third paragraph). 
413 Recodification of current § 106 (Fifth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 407, § 60; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 108 (Second sentence of third paragraph). 
414 Recodification of current § 107. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 407, § 61; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 109 (Second clause of first sentence). 
415 Recodification of current § 108. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 407, § 62. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 110. 
416 Current § 113 entitled "Created; Director as head of department". See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
417 Recodification of current § 113 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in said City a Department of Parks and Recreation, which shall consist of a Director of Parks and Recreation, a Board of Park Commissioners and such a number of employees as shall be prescribed by the board upon recommendation by the director". 
418 Recodification of current § 113 (Third sentence), in lieu of the following: "The director shall be appointed by and subject to the authority of the Mayor". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
419 Current § 117 entitled ". Director; general powers, duties". 
420 Recodification of current §117, as follows: " have charge, control and management and use of all public parks, squares and open places which are included in the park system of the City of New Haven on the effective date of this Charter, and which may hereafter be acquired or dedicated to public use, as parts of or additions to the public park system of the City or Town of New Haven, whether within or without the limits of said City, but not including streets in parks within the City limits". 
421 Recodification of current §117, as follows: " The director shall have charge of the selection, cultivation, procuring, planting, spraying, trimming, preservation and removal of all trees in the streets of the City of New Haven and in parks and public places of said City". 
422 Recodification of current §117 (First clause of third sentence), as follows: " The director shall have charge of the preservation, development and adornment of said parks and places". 
423 Recodification of current § 118 entitled "Director; power to hire employees, call on City Engineer for engineering services". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
424 Recodification of current § 116. 
425 Current Article XXIV entitled "Office of Building Inspection and Enforcement". 
426 Recodification of current § 122 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "The building official, plumbing inspector and electrical inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor, and they shall be subject to the authority of the Mayor". Current section is entitled "Building, plumbing, electrical inspectors; appointment, terms, salaries". 
427 Recodification of current §121 (First sentence), as follows: "The re department shall also include the following inspectors: Building Official, Plumbing Inspector and Electrical Inspector shall be in the City of New Haven an Office of Building Inspection and Enforcement which shall be under the management and control of a director, and shall consist of the following bureaus ". 
428 See, footnote regarding recodification of current § 122 (First sentence), above. 
429 Recodification of current § 122 (Third sentence). The word "Mayoral appointees" is inserted in lieu of "inspectors". 
430 Recodification of current § 122 (Second sentence). 
431 Recodification of current § 123 (Fourth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 159; See, Sp. L. 1911, p. 624—626. 
432 Recodification of current § 123 (Second sentence). 
433 § 121, currently entitled "Created; supervision by inspection; bureaus established". See, Amend. of 7-1-75; 
434 Modification and recodification of current §121(a), as follows: " With regard to the A Bureau of B building I inspection function the duty of the Director the head of which shall be the building official, whose duty it shall be to inspect, or cause to be inspected, buildings and other structures within said City, to secure the enforcement of all ordinances of said City concerning the use, construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other structures, and to perform such other duties as may be by ordinance prescribed". Derived from Sp. L. 1911, p. 624—626; See also, Sp.L. 1927, §155(1). See also, Amend. of 1-1-83 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
435 Modification and recodification of current §121(b), as follows: " With regard to the plumbing inspection function the duty of A Bureau of Plumbing Inspection, the head of which shall be the plumbing inspector whose duty it shall be, under the direction of said Director, to inspect, or cause to be inspected, plumbing and piping work within said City, to secure the enforcement of all ordinances of said City concerning the use, construction, alteration and repair of plumbing and piping work, and to perform such other duties as may be by ordinances prescribed". Derived from Sp. L. 1911, p. 624—626; See also, Sp. L. 1927, §155(2). See also, Amend. of 1-1-83 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
436 Modification and recodification of current §121(c), as follows: " With regard to the electrical inspection function the duty of A Bureau of Electrical Inspection, the head of which shall be the electrical inspector, whose duty it shall be, under the direction of said director, to inspect, or cause to be inspected, electrical plants and wires on which electricity is conducted within said City, to secure the enforcement of all ordinances of said City concerning such plants and wires, and to perform such other duties as may be by ordinance prescribed". Derived from Sp. L. 1911, p. 624-626; see also, Sp. L. 1927, §155(3). See also, Amend. of 1-1-83 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
437 NEW. 
438 Derived from current § 127 (First sentence of first paragraph). 
439 Recodification of current § 127 (Third sentence of first paragraph). 
440 Recodification of current § 129 (First sentence). 
441 Current section entitled "Bureau of Vital Statistics". 
442 Modification and recodification of current §130 (First and second sentence of first paragraph), as follows: " There shall be within the Department of Public Health a bureau of vital statistics 442 . Said bureau shall be under the direction of a The registrar of vital statistics who shall be appointed by the director of health and shall be under the supervision of said director as shall be all assistants and employees of the department". See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
443 Current § 130 (Second paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
444 Recodification of current § 127 (Second sentence of second paragraph). 
445 Current § 129 entitled "Duties, powers of Director". 
446 Recodification of current § 129 (Second sentence). 
447 Recodification of current § 129 (Third sentence). 
448 Recodification of current § 129 (Fourth sentence). 
449 Recodification of current § 129 (Fifth sentence). 
450 Recodification of current § 129 (Sixth sentence). 
451 Modification and recodification of current §131 entitled "Emergency expenditures by Director authorized", as follows: " may incur such expenditures which are deemed necessary, in case of serious medical emergencies and the Director of Public Health with the advice and consent of the Mayor, may incur such expenditures which are deemed necessary until the Board of Alders shall have taken action in the premises". See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
452 Recodification of current § 132. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
453 Provisions are derived from current § 133; see, notes attached to the Board of Library Directors. 
454 NEW. 
455 Modification and Recodification of current §133 (Ninth sentence), as follows: "Said board shall have the power to appoint and remove a City librarian and may remove said Librarian in accordance with the provisions accorded to the Mayor in §15 B, D and E of Article II of this Charter ("...and such other officers and employees as it may deem necessary for the proper management of said library and reading room, and shall fix the duties of such officers and employees"). 
456 Recodification of current § 133 (Twelfth sentence). 
457 Recodification of current § 133 (Thirteenth sentence). 
458 Recodification of current § 134. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
459 NEW. 
460 Modification and recodification of current § 150 (Second sentence). 
461 Modification and recodification of current § 150 (Third sentence). 
462 Modification and recodification of current § 150 (Fourth sentence). 
463 Modification and recodification of current § 150 (Fifth sentence). 
464 Recodification of current §156, in lieu of the following: "There shall be in the City a Civil Service Board and a Department of Personnel consisting of a Personnel Director and such other employees as shall be provided in the budget" . 
465 NEW. 
466 Recodification of current § 165 (First sentence) entitled "Appointment, qualifications of Personnel Director", in lieu of the following: "The Personnel Director shall be appointed by the Mayor from a list of three (3) persons with the highest ratings obtained in a civil service examination held to determine eligibles for said position". See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
467 Current § 166 entitled "Powers, duties of Personnel Director". 
468 Recodification of current § 166(a). 
469 Recodification of current § 166(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
470 Recodification of current § 166(c). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
471 Recodification of current § 166(d). 
472 Recodification of current § 166(e). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
473 Recodification of current § 166(f). 
474 Recodification of current § 166(g). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
475 Recodification of current § 166(h). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
476 Recodification of current § 166(i). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
477 Recodification of current § 166(j). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
478 Recodification of current § 166(k). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
479 Current § 178 entitled "Planning Director; appointment, qualifications, general duties". 
480 NEW. 
481 Recodification of current § 178 (First sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
482 Recodification of current § 178 (Fourth sentence), with the addition of the word ""City Planning Commission" in lieu of "commission". 
483 Current Article XXXVIII entitled "Department of Traffic and Parking". 
484 Recodification of current § 214 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in said City a department of traffic and parking that shall be under the charge of one director and shall consist of other employees as provided by the ordinances". Currently entitled ""Created; supervision by director; appointment; qualifications". 
485 Recodification of current § 214 (Second sentence), in lieu of the following: "The director of traffic and parking shall be the head of the department and shall be the traffic engineer of said City and shall be appointed by and subject to the authority of the Mayor". 
486 Recodification of current § 215 (First sentence). 
487 Modification and recodification of current §215 (Second sentence), as follows: " The director shall m M ake all suitable rules and regulations in regard to said department and the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the General Statutes and ordinances of the City". 
488 Modification and recodification of current §215 (Third sentence), as follows: "Subject to the articles of this Charter pertaining to personnel : the director shall (a) appoint and remove all assistants and employees of the department ; , shall (b) be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of same, and for the care and custody of all property of the City belonging to or used by said department". 
489 Deletes the term "Department Heads". 
490 Recodification of current § 56. 
491 Modification and recodification of current §11(b) (First Paragraph), as follows: " Except as otherwise provided by the General Statutes or this Charter all members of Boards and Commissions shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to approval by the Board of Alders. Moreover the Mayor shall To fill, by appointment, a ny vacancy in any Board or Commission in which the Mayor is given the power to appoint the incumbent of such office, subject to approval by the Board of Alders; however, if the Mayor fails to fill a vacancy on a Board or Commission within sixty (60) Days following the effective date of that vacancy, then the Board of Alders may fill the vacancy within sixty (60) Days thereafter by a majority vote of the members of the Board of Alders, present. If the Board of Alders fails to fill the vacancy, then the remaining members of the Board or Commission in which the vacancy exists may fill the vacancy by appointment". 
492 Recodification of current § 56(a). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
493 Recodification of current § 56(b). Recodifies the following: (1) Board of Public Health (Current § 126, second sentence, "All members of the Board of Public Health shall be residents of said City"); (2) Board of Library Directors (Current § 133 (Fifth sentence, "All the members of said board shall be residents of the City of New Haven"); and, (3) City Planning Commission (Current § 177 (first sentence) which requires members to the "electors of the City"). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
494 Recodification of current § 56(c). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
495 Recodification of current § 56(d). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
496 Consolidation, modification of all "compensation: provisions" and recodification of current §144 by replacing "officers" with "Board and Commission Members". Recodifies the following provisions: (1) Board of Education (Current §148, first sentence, as follows: "(Board of Education members) who shall serve without compensation": (2) Board of Park Commissioners (Current §114, first clause of first sentence), as follows: " There shall be in said department a Board of Park Commissioners which shall consist of the Mayor and eight (8) commissioners who shall serve without pay, shall be electors and residents of the City and shall be chosen as follows ". See; Special Act pertaining to East Rock Park; (3) Board of Public Health (Current §126, second sentence, "The Members shall serve without compensation"; (4) Board of Library Directors (Current §133, fifth sentence, "The member shall serve without pay"); (5) Civil Service Board (Current §157, first sentence, in lieu of the following: "Five (5) persons who shall serve without pay and be appointed by the Mayor shall constitute a Civil Service Board"); and, (6) City Planning Commission (Current §177, fourth sentence, "The members of the commission shall serve without compensation"). See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
497 Consolidation of the following "vacancy" provisions: (1) Financial Review and Audit Commission. (Current §63, fifth sentence, " Members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified, unless removed for cause, which shall not be political, but may include failure to attend a specified number of meetings of the commission within a specified period as the commission may set forth in its bylaws"); (2) Board of Assessment Appeals (Current §65, second sentence, "The present members of the Board of Assessment Appeals shall continue to hold office until the terms for which they have been appointed shall expire, unless sooner removed for cause in accordance with the provisions of this Charter"; (3) Board of Police Commissioners (Current §102, fifth sentence, "The members of the Board of Police Commissioners first to hold office at the effective date of this Charter shall continue to hold said offices for the terms for which they were appointed"); (4) Board of Fire Commissioners (Current §104, fourth sentence, "The members of the Board of Fire Commissioners first to hold office at the effective date of this Charter shall continue to hold said offices for the terms for which they were appointed"; (5) Board of Park Commissioners (Current §114, third sentence, "The members of said board holding office when this Charter takes effect shall continue to hold their respective offices until the term for which they were appointed shall expire, unless sooner removed for cause which cause shall not be political"; (6) Board of Public Health (Current §126, fifth sentence, "The members of the Board of Public Health holding office at the time when this Charter takes effect shall continue to hold office until the terms for which they have been appointed expire, unless they be sooner removed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter"; (7) Board of Library Directors (Current §133, sixth sentence, "The members of said board of directors holding office when this Charter takes effect shall continue to hold their respective offices until the term for which they were appointed shall expire, unless sooner removed for cause in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of said City"; (8) Civil Service Board (Current §157, third sentence, "All citizens now members of said Civil Service Board shall continue to be members of said board during the term for which they were appointed, unless sooner removed for cause under the provisions of this Charter"; and, (9) Board of Education (Current §149, first sentence, "The members of the Board of Education in office at the time this Charter takes effect shall hold their respective offices during the terms for which they were appointed unless sooner removed for cause according to the provisions of this Charter"). 
498 Consolidation and recodification of the following provisions: (1) Board of Education (Current §149, fourth sentence, "Not more than four (4) members as provided in this section of the same political party shall at any one time be members of said board"); (2) Board of Ethics (Current §213 , the final clause of the first sentence), in lieu of the following: "..., not more than two (2) of whom shall be members of any one political party "); (3) Financial Review and Audit Commission (Current §63 (First clause of the third sentence), as follows: " Such appointments shall be made so that n N ot more than five (5) members of said commission shall be members of the same political party".); (4) Board of Assessment Appeals (Current §65 (First sentence), as follows: ". There shall be a Board of Assessment Appeals in said City consisting of three (3) members. , Nnot more than two (2) members of the Board of whom shall belong to the same political party"); (5) Board of Police Commissioners (Current §102, fourth sentence, "No more than three (3) members of said board, in addition to the Mayor, shall at any one time belong to the same political party"); (6) Board of Fire Commissioners (Current §104, fifth sentence, "Not more than three (3) members of said board shall at any one time belong to one (1) political party"; and, (7) Civil Service Board (Current §157, fifth sentence, "Not more than three (3) of the citizen members appointed by the Mayor shall at any time be members of the same political party"). 
499 Consolidation and recodification of the following: (1) Board of Police Commissioners (Current § 110 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 112; See also, Sp. L. 1899, p., 408, § 64, as follows: "Four (4) members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business"; (2) Board of Fire Commissioners (Current § 110, second sentence. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 112; See also, Sp. L. 1899, p., 408, § 64, as follows: "Three (3) members of the Board of Fire Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business".; and, (3) Board of Education (Current § 151), as follows: "Notwithstanding any provisions of this Charter to the contrary, quorum of said Board of Education shall be five (5) members and any action to be taken by said board shall be by a unanimous vote of five (5) members of the board". 
500 NEW. 
501 Current Article XXIX entitled "Department of Education". 
502 Modification and recodification of current §148 (First sentence) entitled "Department, board established; authority to determine school boundaries", as follows:" (1) Establishment. There shall be in the City of New Haven a Board of Education which shall be responsible for the management and control of the d D epartment responsible for public education in the City. (2) Composition. The of Education which shall be under the management and control of a Board of Education shall consisting of the Mayor, and seven (7) members appointed as follows: five (5) by the Mayor, subject to approval by the Board of Alders; and two (2) elected by district, as set forth in §3 of Article II of this Charter. (3) No Compensation. The members who shall serve without compensation ". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
503 Modification and recodification of current §149 (Second sentence), in lieu of the following: " Effective on January 1, 2014, O o n or before the first (1st) day of September , 2014 and in every year thereafter the Mayor shall submit, to the Board of Alders, nominees for appointment to fill the vacancies about to occur in positions on said board by appointing one or two members, as the case may be, to serve for four (4) years commencing on January 1 of the year following said submission from the third Monday of September following their appointment ". 
504 Modification and recodification of current § 149 (Third sentence). 
505 Modification and recodification of current §150 (First sentence), as follows: "The Board of Education shall: (a) have the entire charge, control and management of all the public schools in the City, and of the expenditure of all moneys appropriated for the support and maintenance of the same unless otherwise provided herein ; , and shall (b) have charge and control of the construction, repair and maintenance of all school buildings, grounds and equipment, and shall possess all other powers and be subject to all other duties of boards of education, school committees, and school visitors in this State, so far as the same are consistent with the provisions of this Charter". Further note: The following second sentence has been deleted from this section and has been recodified and placed in the Article dealing with Departments of the City Government: "... The Board of Education shall appoint a Superintendent of Schools. The appointments made by the Superintendent of Schools of all certified and qualified personnel and all other employees are subject to the approval of the Board of Education. The Superintendent of Schools with the approval of the Board of Education shall have the power to discharge any employee for cause after due notice and hearing by the Board of Education. Subject to the provisions of this Charter and the rules and regulations thereunder, the board may establish such positions, the conditions and terms of employment and salaries as it deems necessary for the proper functioning of the department ". Currently entitled "General duties, powers of board; appointment of superintendent, power to discharge employees". 
506 Modification and recodification of current §150 (Third sentence); as follows: " The board shall (c) annually choose a President and vice President from among its own members, make its own bylaws, keep a journal of its proceedings of which a suitable number shall be printed for public distribution, define the duties of its officers and committees, and prescribe such rules and regulations for the proper operation of the public schools of the City as are not inconsistent with the laws of the State 506 ; . ". 
507 Modification and recodification of current §150 (Fourth sentence), as follows: " (d) Annually, on or before the fifteenth (15th) day of January, the board shall prepare and submit to the Mayor a report of the Department of Education for the preceding fiscal year of which a reasonable number shall be printed for public distribution ; and, ". 
508 Recodification of current §148 (Second sentence), as follows: " (e) Have t T he authority to determine all school boundaries of the City of New Haven is hereby expressly granted to this board". 
509 NEW. 
510 Recodification of current § 153. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
511 Recodification of current § 154. 
512 Current § 155. See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. 
513 Current § 213 entitled "Administration". . 
514 Current § 213 entitled "Administration" (third sentence). 
515 Modification and recodification of current § 213 (First clause of the first sentence), by repealing the following: "The administration of this article shall be charged top the Mayor...". 
516 Recodification of current § 213 (second sentence). 
517 Recodification of current § 213 (Third sentence). 
518 Recodification of current § 213 (Fourth sentence). 
519 Recodification of current § 213 (Fifth sentence). 
520 Recodification of current § 213 (Sixth sentence). 
521 Current § 63 entitled "Creation, membership of the Financial Review and Audit Commission." See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
522 Derived from current § 64 (First and third sentences). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
523 Modification and recodification of current § 63 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in the City a nine (9) member financial review and audit commission, whose members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Alders." See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
524 Recodification of current § 63 (Fourth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
525 Recodification of current § 63 (Second paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
526 Recodification of current §63 (Fifth sentence), as follows: " Members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified, unless removed for cause, which shall not be political, but may include failure to attend a specified number of meetings of the commission within a specified period as the commission may set forth in its bylaws". 
527 Modification and recodification of current §63 (Remainder of the third sentence), as follows: " and n N ot fewer than seven (7) members shall have training and experience in financial matters as evidenced by being a certified public accountant, having earned a bachelor's degree in business or public administration, having not less than five (5) years service as the financial officer of a business, having not less than five (5) years service as a public administrator, or having a similar degree or experience". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
528 Recodification of current § 63 (Ninth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
529 Recodification of current § 63 (Sixth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
530 Current § 63 (Seventh sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
531 Current § 63 (Eighth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
532 Current § 64 (First sentence). Current section entitled "Meetings of the commission; duties." See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
533 Current § 64 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
534 Recodification of current § 64 (Third sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
535 Recodification of current § 64 (Fourth sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
536 Current Article XII entitled "Board of Tax Appeals". Current § 65 (Note: Board of Assessment Appeals) entitled "Created; membership; powers, duties". 
537 Derived from current § 65 (Fourth sentence), as follows: "Said Board of Assessment Appeals shall have all the powers and perform all the duties which the General Statutes provide for". 
538 Modification and recodification of current §65 (First sentence), as follows: ". The re shall be a Board of Assessment Appeals in said City shall consisting of three (3) members . , not more than two of whom shall belong to the same political party ". 
539 Modification and recodification of current §65 (Third sentence), as follows: "In the month of January 1952, and annually thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint one (1) member of the Board of Assessment Appeals to serve for three (3) years[0] from the first (1st) day of February next following appointment to office, provided that such appointments made after July 1, 1993, shall be made so that as soon as possible and continuously thereafter two (2) members of said board shall have either an appraiser's license or a real estate agent's license issued by the State. Said Board of Assessment Appeals shall have all the powers and perform all the duties which the General Statutes provide for ". 
540 Modification and recodification of current §65 (Third sentence), as follows: " In the month of January 1952, and annually thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint one (1) member of the Board of Assessment Appeals to serve for three (3) years from the first (1st) day of February next following appointment to office, provided that s S uch appointments made after July 1, 1993, shall be made so that as soon as possible and continuously thereafter two (2) members of said board shall have either an appraiser's license or a real estate agent's license issued by the State. Said Board of Assessment Appeals shall have all the powers and perform all the duties which the General Statutes provide for ". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
541 Current Article XX entitled "Department of Police Service". Section 102 entitled "Board of Police Commissioners; created; appointment; term; general duties, powers". 
542 Recodification of current §102 (First sentence), as follows: "There shall be in the Department of Police Service a Board of Police Commissioners consisting of six (6) commissioners who shall advise and consult with the Chief of Police concerning matters pertaining to the chief's duties and to the conduct of the department, and together with the chief shall make all rules and regulations relating to the administration of the department which it may deem necessary or advisable, which rules shall be printed and made available to the public". Note: Authority for the commission is derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 403, §§46. 48, 49 and 50; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, §1; Sp. L. 1905, p. 899, §§2 and 3; and, Sp. L. 1927, §§95, 97, 98 and 99. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
543 Recodification of current § 102 (First sentence), as set forth above. 
544 Recodification of current § 102 (Third sentence). 
545 Recodification of current § 109. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 408, § 63; see also, Sp.L. 1927, § 111 (First sentence). See also, Amend. of 1-1-83. 
546 Recodification of current § 102 (Second sentence). 
547 Current Article XXI entitled "Department of Fire Service". Section 104 entitled "Board of Fire Commissioners; created; membership, appointment, duties". See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
548 Modification and recodification of current §104 (First sentence), as follows: "There shall be in the Department of Fire Service a Board of Fire Commissioners consisting of five (5) members ". Note: Authority for the commission is derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 495, §§54 and 56; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§1 and 2; Id., p. 1117, §12; Sp. L. 1927, §§102 and 104. 
549 Recodification of current § 104 (Second sentence). 
550 Recodification of current § 104 (First sentence), as set forth above. 
551 Recodification of current § 104 (Third sentence). 
552 Recodification of current § 104 (Sixth sentence). 
553 Recodification of current § 110 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 408, § 64; see also, Sp.L. 1927, § 112. 
554 Recodification of current § 110 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 408, § 64; see also, Sp. L. 1927, § 112. 
555 Recodification of current § 111 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 408, § 65; See also, SP. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 113 (First paragraph). 
556 Recodification of current § 111 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 408, § 65; See also, SP. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1. See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 113 (First paragraph). ;b0; 557 Recodification of current ;s; 112 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, ;s; 113 (Second paragraph); See also, Sp. L. 1903, p. 474, ;s; 1. 
558 Recodification of current § 112 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 113 (Second paragraph); See also, Sp. L. 1903, p. 474, § 1. 
559 Recodification of current § 112 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 113 (Second paragraph); See also, Sp. L. 1903, p. 474, § 1. 
560 Current Article XXIII entitled "Department of Parks and Recreation". Section 114 entitled "Board of Park Commissioners; compensation, qualifications, term appointment". See; Special Act pertaining to East Rock Park. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
561 Recodification and derived from current § 114 (First clause of first sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in said department a Board of Park Commissioners which shall consist of the Mayor and eight (8) commissioners who shall serve without pay, shall be electors and residents of the City and shall be chosen as follows:". 
562 Current § 115 (First sentence). 
563 Recodification and derived from current § 114 (First clause of first sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in said department a Board of Park Commissioners which shall consist of the Mayor and eight (8) commissioners who shall serve without pay, shall be electors and residents of the City and shall be chosen as follows:". 
564 Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 162—163; See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 415, § 86—87; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 912, § 13. 
565 Recodification of current § 114 (Second clause of the first sentence), by deleting the word "The" from the first line. 
566 Recodification of current § 114 (Second sentence). 
567 Recodification of current § 114 (Fourth sentence). 
568 Recodification of current § 114 (Fifth sentence). 
569 Recodification of current § 114 (Sixth sentence). 
570 Recodification of current § 115 (Second sentence). 
571 Recodification of current § 115 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 164 First clause of second sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 415, § 88; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 912, § 13. 
572 Recodification of current § 117 (Fourth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 164 (Second sentence following the first clause); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p., 415, § 88; See also, Sp. L. 1911, p. 140. 
573 Recodification of current § 117 (Fifth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 164 (Third sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p., 415, § 88; See also, Sp. L. 1911, p. 140. 
574 Recodification of current § 117 (Sixth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 164 (Fourth sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p., 415, § 88; See also, Sp. L. 1911, p. 140. 
575 Recodification of current § 117 (Seventh sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p., 416, § 90; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2; p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1927, § 166; Sp. L. 1925, p. 1075, § 1; and Sp. L. 1927, No. 267, p. 289. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
576 Recodification of current § 119. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
577 Recodification of current § 120. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
578 Current Article XXV entitled "Department of Public Health". Section 125 entitled "Created; composition". 
579 Derived from current § 125 entitled "Created; composition", in lieu of the following: "There shall be a Department of Public Health in said City which shall consist of a Board of Public Health, Director of Public Health, and such a number of professional and clerical assistants as said board shall prescribe". 
580 Recodification of current § 128 (First sentence). 
581 Recodification of current § 126 (First and second clauses of the first sentence), in lieu of the following: "The board shall consist of seven (7) members, one of whom shall be the Mayor,". Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 172; See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 416, § 93; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 912, § 19. 
582 Recodification of current § 126 (Third sentence). 
583 Recodification of current § 126 (Fourth sentence). 
584 Recodification of current §126 (Remaining clauses of the first sentence) entitled "Board of Public Health; membership; appointment, qualifications, terms", as follows: " and a A t least two (2) of whom the members shall be doctors of medicine, from an accredited school of medicine, and who shall each have not less than five (5) years of experience in any or all of the following: Clinical medicine, public health administration, or college or university teaching in any of the branches of medical sciences". 
585 Derived from current § 128 (First sentence). 
586 Recodification of current § 128 (Second sentence) entitled "Same—Duty to advise with Director; regulations authorized". 
587 Recodification of current § 128 (Third sentence). 
588 Current Article XXVI entitled "Department of Public Library". Section 133 entitled "Department created; supervisions by Board of Library Directors; membership, appointment, general duties of board". 
589 Current §133 (First sentence). Note: The tenth through twelfth sentences have been recodified and placed in the Article dealing with Departments of the City Government, as follows: " Said board shall have the power to appoint and remove a City librarian and such other officers and employees as it may deem necessary for the proper management of said library and reading room, and shall fix the duties of such officers and employees. The City librarian shall be appointed for a term as provided in Section 57 of this Charter. The City librarian shall reside in said City during such term of office. Said board shall recommend the compensation of such officers and employees to be established in the budget. Appointments and promotions to the positions of librarian, assistant librarians, and superintendents of the different departments may be made by said board subject to the provisions of this Charter ". 
590 Recodification of current § 133 (Second sentence), in lieu of the following: "There shall be in said City a Department of the Public Library, which shall be under the management and control of a Board of Library Directors". 
591 Recodification of current § 133 (Fourth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 178 (Second sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 418, § 99; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 905, § 11. 
592 Recodification of current § 133 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 178 (Third sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 418, § 99; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 905, § 11. 
593 Recodification of current § 133 (Seventh sentence). 
594 Recodification of current § 133 (Eighth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 178 (Sixth sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 418, § 99; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 905, § 11. 
595 Current § 133 (Ninth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 179 (First sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 418, § 100; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, § 1, 2; Id, p. 1117, § 12. 
596 Current § 137. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 182; See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 419, § 103. 
597 Current § 135. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 181 (First, second and third sentences of the second paragraph); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 418, § 102; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 906, § 3. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
598 Current § 136. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 181 (Fourth, fifth and six sentences of the second paragraph); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 418, § 102; See also, Sp. L. 1905, p. 906, § 3. 
599 §§ 156-158 of current Article XXX entitled "Personnel and Civil Service". 
600 Recodification of current § 156 entitled "Created; composition ", in lieu of the following: "There shall be in the City a Civil Service Board and a Department of Personnel consisting of a Personnel Director and such other employees as shall be provided in the budget". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
601 Recodification of current § 157 (First sentence) entitled "Civil Service Board; membership, appointment, qualifications", in lieu of the following: "Five (5) persons who shall serve without pay and be appointed by the Mayor shall constitute a Civil Service Board". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
602 Recodification of current § 157 (Fourth sentence). 
603 Recodification of Current §157 (Fifth sentence), as follows: " Not more than three (3) of the citizen members appointed by the Mayor shall at any time be members of the same political party, and n one of such citizen members shall hold any other City office". 
604 Recodification of current § 157 (Second sentence). 
605 Recodification of current § 163 (First sentence). 
606 Recodification of current § 163 (Second sentence). 
607 Recodification of current § 163 (Third sentence). 
608 Recodification of current § 163(a). 
609 Recodification of current § 163(b). 
610 Recodification of current § 163(c). 
611 Recodification of current § 163(d). 
612 Recodification of current § 163(e). 
613 Recodification of current § 158(a). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 269 (First sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 422, § 118; See also, Sp. L. 1903, p. 436, § 2; Sp. L. 1909, p. 962, § 2. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
614 Recodification of current § 158(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
615 Recodification of current § 158(c). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
616 Recodification of current § 158(d). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
617 Recodification of current § 164. Note: this provision has been in the Charter, at least, since 1962. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
618 Recodification of current § 177 (first sentence) entitled "City Planning Commission created; membership, terms, chairman, compensation", in lieu of the following: " There shall be a City Planning Commission consisting of the Mayor who shall be its presiding officer, the City Engineer, one (1) member of the Board of Alders to be selected by said board and four (4) electors of the City to be appointed by the Mayor" (Emphasis added). 
619 Recodification of current § 177 (first sentence) entitled "City Planning Commission created; membership, terms, chairman, compensation", in lieu of the following: "There shall be a City Planning Commission consisting of the Mayor who shall be its presiding officer, the City Engineer, one (1) member of the Board of Alders to be selected by said board and four (4) electors of the City to be appointed by the Mayor " (Emphasis added). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 295; See also, Sp. L. 1913, pp. 897-898; See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
620 In lieu of "electors of the City". 
621 Current § 177 (Second sentence). 
622 Recodification of current § 177 (Third sentence). 
623 Recodification of current § 179(a). 
624 Recodification of current § 179(b). 
625 Recodification of current § 179(c). 
626 Modification and recodification of current §179(d), as follows: "To be vested with all the powers and duties conferred upon a zoning commission for the City by Special Act as codified in §§2.A through H of Article XIII of this Charter. of New Haven by Special Law 1925 (pp. 1006—1010) ". 
627 Recodification of current § 185 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (First sentence). 
628 Modification and recodification of current § 185 (First sentence), in lieu of the following: "The Mayor shall appoint a Board of Zoning Appeals, to consist of five (5) members, of whom not more than three (3) may be officials of said City". Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (First sentence). 
629 Current § 185 entitled "Board of Zoning Appeals; appointment, membership; procedure for appeals". 
630 Recodification of current § 185 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Second sentence). Note: The third sentence appears to be repealed. 
631 Recodification of current § 185 (Third sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Fourth sentence). 
632 Recodification of current § 185 (Fourth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Fifth and sixth sentence). 
633 Recodification of current § 185 (Fifth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Seventh sentence). 
634 Recodification of current § 185 (Sixth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Eighth sentence). 
635 Recodification of current § 185 (Seventh sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Ninth sentence). 
636 Recodification of current § 185 (Eighth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Tenth sentence). Note: The eleventh sentence appears to be repealed. 
637 Recodification of current § 185 (Ninth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Twelfth sentence). 
638 Recodification of current § 185 (Tenth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Thirteenth sentence). 
639 Recodification of current § 185 (Eleventh sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Fourteenth sentence). 
640 Recodification of current § 185 (Twelfth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Fifteenth sentence). See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
641 Recodification of current § 185 (Thirteenth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Sixteenth sentence). 
642 Recodification of current § 185 (Fourteenth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Seventeenth sentence). 
643 Recodification of current § 185 (Fifteenth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Eighteenth sentence). 
644 Recodification of current § 185 (Sixteenth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Nineteenth sentence). 
645 Recodification of current § 185 (Seventeenth sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 309 (Twentieth sentence). 
646 NEW. 
647 Current § 58(a). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
648 Current § 58(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
649 Current § 58(c) (First Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
650 Current § 58(c) (Second Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
651 Current § 58(c) (Third Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
652 Current § 58(d). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
653 Current § 58(e). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
654 Current § 58(f). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
655 Current § 59 (First Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
656 Current § 59 (Second Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
657 Current § 59 (Third Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
658 Current § 59 (Fourth Paragraph). See, Special Laws 1967, Act No. 437, § 3. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
659 Current § 59 (Fifth Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
660 Current § 60. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
661 Current § 61 (First Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
662 Current § 61 (Second Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
663 Current § 62 (First Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
664 Current § 62 (Second Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
665 Current § 62 (Third Paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. ;b0; 666 Recodification of current ;s; 66. 
667 Recodification of current § 67. Derived from Special Acts 1913, Act No. 181, § 1; See also, Sp. L. 1913, p. 837-839; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 83; See also, Special Acts 1931, Act No. 491, § 4; Amend. of 9-8-51, § 69; See also, Special Laws of 1969, Act No. 15, § 1. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
668 Recodification of current § 68. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 84; See, Sp. L. 1913, p. 837-839. 
669 Recodification of current § 69. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 85; See, Sp. L. 1913, p. 837-839. 
670 Recodification of current § 70. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 87; See, Sp. L. 1913, p. 837-839. 
671 Recodification of current § 78. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
672 Recodification of current § 79. 
673 Recodification of current § 80. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
674 Recodification of current § 205. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
675 Recodification of current § 206. 
676 Recodification of current § 207. See, Sp. L. 1903, pp. 276, 277, approved June 1, 1903. 
677 §§ 156-158 of current Article XXX entitled "Personnel and Civil Service" have been moved to Articles VI, § 18 and VII, § 3.K. 
678 Current § 159. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
679 Recodification of current § 160 (First sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 270 (First sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 423, § 119; See also, Sp. L. 1909, p. 963, § 3. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
680 Recodification of current § 160 (Second sentence). Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 270 (Second sentence); See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 423, § 119; See also, Sp. L. 1909, p. 963, § 3. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
681 Recodification of current § 161. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
682 Recodification of current § 162. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 272; See also, Sp. L. 1899, p. 423, § 122; See also, Sp. L. 1907, p. 361. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
683 Recodification of current § 167. See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
684 Current § 168. 
685 Current § 169. See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
686 Recodification of current § 170. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
687 Recodification of current § 171. 
688 Recodification of current § 172. See, Amend. of 7-1-75. 
689 Recodification of current § 173. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
690 NEW. 
691 Current § 174. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
692 Current § 175. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
693 Provisions from current Article XXXI entitled "Planning and Zoning". 
694 Current § 180. 
695 Recodification of current § 181. Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 303. 
696 Recodification of current § 182. Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 304. Note: §§ 305 and 306 appear to be repealed. 
697 Recodification of current § 183. Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 307. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
698 Recodification of current § 184. Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 308. 
699 Recodification of current § 186. Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 310. 
700 Recodification of current § 187. Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 311. 
701 Recodification of current § 188. Derived from Sp. L. 1925, pp. 1006—1010; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 312. Note: § 313 appears to be repealed. 
702 Recodification of current § 85. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 126 (First paragraph); See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 412, § 78; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p.1114, § 1, 2 and Sp. L. 1911, p. 202. 
703 Recodification of current § 86. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 126 (Second paragraph) (see above; See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
704 Recodification of current § 87. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 127; See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 412, § 79; See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
705 Recodification of current § 88. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 129 (First paragraph); See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 413, § 81; See also, Sp. L. 1911, p. 143—144. 
706 Recodification of current § 89. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 129 (Second paragraph). See, above. 
707 Recodification of current § 90. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 129 (Third paragraph); See, above. 
708 Recodification of current § 91. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 130; See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 413, § 82; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and p. 1117, § 12. 
709 Recodification of current § 92.Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 131; See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 414, § 83; See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
710 Current § 93. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
711 Recodification of current § 94. Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 133; See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 414, § 85; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and p. 1117, § 12; Sp. L. 1913, p. 1119. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
712 Recodification of current § 95. . Derived from Sp. L. 1927, § 134 (Second paragraph); See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 427, § 136; See also, Sp. L. 1901, p. 1114, §§ 1, 2 and p. 1136. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
713 Recodification of current § 216. 
714 Recodification of current § 217. 
715 Recodification of current § 218. 
716 NEW. 
717 Current § 74(a). See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
718 Current § 74(b). See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
719 Current § 74(c). See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
720 Recodification of current § 74(d). See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
721 Recodification of current § 75. See, Amend. of 7-1-75 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
722 Recodification of current § 76. See, Amend. of 6-5-54 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
723 Recodification of current § 77. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
724 NEW. 
725 Modification and recodification of current §17, as follows: " In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads , There shall be in said city a corporation counsel who, at the time of appointment, the Corporation Counsel shall have been an attorney and counselor at law of this state for not less than ten years , and shall reside in said city during the term of office . The corporation counsel shall be appointed by and subject to the authority of the mayor, and shall serve a term coterminous with that of the mayor who appointed him . Said corporation counsel shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department." The residency requirement is addressed by §2.C(3) of Article VI of this Charter. Derived from Sp. L. 1899, p. 395, § 15; Sp. L. 1905, p. 910, § 7; Sp. L. 1927, p. 17, § 15. 
726 Recodification of current §19 (First clause of the first sentence), as follows: "The Mayor shall appoint deputy and assistant Corporation Counsels, all of whom shall have been admitted to the bar of this State and shall have been practicing attorneys for at least two (2) years 726 , each to hold office for the term of one (1) year from said appointment or until their successor shall be appointed and duly qualified ". The final clause has been moved to §2.A(3) of this Article. See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
727 Recodification of current § 21 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
728 NEW. 
729 Current § 81(b) (First sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
730 NEW. 
731 Recodification of current § 96 (Second sentence). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
732 Recodification of current § 101 (Third and fourth sentences). See, Sp. L. 1899, p. 403, § 47; Sp. L. 1901, p. 675, § 1; Sp. L. 1907, p. 179; See also, Sp. L. 1927, § 96; and, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
733 Recodification and modification of current §103 (Fourth and fifth sentences), in lieu of the following: "In addition to the general requirements applicable to Department Heads and subject to modification as set forth in §2.B of this Article, the chief shall have an adequate knowledge of the organization and administration of a the D d epartment of F f ire S service and shall also have had experience of at least five (5) years in the protection of a municipality the City against danger from fire and in the management and direction of the operations of a fire department with at least two hundred (200) employees serving a population of at least one hundred (100,000) thousand residents of fire department personnel 733. Said Fire Chief shall have earned at least a bachelor's degree from an accredited institution of higher education prior to being considered for the position ". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
734 Modification and recodification of current § 113 (Second sentence). 
735 Recodification of current § 123 (First sentence). Currently entitled "Same; qualifications; authority of Director to appoint, remove other employees." Derived from Sp. L. 1911, p. 624-626; See also, Sp. L. 1927, §§ 156, 157 and 158; See,. See also, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
736 Recodification of current § 127 (Fifth sentence of first paragraph). See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
737 NEW. 
738 NEW. 
739 Modification and recodification of current § 165 (Second sentence). See also, Amend. of 1-1-83 and Amend. of 7-1-93. 
740 Modification and recodification of current §178 (First sentence), as follows: " The Mayor shall appoint a The Planning Director who shall be qualified by special training and experience in City planning". See, Amend. of 7-1-93. 
741 NEW.  
TITLE II - Special Laws[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Title II consists of those Connecticut special laws affecting the City of New Haven which are of continuing effect and general interest. It does not include special laws which have been superseded by the 1952 Charter, nor does it include acts expressly amending said Charter. Words in brackets [], have been added by the editor to clarify meaning and correct obvious typographical errors. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Boundaries between New Haven and Hamden changed. 
(a)  That portion of the town line between the city of New Haven and the town of Hamden, lying easterly of and adjacent to Wintergreen avenue and southerly of the old Selden Farm shall be changed to a line running parallel with and 150 feet perpendicularly distant easterly thereof, said changed line running between the southerly side of Selden Farm and the present town line lying westerly of Fowler Street. 
(b)  That portion of the town line between the city of New Haven and the town of Hamden running along the center line of the highway known as Wooding street shall be changed to a line coincident with the southerly street line of said Wooding street as established at the time of the passage of this act. 
(c)  That portion of the town line between the city of New Haven and the town of Hamden running southerly a distance of 671.57 feet from the northeasterly corner of a lot of land originally laid out in the name of Richard Hickenbottom and afterward conveyed to John Hubbard, to a point in the easterly side of an old four rod highway known as Wintergreen avenue, said point being marked by a monument, shall be changed to a line running as follows: Beginning at the said northeasterly corner of the said Richard Hickenbottom lot and running easterly in a straight extension of the present town line for a distance of 100 feet, thence running southerly a distance of 638.84 feet to the point in the easterly side of Wintergreen avenue hereinbefore mentioned and marked by a monument. 
(Special Laws 1939, Act No. 97, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 2. - Ivy street school considered in eighteenth ward. 
The provisions of an act dividing the city of New Haven into thirty-three wards, approved May 31, 1921, as amended by an act approved April 23, 1931, [2] to the contrary notwithstanding, the Ivy street school, located in the sixteenth ward in the city of New Haven, shall be considered a part of the eighteenth ward of said city, and may be used as a polling place by the electors of said eighteenth ward. 
(Special Laws 1945, Act No. 301) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1921, Act No. 342, enacted May 31, as amended by Special Laws 1931, Act No. 249, enacted April 23, established wards in the city. Said acts, as subsequently amended, are set out in § 3 of the 1952 Revised Charter. 
 
Sec. 3. - Thirty-second ward consolidated into city. 
On and after the 31st day of May, 1959, all that part and portion of the city of New Haven known as the thirty-second ward thereof, and more particularly bounded and described as follows: commencing at the point of intersection of the center lines of Ferry street and the easterly harbor line, thence following said harbor line to the center line of Fort Hale road extended, thence easterly through the center of Fort Hale road to the center of Munn road, thence through the center of Munn road to the city line, thence northerly following the city line to the center line of the old Shore line railway, thence westerly along the center line of said railway to the center line of Ferry street extended, thence westerly through the center of Ferry street to the point of beginning is hereby brought within the full jurisdiction of said city, and the inhabitants thereof shall have all the rights and be subject to all duties and responsibilities which appertain to the inhabitants of the other wards and areas within the territorial limits of said city. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138, § 1) 
Charter reference— For provisions governing taxation and services in the 32nd ward prior to enactment of Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138, which appears as §§ 3—9 of this compilation, see § 172 of the 1952 Revised Charter. For procedure for consolidating said ward, see § 173 of said charter.  
Sec. 4. - Thirty-second ward entitled to all public services. 
On and after the first day of June, 1959, said area which thereto had been known as the thirty-second ward, and more particularly described in section 1 hereof, shall have and receive any and all public services of every sort and description which every other area or part of said city shall have and shall be entitled to receive. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138, § 2)  
Sec. 5. - Taxation of property in thirty-second ward. 
On and after said first day of June, 1959, all property in said thirty-second ward, whether real or personal, shall be subject to taxation, and to assessments for public purposes, upon the same terms and conditions and at the same rates as is all other such property within said city. 
(Special Laws, 1959, Act No. 138, § 3)  
Sec. 6. - Dissolution of Fairmount Association in thirty-second ward. 
As of the first day of June, 1959, The Fairmount Association, incorporated under the provisions of number 361 of the special acts of 1911, theretofore having certain powers and duties in respect to public affairs in said thirty-second ward, shall be dissolved and cease to exist, and the city of New Haven shall receive and have for public purposes all the property and assets of said Fairmount Association and shall assume all existing indebtedness of said Fairmount Association; except that, for all indebtedness incurred by said Fairmount Association between February 1, 1959, and June 1, 1959, the city of New Haven shall be liable for only such amount as the board of finance of said city may approve. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138, § 4)  
Sec. 7. - Repeal of special act concerning sewerage plant in thirty-second ward: refund of taxes. 
Number 337 of the special acts of 1945, pertaining to the construction and maintenance of a sewer disposal plant and accessory pumping stations in the thirty-second ward of the city of New Haven and the levying of a tax upon the individual property in said ward therefor, is repealed. Any and all moneys paid before the effective date of this act [3] on account of any such tax shall be refunded to the property owner against whom such tax was levied or to any successor in title who has assumed and paid such tax. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138, § 5) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138 was approved and effective May 15, 1959. 
 
Sec. 8. - Repeal of special act authorizing sewer assessments in thirty-second ward. 
Number 341 of the special acts of 1945 is repealed; provided the city may levy assessments against the owners of real property in the thirty-second ward for sewers constructed or to be constructed, in the same manner and to the same extent as it may levy assessment for sewers in remaining parts of the city. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138, § 6) 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1945, Act No. 341 limited the services available to the thirty-second ward and prohibited city taxation therein for specified purposes. It is not included in this compilation.  
Sec. 9. - Consolidation of thirty-second ward not subject to Section 2-14 General Statutes. 
Section 2-14 of the general statutes shall not be applicable to this act. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 138, § 7) 
Editor's note— Section 2-14 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958) provides that the general assembly cannot enact local legislation unless requested by the affected municipality. "This act" refers to the provisions compiled as §§ 3 through 9 of this Article.  
Sec. 10. - City designated complying municipality under chapter 110 of general statutes. 
The city of New Haven is designated as a complying municipality under chapter 110 of the general statutes with the same effect, except as otherwise provided in sections 62 and 63 of the charter, as though it had become such pursuant to section 7-382 of said chapter and Chapters 111, 203, 204 and 205 of the general statutes are made applicable mutatis mutandis to said city. 
(Special Laws 1967, Act No. 437, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 10 is derived from § 1, Act No. 437, Special Laws 1967.  
Secs. 11—19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 20. - Mayor—General powers. 
The mayor shall have power: 
(1)  To assume the entire control and direction of the police and fire forces of the city, or either of them, for a period not exceeding five days, at his discretion in case of emergency, and to exercise all of the powers conferred upon the fire and police departments in relation thereto. 
(2)  To exercise, whenever necessary in order to suppress tumults, riots, or unlawful assemblies, within the limits of said city, all the powers given by law to sheriffs in relation to riotous assemblages; and, at all times, when necessary, to require the aid of any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, or policeman, or any or all of them together, to assist him in executing the laws within the limits of said city. 
(3)  To make requisition for the several companies of the Connecticut national guard and divisions of naval reserve in said city, or any of them, whenever he shall have reason to believe that great opposition will be made to the exercise of his authority, and to exert all the force necessary to enable him to execute the laws within the limits of said city. 
(4)  To appoint, whenever he may deem it best to do so, three competent, disinterested persons, no more than two of whom shall be of the same political party, to examine without notice the affairs of any department, officer, or employee of said city, and submit the results of said examination to him. 
(5)  The mayor may at any time whenever he may believe any person appointed to office by him or any of his predecessors to be incompetent, or unfaithful to the duties of his office, or that the requirements of the public service demand his removal, summon said officer before him at a place and time specified in said summons, to show cause why he should not be removed from said office. With said summons he shall leave with said officer a written statement of the charges against him, and if, after a full hearing, he shall find that such officer is incompetent or unfaithful, or that the requirements of the public service demand his removal, he may remove such person from his office. Any such official so removed may appeal from the order of the mayor removing him from said office to the superior court or any judge thereof, which appeal shall be made returnable not more than six nor less than three days from the date of the order of removal of said mayor, and shall be served upon the mayor or at his usual place of abode at least forty-eight hours before the time fixed for a hearing. And said court or judge, having given such further notice as may be deemed necessary to all parties, shall forthwith hear said case, and may approve or revoke the order of said mayor and may award costs at his discretion. But no such official so removed shall exercise any of the powers of his office during the pendency of his approval to the superior court. 
(6)  The mayor shall have authority to administer oaths to duly elected and appointed officials of said city. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 12; Special Laws 1945, Act No. 117) 
Charter reference— The provisions of § 20 above are partially covered by § 7 of the 1952 Revised Charter. 
Annotation— Avery v. Studley, 74 Conn. 281 (1901) held hearings on removal under subsection (5) above are not subject to a motion to make the charges more definite and employee is not entitled to legal counsel as a matter of right.  
Sec. 21. - Same—Hindering, obstructing, refusing to aid prohibited. 
If any person shall hinder, obstruct, resist, or abuse the mayor in the execution of his office, or when ordered to render assistance to the mayor (being of sufficient age and ability) shall refuse or neglect to do so, such offender, being thereof duly convicted, shall pay a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, or shall be imprisoned in the county jail not exceeding six months, or both, at the discretion of the court having cognizance of the offense. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 13)  
Sec. 22. - Same—Status of soldiers called into service by. 
Every commissioned officer and soldier, when called into service by the mayor, as aforesaid, shall have the same pay, and in case of disobedience be subject to the same penalties, as if called into service by the sheriff of the county. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 14)  
Sec. 23. - Office of corporation counsel; authority of mayor to employ additional counsel. 
The corporation counsel may have an office, to be provided by the city, which shall be kept open during such hours daily as may be by ordinance prescribed. The mayor may, if in his opinion the interests of the city require it, employ additional counsel, except with reference to matters pending before the general assembly. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 17) 
Charter reference— Section 15 of the 1952 Revised Charter authorizes the appointment of assistant corporation counsels and establishes their qualifications.  
Sec. 24. - Record commission. 
There shall be in the city of New Haven a record commission to consist of three citizens, to be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen, each to hold office for the term of three years. When this act shall take effect [4] the mayor shall nominate three members of said commission, one for the term of three years from the first day of July 1907, one for the term of two years from the first day of July, 1907, and one for the term of one year from the first day of July, 1907, and thereafter shall nominate one member of such commission during the month of June in each year for the term of three years from the first day of July following. The members of said commission shall be chosen from such citizens as are especially qualified, by reason of their experience and knowledge concerning public records, to exercise an intelligent judgment in respect to matters liable to be submitted to them, and shall serve without pay. Said commission shall have charge of the preparation of the copy for printing and of the printing and distribution of such volumes of ancient or valuable records as the board of aldermen may, from time to time, order printed; shall designate the institutions, public bodies, and officials to whom copies may be distributed free of expense, and the terms on which copies may be obtained by private individuals; and shall from time to time make such recommendations to said board concerning the care, preservation, and printing of such records as it shall deem advisable. The board of aldermen may also refer to said commission for advice or action [on] any matter pertaining to said records. 
(Special Laws 1907, Act No. 186, § 1) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1907, Act No. 186, from which § 24 above is derived, was effective when passed May 14, 1907. 
 
Sec. 25. - Assistant registrars authorized to serve as absentee ballot counters. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of sections 9-148 of the general statutes and 9-149 of the 1965 supplement thereto, the assistant registrars of voters in the seventh wards of the city of New Haven shall serve as absentee ballot counters for their respective wards. 
(Special Laws 1967, Act No. 358) 
Editor's note— Section 25 is derived from Act No. 358, Special Laws 1967. 
Charter reference— Elections and electors, §§ 4 and 5.  
Secs. 26—34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING LINES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, which is codified as §§ 35—45 of this Article, is expressly adopted and declared a part of the charter by the 1952 Revised Charter, § 292. 
 
Sec. 35. - Building lines commission established; appointment, term, compensation, political affiliation of members. 
There shall be in the city of New Haven a special commission on building lines which shall consist of five members, who shall be tax-paying citizens of said city of New Haven, and shall be appointed by the mayor, one for a term ending February 1, 1913, one for a term ending February 1, 1914, one for a term ending February 1, 1915, one for a term ending February 1, 1916, and one for a term ending February 1, 1917, and in the month of January 1913, and annually thereafter, the mayor shall appoint a member of said commission for a term of five years from the first day of February next succeeding his appointment, until said commission shall have completed its work, when the terms of its members shall expire. No more than three of said members shall, at any time, be members of the same political party. The members of said commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 1)  
Sec. 36. - Clerk to building line commission. 
Said building line commission shall employ a clerk, who shall be a competent stenographer and typewriter, at a salary not exceeding one hundred dollars per month, which clerk shall make full and correct records of the hearings and doings of the commission, and otherwise serve the city, as directed by the mayor, when not in the immediate employ of said commission. The hours of service of said clerk shall be from ten to twelve o'clock a.m., two to four o'clock, and eight to ten o'clock p.m. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 2)  
Sec. 37. - Assistance rendered commission of other departments; submission of budgets to board of finance. 
Said commission may call upon the other departments of the city government for such assistance as they may be able to give, and shall also have authority, if necessary, to employ engineering or other services and fix the compensation therefor, and to incur all other expenses necessary to effectuate the purpose of this act [article], subject to the approval of the board of finance, which expenses shall be paid by the city of New Haven. 
Said commission shall submit an estimate of its expenses to the board of finance on or before August tenth in each year. Prior to the adoption of the estimates for 1912, the expenses of said commission shall be paid out of the contingent account or by transfers from other appropriations made for the year 1911. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 3)  
Sec. 38. - Authority of commission to establish, modify building lines. 
Said commission shall have authority, and it shall be its duty, on proper petition or the order or direction of the mayor and board of aldermen, to establish, modify, or re-establish building lines on any street or streets, or any part of any street, in said city, in existence at the time of the passage of this act [article], [6] in accordance with the methods provided in the charter of the city of New Haven, and said commission is hereby vested with all the powers, necessary for the purposes aforesaid, which have been heretofore conferred upon the board of aldermen of said city. Said commission shall also consider and take action regarding building lines upon any street, or part of a street, in existence at the time of the passage of this act,* when requested so to do by the board of aldermen. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 4) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433 was approved August 24, 1911. 
 
Sec. 39. - Survey, public hearing required before establishing lines, assessing benefits or damages. 
Before said commission shall establish, modify, or re-establish any building line, or assess benefits or damages, it shall cause a survey, in writing, of such line to be made, and shall give notice to all owners and mortgagees of land which will be taken or affected by such building line of the time and place of a public hearing on such proposed establishment, modification, re-establishment, or assessment of benefits or damages. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 5)  
Sec. 40. - Procedure for giving notice of hearings before commission. 
All such notices shall be signed by the clerk of said commission, and a notice shall be delivered or mailed to each person interested, as aforesaid, in such land, who resides in said city, or to the agent in charge of such land, or left at the usual place of abode of such person or agent at least six days prior to such hearing. In case the person so interested shall not, at the time, reside in said city, or shall be under any legal disability, or in case the owner of such property is unknown, such notice shall be given as a judge of the superior court or court of common pleas shall order. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 6)  
Sec. 41. - Authority of commission to act after hearing. 
After such notice and hearing said commission shall determine and establish the building line, and shall assess damages, if any, to any person whose property or estate will be damaged by such building line, and the benefits, if any, to be paid by any person whose property or estate will be specially benefited by such building line. The assessment shall be for the excess of benefits over damages, if any, or vice versa, as the case may be. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 7)  
Sec. 42. - Records of official acts of commission. 
Said commission shall cause all its official acts to be fully recorded and shall deposit such record with the city clerk of the city of New Haven, who shall keep the same permanently on file as a record of said city; said city clerk shall cause to be recorded in the land records of the town of New Haven all building lines now established, or which are established hereafter. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 8)  
Sec. 43. - Reports by commission to mayor; effective date, collection of assessments. 
Said commission shall report in writing to the mayor, all its doings in the premises, and said mayor shall, in writing, approve or disapprove, said report; if he disapproves, he shall, within ten days, return said report, with the reasons for his disapproval, to said commission for further consideration. When any report of said commission establishing, modifying, or re-establishing any building line on any street is so approved by the mayor, he shall transmit said report to the city clerk, who shall record it in the records of the city; and when said report is so recorded, and is also recorded in the land records of the town, as provided in section eight of this act [section 42 of this article], and when the damages shall have been paid to the person whose property has been damaged by the establishment of any building line, or shall have been deposited with the city treasurer to be paid to such person when he shall apply for the same, then each of said assessments shall be legally deemed to have been made, and the land described in said survey and record of the establishing of said building line shall be devoted to the public use for which it shall have been designated. Within one week after compliance with the foregoing provision in regard to the payment of damages, or within one week after the recording of said report when no damages are to be paid to any person, the city clerk shall give notice to any person against whom an assessment has been laid, and said assessment shall be payable, and shall bear interest, as provided in section eighty-one of the charter of said city as amended by an act approved April 25, 1911. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 9; Special Laws 1913, Act No. 101, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 81 of the 1899 charter, Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, as amended, is substantially the same as §§ 96—98 of the 1952 Revised Charter, and has been omitted from this compilation as superseded thereby.  
Sec. 44. - Appeals from building line assessments. 
Any person who shall be aggrieved by any assessment of benefits or damages made in establishing a building line by the special commission on building lines of the city of New Haven, may, within thirty days after recording a description of the location of such building line in the records of the city by the city clerk, make written application for relief to the superior court in the manner provided in section eighty-five of the charter of the city of New Haven as amended by an act approved June 6, 1913. 
(Special Laws 1915, Act No. 208) 
Editor's note— Section 85 of the 1899 charter, Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, as amended, is substantially the same as § 102 of the 1952 Revised Charter, and has been omitted from this compilation as superseded thereby.  
Sec. 45. - Authority of aldermen to establish, modify building lines. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the board of aldermen from establishing building lines in new streets, or in parts of streets hereafter widened or extended, in accordance with the provisions of the charter of the city of New Haven, or from transferring to said building line commission petitions, addressed to said board of aldermen, for their action, relating to the establishment, re-establishment, change, or modification of building lines. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 433, § 10) 
Charter reference— For authority of aldermen to establish building lines, see § 50(d) of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Secs. 46—54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE AND TAXATION 
 
Sec. 55. - Records of back taxes. 
The city of New Haven is authorized to install cumulative delinquent tax register cards for each delinquent taxpayer for keeping records to show the amount of the delinquent tax and all types of assessment liabilities due, and the collection, adjustments, charges, interest and abatements thereon. The tax collector of said city shall not be required to post collection of back taxes and assessments in the back tax rate books or back tax rate bills, and the cumulative delinquent cards are to be used in lieu of the rate books when the tax becomes delinquent. 
Any provisions of the general statutes or of any special act inconsistent with the provisions of this act shall not apply to the city of New Haven and its tax collector. 
(Special Laws 1943, Act No. 251, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 56. - Adjustment of tax receivable accounts. 
The city of New Haven is authorized to adjust the general ledger tax receivable control accounts of the controller's office of all outstanding taxes so that the same will be in agreement with the tax collector's rate books of said municipality and with the auditor's report on his examination of such accounts. 
(Special Laws 1941, Act No. 133)  
Sec. 57. - Tax to liquidate current operating deficits. 
Upon the determination of the amount of any deficit occurring in the city of New Haven in any year hereafter, by reason of current expenditures exceeding current revenue, such deficit shall be liquidated through the proceeds of a tax to be laid and appropriated for such purpose, to be included in the general city rate in the estimated receipts and disbursements for the next succeeding year, as provided in section forty-four of the charter of said city. [7] Such amount shall be used only for the purpose for which it is appropriated and no transfers shall be made therefrom. The tax bills for the year in which such tax is to be collected shall be accompanied by a plainly printed statement as follows: "During the year 19___ the City of New Haven expended _______ more than it received. Of the tax laid, _____ mills are for the purpose of paying such deficit." 
(Special Laws 1937, Act No. 23, § 2; Special Laws 1933, Act No. 24, § 1) 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 44 of the 1899 charter, Special Laws 1899, Act: No. 467, is substantially the same as § 62 of the 1952 Revised Charter, and has been omitted from this compilation as inconsistent therewith. 
 
Sec. 58. - Tax exemption granted Jewish Center. 
Said corporation [8] may purchase, receive, hold, lease, mortgage or otherwise encumber or convey any real or personal property, and all its real property, furniture and equipment, from which no rents, profits or income are derived, shall be exempt from taxation. 
(Special Laws 1955, Act No. 475) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— "Said corporation" refers to the Jewish Community Center. The special law set out in § 58 above was an amendment to Special Laws 1925, Act No. 253, § 3 as amended by Special Laws 1947, Act No. 39, said acts being the charter of the center. The remainder of the charter has been omitted from this compilation. 
 
Sec. 59. - Due date of taxes. 
All taxes laid by said city or town on the grand list of 1933 shall become due and payable on the first day of January, 1934, and all taxes thereafter laid by said city or town shall become due and payable on the first day of January next after they are laid. If one-half in amount of such taxes be paid on or before the first day of February next after they become payable, no interest thereon shall be charged until after the first day of the next succeeding August, and then only on such amount of such tax as then remains unpaid; that is to say, if more than one-half of the tax assessed against any person or corporation shall remain unpaid on the first day of February next after such tax shall have become due and payable, interest shall be collected at seven per cent per annum from the first day of February on so much as then remains unpaid exceeding such one-half; and on all taxes remaining unpaid on the first day of August next after they shall have become due and payable, interest at said rate shall be collected from said first day of August until paid. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 61; Special Laws 1931, Act No. 330; Special Laws 1933, Act No. 349) 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1931, Act No. 330, Special Laws 1933, Act No. 349, from which § 59 above is derived, are expressly declared part of the charter of New Haven by § 293 of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 59.1. - Payment of taxes in installments. 
The city's tax levy for the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1968, and for each succeeding fiscal year shall be due and payable in two installments, the first of which shall be due and payable on the first day of such fiscal year and the second of which shall be due and payable on the succeeding January first. 
(Special Laws 1967, Act No. 437, § 4) 
Editor's note— Section 59.1 is derived from § 4 of Act No. 437, Special Laws, 1967.  
Sec. 60. - Tax and assessment lists. 
(1)  The assessors of the town and city of New Haven shall, at least fifteen days before the first day of June, annually, post on the public sign post in said city, or publish in one or more newspapers published in said city, a notice requiring all persons therein liable to pay taxes, to bring in, between June first and July first, inclusive, written or printed lists of the taxable personal property other than motor vehicles belonging to them on the first day of June in that year. If July first shall be a Sunday, then the next business day following shall be the final day for filing said lists. 
(2)  The state tax commissioner shall, subject to the provisions of this section, prescribe the form to be used by property owners in the town and city of New Haven in filing lists under the provisions of section one of this act [subsection (1) of this section]. The assessors of the town and city of New Haven may prepare one or more tentative forms for individual assessment lists and for an abstract book and may make application to the state tax commissioner for his approval thereof. Any such form, which shall have been approved by the tax commissioner, may thereafter be used in the town and city of New Haven until the tax commissioner shall either revoke his approval thereof or until such form shall have been superseded by another form approved by said commissioner. No special form of abstract book for the town and city of New Haven shall be approved which does not permit all information to be shown thereon which shall be contained in the regular form of abstract book. 
(3)  The addition of ten per cent, to taxpayers' lists provided by law for failure to file lists shall not apply to any failure to file lists of real estate or motor vehicles. 
(4)  Any provision of the general statutes or of any special act inconsistent with the provisions of this act shall have no force and effect so far as they relate to the assessment of property for taxation in the town and city of New Haven. 
(Special Laws 1943, Act No. 520, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Special Laws 1943, Act No. 520, declared that it should be effective May 31, 1944. Under the 1952 Charter, § 86, as amended effective January 1, 1961, the accessors have been replaced by a department of assessments under the direction of an assessor.  
Sec. 61. - Notice requiring tax lists. 
The assessors of the town and city of New Haven shall, on or before the first day of June, annually, post on the signpost in said city, or publish in one or more newspapers published in said city, a notice requiring all persons therein liable to pay taxes to bring in written or printed lists of the taxable property belonging to them on the first day of June in that year. (Sec. 1129 Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918) 
Editor's note— The provisions of §§ 61-68 of this compilation are derived from the sections of the 1918 general statutes set out in the history notes appended to each section. 
Said provisions were ordered deleted from the general statutes and reprinted as special acts in the back of Vol. XXI, Part 1 of the special laws by Public Act 1929, Ch. 258. Though some of said sections refer to the town of New Haven, they are included at the request of the city. Section 61 above is in part inconsistent with § 60(1) and has been partially superseded thereby. Sections 12-40—12-42 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958) provided for tax lists. Section 12-40 requires notice that said lists are due to be published on or before October 15 of each year, but said section is only applicable in the absence of other provisions of law. An amendment to the 1952 Charter, effective January 1, 1961, abolished the offices of assessor and created a department of assessments headed by an assessor. See § 86 of said Charter.  
Sec. 62. - Due date for tax lists. 
Each resident of the city of New Haven liable to give in a list and pay taxes therein shall give in the list required by section 1126 of the general statutes (revision of 1930) on or before the first day of July, annually. When the first day of July shall be Sunday, the list may be given in on the day following. (Sec. 1139 Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918) 
Note— See note following § 61 of this compilation. The provisions of § 62 above are partially inconsistent with and superseded by § 60(1) of this compilation. Section 1126 Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1930), as amended, appear as § 12-42 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 63. - Notice of addition to town tax lists. 
The assessors of the town of New Haven shall give the notice required by section 1137 of the general statutes (revision of 1930), on or before the twentieth day of September next following the making of any addition to the list of any person. (Sec. 1145, Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918) 
Note— See note following § 61 of this compilation. Section 1137 Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1930), as amended, appear as § 12-53 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). Under § 86, 1952 Charter, as amended effective January 1, 1961, the assessors have been replaced by a department of assessments, under the direction of an assessor.  
Sec. 64. - Perfected lists and abstracts for public inspection in town of New Haven. 
The assessors of the town of New Haven shall, on or before the thirtieth day of September, lodge the lists in the town clerk's or assessors' office, and make and lodge the abstracts in the town clerk's office, in the manner prescribed by section 1141 of the general statutes (revision of 1930). (Sec. 1150 Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918) 
Note— See note following § 61 of this compilation. Section 1141 Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1930), as amended, appear as § 12-55 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). Under § 86, 1952 Charter, as amended effective January 1, 1961, the assessors have been replaced by a department of assessments, under the direction of an assessor.  
Sec. 65. - Taxation of traders and manufacturers in town of New Haven. 
The property of any trading, mercantile, manufacturing or mechanical business, in the town of New Haven, shall be assessed and valued in all respects as provided by section 1152 of the general statutes (revision of 1930); provided the average amount of goods kept on hand for sale during the year, or any portion of the year when the business has not been carried on for a year previous to the first day of June, shall be the rule of assessment and taxation in said town (Sec. 1215 Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918) 
Note— See note following § 61 of this compilation. Section 1152 Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1930), as amended, appears as § 12-58 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 66. - Sessions of board of relief in town of New Haven. 
(a)  The board of relief in the town of New Haven shall meet on the first business day of October, annually, and may adjourn from time to time to a day not later than the last business day of October, on or before which day said board shall complete the duties imposed upon it; and said board shall give notice of its meetings as prescribed by law. 
(b)  In addition to the regular members of the board of assessment appeals who are appointed by the mayor and serve three-year terms in accordance with Article XII, Section 65 of the Charter of the City of New Haven, the board of aldermen may appoint two additional members to the board of assessment appeals in any assessment year for which it deems such appointments are necessary or appropriate, as provided under Connecticut General Statutes Section 9-199 (c) as that section may be re-codified from time to time. Each additional member shall be nominated by a member of the board of aldermen and confirmed by the aldermanic affairs committee and by the full board of aldermen and shall serve for one assessment year. 
(Sec. 1231 Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918; Ord. No. 1648, 4-4-11 ) 
Note— See note following § 61 of this compilation. Under Section 68 of the 1952 Charter, the board of relief has been replaced by the board of tax review.  
Sec. 67. - Appeals from assessors in town of New Haven. 
No appeal from the doings of the assessors in the town of New Haven, or application for deduction of indebtedness from the list of any debtor, shall be heard or entertained by the board of relief unless preferred to it at its meeting held on the first business day of October or at some adjourned meeting held within twenty days thereafter. (Sec. 1238 Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918) 
Note— See note following § 61 of this compilation. Under § 86, 1962 Charter, as amended effective January 1, 1961, the assessors have been replaced by a department of assessments, under the direction of an assessor.  
Sec. 68. - Tax liens in town of New Haven. 
The lien for taxes provided by section 1233 of the general statutes (revision of 1930) shall, as to real estate situated within the town of New Haven, exist from the first day of June in the year previous to that in which such taxes become due and precedence of such lien shall be determined as of the first day of June and not of the first day of October, but in all other respects as provided in said section. (Sec. 1301 Gen. Stats. Rev. 1918) 
Note— See note following § 61 of this compilation. Section 1233 Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1930), as amended, appears as § 12-172 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Secs. 69—74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HEALTH AND WELFARE 
 
Sec. 75. - Amendments to contracts between city and General Hospital Society authorized. 
(a)  The city of New Haven and the General Hospital Society of Connecticut are authorized to amend a certain contract entered into by and between said city and said General Hospital Society of Connecticut on the seventeenth day of June, 1910, as amended by agreement of the parties on December 12, 1912, for the purpose of providing and equipping a pavilion for the care and treatment of contagious diseases, for which purpose, under said contract, said city was authorized to issue bonds by act approved June 13, 1911, and said city and said hospital society may, in such amendment, provide for an increase in the rate to be paid by said city to said General Hospital Society of Connecticut for the care of any patient having a contagious disease, and the action of said city and said society in executing and adopting said amendment of December 12, 1912, is ratified and confirmed. 
(b)  The city of New Haven and The General Hospital Society of Connecticut are authorized to amend a certain contract entered into by and between said city and said The General Hospital Society of Connecticut on June 17, 1910, as amended by agreements of the parties dated December 12, 1912, and January 25, 1924, which contract as amended is for the purpose of providing and equipping a pavilion for the care and treatment of contagious diseases, for which purposes, under said contract, said city was authorized to issue bonds by an act approved June 13, 1911, and said city and said hospital society may, in such amendment, provide for an increase or decrease in the rates to be paid by said city to said The General Hospital Society of Connecticut for the care of patients under said contract as so amended, and the parties are further authorized to provide by further amendments from time to time for further increases if agreed upon between the parties. 
(Special Laws 1923, Act No. 9; Special Laws 1927, Act No. 116) 
Editor's note— The act of June 13, 1911, Special Laws 1911, Act No. 270, authorizing a bond issue, has been omitted from this compilation.  
Secs. 76—84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 85. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this act [article], "parking facility" shall mean and shall include lots, garages, parking terminals or other structures and accommodations for the parking of motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or without charge. "Parking authority" shall mean the authority established under section 2 hereof [section 262 of this compilation]. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 1)  
Sec. 86. - Parking authority created; membership; personnel; records and reports; cooperation of traffic engineer; requirements for valid action. 
There shall be in the city of New Haven a parking authority, which shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor, not more than three of whom shall be members of the same political party, and the traffic engineer of the city of New Haven. The first appointments to said parking authority shall be made on or before September 15, 1951. Those first appointed shall be designated to serve one, two, three, four and five years respectively from said date, and thereafter members shall be appointed annually to serve for five years, except that any vacancy shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired term. Said authority shall select from among its members a chairman and may employ necessary personnel and shall have available as consultant the traffic engineer of the city of New Haven to the end that he shall coordinate the development and operation of off-street parking operations with the activities of the traffic authority. The members of the authority shall serve without compensation as such members but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses. No action of said authority shall be valid unless authorized by a vote of the majority of its members taken at a meeting open to the public. Said authority shall maintain proper accounting and financial records and shall make an annual report to the mayor. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 2; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 8, § 1)  
Sec. 87. - Construction, operation of parking facilities. 
Said parking authority shall have the power in the name of the municipality to acquire, construct, reconstruct, improve, operate and maintain parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of this act [article]. Subject to the specific authorization and approval of the board of aldermen, after said board has received the report of the city planning commission on the suitability for parking use of any proposed real property or interest therein for use as a parking facility, said parking authority shall have the power, in the name of the municipality to acquire by purchase, gift, devise, lease, exchange or other contract or by the exercise of the power of eminent domain, real property or any interest therein necessary for or incidental to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, operation or maintenance of said parking facilities, provided said authority shall not be empowered to take by eminent domain any property from a corporation which has the right of eminent domain, and this act [article] shall not affect the powers of eminent domain of any such corporation. Upon the approval, as hereinafter provided, of the method or methods of financing, said parking authority shall prepare necessary plans and drawings; acquire, construct, reconstruct or improve or contract for the construction, reconstruction or improvement of parking facilities; maintain and operate parking facilities; establish and collect reasonable off-street parking fees; lease parking facilities to any individual, firm or corporation, upon such terms and conditions as the public interest may warrant. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 3; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 8, § 2; Special Laws 1959, Act No. 575, § 1)  
Sec. 88. - Financing of parking facilities. 
Said parking authority, subject to specific authorization and approval of the board of aldermen, is authorized to finance the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, operation and maintenance of parking facilities, including costs incidental thereto and further including in the case of revenue bonds, reserves required by the vote authorizing such revenue bonds, by any one or more of the following methods: 
(a)  General obligation bonds to be issued as provided in the New Haven city charter; 
(b)  Revenue bonds as provided in this act [article]; 
(c)  Parking fees and special charges derived from the use of parking facilities; 
(d)  Appropriations duly authorized from the general fund of the city; 
(e)  Assessment of benefits against the owners of real estate specifically benefited by any parking facility, whether or not such real estate abuts upon such parking facility. Such assessment shall be made by the bureau of compensation and approved by the board of aldermen in the same manner as is provided in the charter of the city of New Haven for the assessment of benefits and damages for public improvements; 
(f)  Gifts, bequests, devises, grants in aid or otherwise; 
(g)  On-street parking meter revenues. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 4; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 8, § 3) 
Charter reference— Hearings and assessments by board of compensation, § 95 of 1952 Revised Charter; approval by aldermen, § 96 of 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 89. - Revenue bonds for parking facilities. 
(a)  Authorized; form. The board of aldermen is authorized to provide for the issuance of revenue bonds of the city of New Haven to finance said parking facilities. Any such revenue bonds may be issued in part for the purpose of redeeming bonds of the authority or of the city heretofore issued to finance parking facilities of the authority or for the purpose of reimbursing the city for money advanced by the city to the authority. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding six per cent per annum, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding thirty years from their date and may be made redeemable before maturity at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions, as may be provided by the board of aldermen prior to the issuance of the bonds. The board of aldermen shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and the manner of execution of the bonds and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. All bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall be negotiable instruments within the meaning of the general statutes. Such bonds may be sold in such manner and for such price as said board may determine to be for the best interest of the city of New Haven, but no such sale shall be made at a price so low as to require the payment of interest on the money received therefor at more than six per cent per annum, computed with relation to the absolute maturity or maturities of the bonds in accordance with standard tables of bond values, excluding from such computation the amount of any premium to be paid on redemption of any bonds prior to maturity. 
(b)  Debt limitation. Bonds issued under the provisions of this section shall not be subject to the debt limitation prescribed by section 807 of the general statutes, as amended by section 275c of the 1953 supplement to the general statutes, [9] or to any other debt limitation applicable to the city of New Haven, and the obligation evidenced by such bonds shall not constitute an indebtedness of said city. 
(c)  Nature of obligation. Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall not constitute a pledge of the faith and credit of the city of New Haven. Said bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable solely from the income derived from said parking facilities and, to the extent and in the manner provided in the vote authorizing said bonds, revenues derived from on-street parking meters and appropriations from the general funds of the city of New Haven and such bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to that effect. 
(d)  Security. The vote authorizing the issuance of said revenue bonds shall pledge the revenues to be received from said parking facilities for which such bonds are issued. Such vote may also provide, subject to any agreement with bondholders, for the pledging of revenues from other parking facilities and for the pledging of on-street parking meter revenues. Such vote to further effectuate the provisions of this act may contain a covenant with bondholders to maintain substantially the existing on-street parking meters and to collect the fees imposed in connection therewith. Such vote may also contain a covenant with bondholders to make annual appropriations, in amounts to be determined or limited as provided in such vote, which appropriations shall be pledged to the payment of said bonds and the interest thereon as the same become due. Such vote may also provide for mortgaging such parking facilities as additional security, and may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the city of New Haven, the board of aldermen and the parking authority in relation to the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, maintenance, operation and insurance of such parking facilities, and provisions for the establishment and maintenance of appropriate sinking funds and reserves, including use of a part of the bond proceeds therefor, for the custody, safeguarding and application of all moneys, and for the employment of necessary personnel. Except as otherwise provided in this act, the board of aldermen may provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds and the revenues of the parking facilities to such officer, bank, trust company or other fiscal agent as it may designate for the custody thereof, and for the method of disbursement thereof, with such restrictions as it may determine. All expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of such vote shall be treated as a part of the cost of operation, provided any engineering, legal, advertising, printing or other cost incurred in relation to parking facilities which are to be financed by the issuance of revenue bonds may be paid from the proceeds of said revenue bonds. 
(e)  Other limitation. The vote providing for the issuance of revenue bonds may also contain such limitations upon the issuance of additional revenue bonds as the board of aldermen may deem proper. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 5; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 8, § 4; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 88, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Act No. 88, Special Laws 1967, amended Act No. 8, Special Laws 1955, § 4 (a), (c), (d), codified as § 89 hereof, to read as set out. 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Note— Section 807 of the 1949 General Statutes, as amended by § 275c of the 1953 Supplement thereto appears as § 7-374 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Sec. 90. - Establishment of rates, fees for facilities. 
The board of aldermen shall, in the vote providing for the issuance of revenue bonds, fix the initial schedule of rates, rentals, fees and other charges for the use of, and for the services and facilities furnished or to be furnished by each parking facility. After any parking facility has been in operation, the board of aldermen may revise such schedule of rates, rentals, fees and charges from time to time, subject to the provisions of any lease theretofore made by the parking authority and then in force. The parking authority shall charge and collect the rates, rentals, fees and charges fixed or revised. Such rates, rentals, fees and charges shall be so fixed and revised as to provide funds sufficient at all times: 
(a)  To pay the cost of maintaining, repairing and operating the parking facilities, including reserves for such purpose and for replacement and depreciation; 
(b)  To pay the principal of and the interest on the revenue bonds as the same become due and to provide reserves therefor; and 
(c)  To provide a margin of safety for making such payments. 
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit the board of aldermen, in fixing such initial schedule or any revision thereof, to make due allowance for any on-street parking meter revenue or appropriations available for any of such purposes pursuant to the vote authorizing such revenue bonds. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 6; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 8, § 5; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 88, § 2) 
Editor's note— Act No. 88, Special Laws 1967, § 2, amended Act No. 8, Special Laws 1955, § 5, herein codified as § 90, by changing the last paragraph thereof to read as set out.  
Sec. 91. - Rights of bondholders to enforce by suit. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, except to the extent that the rights herein given may be restricted by the authorizing vote, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceeding, protect and enforce all his rights under the provisions of the general statutes or under such vote, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this act or by such ordinance to be performed by the city of New Haven, the board of aldermen, the parking authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of rates, rentals, fees and charges for the services and facilities furnished by the parking facility or parking facilities and the making of appropriations pledged to the payment of said bonds and the interest thereon. 
(Special Laws, 1951, Act No. 437, § 7; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 88, § 3) 
Editor's note— Act No. 88, Special Laws 1967, § 3 amended Act No. 473, § 7, Special Laws 1951 to read as set out.  
Sec. 92. - Exemption of bonds from state taxes. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [article], their transfer and the income therefrom, including any profit made on the sale thereof, shall at all times be free from taxation within the state. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 8)  
Sec. 93. - Parking facility funds declared in trust. 
All moneys received under the provisions of this act [article] shall be deemed to be trust funds, to be held and applied solely as provided in this act [article]. The vote authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds shall provide that any officer to whom, or bank, trust company or other fiscal agent to which, such moneys shall be paid shall act as trustee of such moneys and hold and apply the same for the purposes hereof, subject to such provisions as this act [article] and such vote may provide. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 9)  
Sec. 94. - Leasing of parking facilities. 
Said parking authority shall have the power in the name of the municipality to lease any and all lots, garages, parking terminals or other structures or accommodations for the parking of motor vehicles. Said authority shall also have the power to lease portions of the first floor of any parking structure or any portion of its real property rights, including air rights above or areas below any such structure not to be used for parking purposes, for commercial use where in the opinion of the authority such leasing is desirable or feasible in order to defray the expenses of the authority and thereby facilitate the erection of off-street parking structures. Any such lease of any portion of the first floor of any parking structure or any portion of real property rights, including air rights above or areas below any such structure not to be used for parking purposes, for commercial use, shall contain a provision whereby the lessee shall be obligated to make a payment in lieu of taxes to the city of New Haven for each portion of the property in the possession of the lessee. Such payment shall be based upon its assessed valuation as of June 1 of each year and shall be at the rate of the tax rate set by the board of aldermen for that year. Before making or executing any contract for the leasing of such parking facility to be used for parking purposes said parking authority shall give an opportunity for competitive bidding, under such rules and regulations as shall be provided by the ordinances of said city, unless said authority and the board of aldermen find that the marking or executing of a contract for the leasing of such parking facility without an opportunity for competitive bidding is in the public interest. In the absence of such a finding all such leases or contracts to lease shall be based on competitive bids and shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder, provided the authority shall make a finding that the parking facility or facilities shall be self-liquidating. 
If the authority and the board of aldermen find that making or executing a contract to lease without the opportunity for competitive bidding is in the public interest and prior to making or executing a contract to lease any portion of any parking structure not required for parking purposes, said authority shall: 
(1)  Hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of New Haven, the first publication of which notice to be not less than two weeks before the date set for the hearing, and 
(2)  Subsequent to said hearing submit said contract of lease to the board of aldermen of the city of New Haven for its approval. 
(Special Laws 1951, Act No. 473, § 10; Special Laws 1955, Act No. 8, § 6; Special Laws 1959, Act No. 575, § 2)  
Secs. 95—99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PARKS AND RECREATION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference— For provisions concerning the department of parks and recreation, see 1952 Revised Charter, §§ 130—139. 
 
Sec. 100. - Accepting as a public park the land and buildings in New Haven known as Fort Hale. 
The conveyance of the land, with buildings thereon, known as Fort Hale, in New Haven, by the United States of America to this state, dated November 24, 1922, is accepted, subject to the provisions, reservations and conditions contained in the deed conveying the same, and the city of New Haven is authorized, at the expense of said city, to control, care for and improve the same, subject to such provisions, reservations and conditions, for the purpose of a public park under the name of Nathan Hale Park. 
(Ch. 106 P.A. 1923) 
Editor's note— Section 100 above is derived from Public Acts 1923, Ch. 106, which was ordered deleted from the public acts and reprinted as a special law in the back of Vol. XXI, Part 1 Special Laws 1931 by Public Acts 1929, Ch. 258. Acts authorizing the acquisition or sale of particular park property have been omitted from this compilation at the direction of the city, but are noted in the disposition table which follows the compilation.  
Sec. 101. - New Haven Illuminating Co.—Grant of easements, rights of way etc. by park board authorized. 
The board of park commissioners of the city of New Haven or the city of New Haven is authorized to grant to The United Illuminating Company, which was incorporated under the name of "The New Haven Illuminating Company" by resolution approved June 15, 1899, and to its successors and assigns, such perpetual easements, privileges and rights-of-way, with respect to park lands located on the east side of New Haven Harbor, as may be necessary, appropriate or convenient to extend any electric transmission line from and to New Haven Harbor to and from lands on the east side of New Haven Harbor now owned by said The United Illuminating Company and The Connecticut Light and Power Company. 
(Special Laws 1963, Act No. 269, § 1) 
Editor's note— Act No. 269, Special Laws 1963, has been codified as §§ 101 and 102 in the discretion of the editors.  
Sec. 102. - Same—Erection of poles, wires etc. for transmission of electricity subject to approval of city; limitation. 
The United Illuminating Company, for the purposes of conducting and transmitting electricity and adapting the same to the use of its customers pursuant to the rights, powers and privileges granted to it under its charter and the amendments thereto and acquired by it by purchase or consolidation or merger, shall have the right, subject to any requisite approval of any town, city or borough or other public authority having jurisdiction, to erect, lay, maintain and operate poles, towers, wires, conduits, cables, fixtures and other structures and apparatus of every kind either overhead or underground, over or under any waters of this state and in, over, under and upon the public highways, streets and grounds in any town, city or borough within the state; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to enlarge or diminish the territory within which the company is franchised to sell electricity. 
(Special Laws 1963, Act No. 269, § 2) 
Note— See editor's note following § 101.  
Secs. 103—109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC WORKS, IMPROVEMENTS AND UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 110. - Operation of Tomlinson bridge by state authorized. 
(1)  The highway commission is authorized to maintain and operate as a part of the trunk line system of highways the Tomlinson bridge over the Quinnipiac river in the city of New Haven on United States route number 1. 
(2)  The personnel who are operating said bridge for the city of New Haven at such time as the highway commissioner assumes jurisdiction over the bridge shall be certified to the highway commissioner by the director of personnel as eligible appointees under the merit act for operation of the bridge. 
(Special Laws 1941, Act No. 380, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 111. - Water contract and stipulation declared obligatory. 
(1)  The terms of a certain contract entered into by and between the city of New Haven and the New Haven Water Company on the seventeenth day of February, 1902, concerning the supplying of water for the use of said city and its inhabitants, be and they are hereby made obligatory upon the said city of New Haven and the said New Haven Water Company as though specifically authorized in their respective charters. 
(2)  A certain stipulation executed and delivered by the New Haven Water Company to the city of New Haven on the seventeenth day of February, 1902, concerning the construction of the contract referred to in section one [subsection (1)] hereof, is hereby made obligatory upon the said New Haven Water Company whenever said city shall exercise its option to claim the construction, or any part thereof, in said stipulation particularly set forth. 
(Special Laws 1903, Act No. 335, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1903, Act No. 335, from which § 111 above is derived, is declared a part of the 1952 Revised Charter by § 294 thereof.  
Sec. 112. - Granting of right of way authorized. 
The city of New Haven is authorized, upon approval of its mayor and upon vote of its board of aldermen, to grant a right of way for all highway purposes, including public utilities, to property owners abutting the easterly side of Amrhyn road sometimes called Park road, in the town of Hamden, said Amrhyn road being a parcel of land fifty feet in perpendicular width running southerly from Ridge road, in said town of Hamden, to the public highway known as Park road, in said town of Hamden. Said city is further authorized upon approval of its mayor and upon vote of its board of aldermen, to take any and all steps necessary to turn said Amrhyn road over to the town of Hamden for the use of the same as a public highway under the absolute control and jurisdiction of said town of Hamden. Said city is further authorized, upon approval of its mayor and upon vote of its board of aldermen, to take any and all steps necessary to turn over to said town of Hamden for use as a public highway the land known as Farm road, being a parcel of land fifty feet in perpendicular width running westerly from State street, in said town of Hamden, to said Park road. The lands which are the subject of this act are at the time of the passage of this act used as a public park, and the authority herein granted is given subject to the provision that such authority be exercised only with the approval of the commission of public parks for the city of New Haven, and upon such terms as said commission of public parks may, in the public interest, deem it wise to impose. 
(Special Laws 1955, Act No. 23)  
Sec. 113. - Hamden authorized to connect with New Haven sewers. 
The town of Hamden is authorized to dispose of the sewage and drainage of said town by connecting any sewer, drain, system or systems of sewers or drains, that has been or may hereafter be constructed and maintained by the town, with any sewer, drain, system or systems of sewers or drains, that has been or may hereafter be constructed and maintained by the city of New Haven, and by discharging such sewage and drainage into and through any sewer, drain system or systems of sewers or drains, operated and maintained by the city of New Haven; but no such disposal of the sewage and drainage of the town shall be made until said town shall have first obtained the consent of the city of New Haven. 
(Special Laws 1919, Act No. 45, § 1)  
Sec. 114. - Sewage, drainage disposal contracts between Hamden, New Haven authorized. 
Said town of Hamden is authorized to contract with the city of New Haven and the city of New Haven is authorized to contract with the town of Hamden, for the purpose of disposing of the sewage and drainage of the town of Hamden in the manner provided in section one [section 113 of this compilation] of this act, which contract or contracts shall be in writing and shall stipulate the compensation to be paid by the town to the city of New Haven for the right to make such disposal of its sewage and drainage. No such contract shall become effective or binding upon either the town of Hamden or the city of New Haven until the same has been approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon at a meeting of said town of Hamden, which meeting shall be warned and held for that purpose, and until the same has been approved by a majority vote of all the members of the board of aldermen and by the mayor of said city in accordance with the provisions of the charter of said city of New Haven. 
(Special Laws 1919, Act No. 45, § 2)  
Sec. 115. - Hamden, New Haven authorized to acquire certain rights, privileges, related to sewers. 
The city of New Haven and the town of Hamden are authorized to acquire from each other all the necessary rights and privileges to connect any sewer or system or systems of sewers, and for the use of sewer mains and appurtenances, pressure mains, pumping stations and apparatus, sewage disposal plants and all other such sewage collection and disposal facilities that have been or may be constructed, operated and maintained by either municipality. 
(Special Laws 1927, Act No. 323, § 1)  
Sec. 116. - Contracts between New Haven, Hamden concerning acquisition of sewer rights, privileges. 
Said city of New Haven is authorized to contract with the town of Hamden, and said town of Hamden is authorized to contract with the city of New Haven, for the purposes of obtaining any or all of the rights and privileges provided for in section one of this act [section 115 of this compilation], which contract or contracts, when and as made, shall be in writing and shall stipulate the compensation or basic rates thereof or the shares of construction costs to be paid by either municipality to the other. No such contract shall become effective or binding upon either the city of New Haven or the town of Hamden, until approved by a majority of all members of the board of aldermen and by the mayor of the city of New Haven in accordance with the provisions of the charter of said city, and until the same shall have been approved by a majority of the voters thereon at a meeting of said town, which meeting shall be warned and held for that purpose. 
(Special Laws 1927, Act No. 323, § 2)  
Sec. 117. - Municipal airport—Acquisition, operation authorized. 
The city of New Haven is authorized to establish and maintain an airport within the limits of said city and the town of East Haven and to acquire property as a site for such airport, either by purchase or by condemnation proceedings under the provisions of the general statutes. 
(Special Laws 1927, Act No. 267, § 1; Special Laws 1929, Act No. 266, § 1)  
Sec. 118. - Same—Issuance of bonds for. 
Said city is authorized, from time to time, as shall be deemed advisable by its board of finance, to issue bonds, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section one [section 117 of this compilation], to an amount not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars. Such bonds shall be denominated, "Airport Bonds of the City of New Haven", shall be registered or with coupons attached, shall bear interest at a rate not greater than five per centum per annum, payable semiannually, and shall be issued in serial form, payable, as consecutively numbered, in such equal amounts each year, beginning not more than two years after their date, that the whole amount thereof shall be paid within a time not exceeding thirty years from their date. Subject to the provisions of this section, such bonds shall be of such denomination, payable at such time or times and prepared, signed and authenticated as the board of finance of said city shall determine. 
The amount of the bonds issued under the provisions of this act [sections 117 through 119 of this compilation], with the amount of the outstanding indebtedness of said city, shall not exceed, exclusive of the amount of bonds issued for water supply and of notes or other evidences of indebtedness placed in the sinking fund of said city, five per centum of the grand list of said city. 
(Special Laws 1927, Act No. 267, §§ 2, 3; Special Laws 1929, Act No. 226, § 2)  
Sec. 119. - Same—Use of park property authorized. 
Said city may use property acquired for park purposes for the purposes of an airport, provided a majority of the commission of public parks shall vote in favor of such use. 
(Special Laws 1927, Act No. 267, § 4)  
Sec. 120. - Overhead transmission lines—Board of Aldermen review. 
No overhead electric transmission lines and towers shall be allowed hereafter in the City of New Haven, except as follows: 
A public service company may petition the board of aldermen for approval of an overhead transmission line and tower proposal by filing with the city clerk detailed plans including a rendering of the proposed construction, together with a written application describing in full the compliance with the standards for review which are described below. The city clerk shall refer the applications and plans to the appropriate committee of the board of aldermen for a public hearing thereon after at least two (2) week's public notice. The board of aldermen shall obtain from the city plan commission an advisory report on the proposal, which report shall be available at the time of the public hearing. 
The board of aldermen shall approve the petition only upon specific findings that 
(a)  the proposed plans and application are in accordance with the public convenience and welfare, after taking into account the impact of such proposal upon neighboring uses in the surrounding area compared with the public need for the proposal at the particular location, 
(b)  the effect on present and future development of neighboring properties including existing redevelopment plans or foreseeable redevelopment and reclamation plans, 
(c)  the proximity of dwellings, churches, schools, public buildings and other places of public gathering, 
(d)  the environmental impact of the proposed action, 
(e)  any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should the proposal be implemented, 
(f)  alternatives to the proposed action, 
(g)  the relationship between local short term uses of the city environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long term productivity, 
(h)  any irreversible commitments of resources which would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented, 
(i)  effect on the comprehensive plan of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 12-7-70) 
Editor's note— The ordinance of Dec. 7, 1970, amended Art. VIII by adding § 120 thereto.  
ARTICLE IX. - RETIREMENT PLAN FOR CITY EMPLOYEES[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Art. IX is derived from an ordinance enacted and effective Dec. 1 and approved Dec. 8, 1969, which ordinance in its title states it is amendatory of Special Act 379 of 1965, previously codified as Art. IX, §§ 130—149, and in turn amendatory of Act 397 of 1939. In view of the fact the manner of amendment was not specified, and the fact the ordinance is a total new regulation of the subject of retirement, said ordinance has been codified as effectively superseding Act 397 of 1939, as amended by Act 379 of 1965, at the discretion of the editors. Nature and extent of the changes effected, renders detailed analysis impractical. As previously codified, Art. IX was derived from the following Special Acts in addition to Act 397 of 1939 and Act 379 of 1965: Act 418 of 1941, Act 248 of 1947, Act 456 of 1957, Act 326 of 1961 and Act 389 of 1963; also codified as part of said Art. IX was an ordinance enacted Oct. 23, approved Oct. 27, effective Oct. 1, 1967. 
Special Act 397 of 1939 contained provisions parallel to those in §§ 271—290 of the Revised Charter, hence amendments to said Act 397 operated to effectively supersede said Charter sections. 
Prior provisions concerning retirement of city employees are also contained in Special Act 449 of 1931, which failed to gain approval of the board of aldermen as required by § 16 thereof; and Special Act 66 of 1937 as amended by Special Act 564 of 1937, which Acts were expressly repealed by Special Act 397 of 1939. 
Cross reference— Pensions for former mayors, § 159; custodians and engineers employed after Jan. 1, 1948, declared subject to city employees' retirement fund rather than custodians' and engineers' retirement fund, § 161. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
Sec. 121. - General definitions. 
As used in this plan the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
The fund or said fund means the City of New Haven City Employees' Retirement Fund; 
The city or said city means the City of New Haven; 
The board of finance, treasurer and the city-town clerk mean, respectively, such board or officer of said city; 
Eligible employee or officer means any general fund or water pollution control authority of the City of New Haven full-time employee or paid full-time officer, elected or appointed, of said city, or person regularly employed by the department of education for services in a cafeteria or restaurant operated by a public school, except and employee or officer receiving benefits from or eligible for participation in any of the other Pension or Retirement Funds of the City or State of Connecticut; 
Member of said fund means an eligible employee or officer who contributes to said fund, or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service; 
Conditional member means a terminated employee who has ceased to contribute to the fund but who has retained eligibility rights for a deferred pension; 
He or his means "he" or "she" or "his" or "hers," as may be appropriate; 
The pay of a member means all compensation for services and includes living quarters or maintenance, or both, at such figures as may be determined by said board, but shall not include allowance for a motor vehicle or other transportation; 
Except as otherwise provided in Articles II through VIII [Divisions 2 through 8], as amended, a "year," in calculating the period of service necessary to qualify for retirement, means a complete successive year from the beginning of service during which at least nine months' compensation has been earned; 
Said board or the board means the retirement board created pursuant to the provisions of this plan. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 1; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 122. - Retirement fund; assets; administration. 
There is established a fund to be known as the "City of New Haven City Employees' Retirement Fund" for the benefit of the members as defined in this plan. Said fund shall consist of: 
(1)  All appropriations, gifts, or bequests made to the fund from public or private sources for the purpose for which said retirement fund is established; 
(2)  All contributions by participating members; and 
(3)  All assets of the city employees' retirement fund of said city heretofore created by an act approved April 28, 1937, and subsequent amendment thereof. 
The treasurer of said city shall be the treasurer of said fund. The retirement board shall be the trustee thereof and have full control and management of all its securities and assets, with power to invest and reinvest the same in accordance with the provisions of the general statutes governing the investment of trust funds. Said board may, by written certificate, approved by the controller and accepted by the appointee and filed with the city-town clerk, appoint an incorporated bank or trust company doing business in said city as financial agent of said controller for such period as said controller may decide. 
Such appointee shall be, until otherwise ordered by said board, the receiving and disbursing agent of said board and said fund. Said board may turn over to such appointee the custody and possession of all or any part of the assets of said fund to hold for and on account of said board for such time as said board may decide. For such services rendered by such appointee, reasonable compensation shall be approved by said board and paid to such appointee out of income of said fund, All annuities and all re-payments under this plan, and under any amendment hereof, shall be paid from said fund. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 2; Amd. of 7-6-87; Amd. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 123. - Retirement board. 
The retirement fund shall be administered by a retirement board of seven (7) members as follows: The mayor and controller of said city, ex officio, three (3) persons appointed by the mayor, and two (2) members of the fund nominated and elected by members of the fund (no more than one of which at any time shall be from the same collective bargaining unit). The terms of appointed and elected members of the retirement board shall be three (3) years, beginning on January first, the term. of one expiring at the end of each year. A member of the retirement board shall serve until his successor is named and has qualified, and the mayor shall make such appointments to the retirement board as may be necessary to fill vacancies occurring during the term, except a vacancy in the positions of member representatives which shall be filled by the members of the fund. No member of the retirement board shall incur any liability for any act, done or omitted in the exercise of his duty, except due to his own willful misconduct and/or lack of good faith. The retirement fund shall indemnify and hold harmless each member of the retirement fund for any and all claims or liabilities asserted against him by reason of his status as a member of the retirement board, except those claims or liabilities occasioned by his own willful misconduct and/or lack of good faith. 
The retirement board shall submit annually to the mayor of the City of New Haven a schedule of estimated appropriations of money necessary for the administration of this plan; and shall receive, control, manage and expend according to the provisions of this plan all of said fund, including any monies contributed by employees; and shall invest and reinvest all of said fund in accordance with the provisions of the general statutes governing trust funds. Said mayor shall determine the eligibility of a member of the retirement fund and his rights under this plan; shall make bylaws and regulations not inconsistent with law for the administration of this plan; shall hire and dismiss any employees necessary for the proper administration of this plan and fix their compensation and shall engage expert actuarial, legal, auditing, investment and medical service when, in the judgement of the retirement board, it shall be advisable. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 3; Amd. of 12-1-75; Amd. of 7-6-87; Amd. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 124. - Payment by city. 
The City of New Haven shall pay to the retirement board such amounts to fund the benefits provided by this article as shall be determined by the retirement board based on sound actuarial principles. For each fiscal year, the city's payments shall be a percentage of the estimated total payroll of all participating members of the retirement fund. The city's payment shall also include the total administrative and other expenses of the retirement fund for each year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 4; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 125. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 23, 1998, provided for the deletion of § 125, Annual reports of retirement board, derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 1, 1969, Art. I, § 5, as amended July 6, 1987.  
Sec. 126. - Exemption of fund and benefits from taxation, attachment, execution, etc.; fund and benefits declared unassignable. 
The rights of any person under the provisions of this plan to any payment from said fund and said fund, itself, shall be exempt from any state, municipal, transfer or inheritance tax and shall not be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution and shall be unassignable. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 6; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 127. - Limitations of actions. 
No action for any amount due under the provisions of this plan shall be brought but within two years after the right of action accrues. Any person legally incapable of bringing an action when the right accrues may sue at any time within the two years next after he becomes legally capable to institute suit. All amounts not claimed within said period shall remain absolutely a part of said fund. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 7; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 128. - Effect of worker's compensation. 
Any member receiving payments under the Worker's Compensation Act shall not, at the same time, receive an annuity provided by the retirement fund, except to the extent that such annuity for each month exceeds the worker's compensation benefit payable for the same month. If payment of an award or stipulation under the Worker's Compensation Act has been made and the time covered by such award or stipulation has ended, the member may thereafter receive annuities under the retirement fund to the extent that he is otherwise qualified to participate in the retirement fund at the time. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 8; Amd. of 12-1-75; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 129. - Accounts and reserves. 
The retirement board shall maintain proper accounts and actuarial reserves for all benefits provided by this plan. These actuarial reserves shall include the following items: 
(1)  A reserve to cover future payments on retirement annuities granted due to age and service; 
(2)  A reserve to cover future payments on annuities granted due to disability; 
(3)  A reserve to cover future payments of benefits granted to survivors; and 
(4)  The balance representing the remainder of the accumulated contributions made by the members and by the city, to be held as a reserve for benefits accruing in future years in accordance with the provisions of this plan. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 9; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 130. - Actuarial valuation. 
A complete valuation shall be made periodically (but at least every fifth year by a qualified actuary in order to determine the amount of the reserve prescribed in section 9 [129] of this article and the city's contributions prescribed in sections 2 and 4 [122 and 124] of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 10; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 131. - Cost-of-living adjustment. 
Effective after December 1, 1969, the monthly amounts of those service and disability annuities payable to members who retired to January 1, 1968, and the monthly benefits payable to the qualified survivors of these members who died prior to January 1, 1968, shall be increased by cost-of-living adjustments which will approximately reflect the percentage increase in the federal Consumer Price Index between the calendar year when the payments commenced in each case and the calendar year 1968. The amount of increase for each case will be determined by multiplying the monthly payment by the appropriate percentage increase set forth in the following table, except for cases where the monthly payment is for the minimum amount of $83.33 (or $1,000.00 annual) or for lesser amounts: 
Year payments commenced 	% of increase 	Year payments commenced 	% of increase 	Year payments commenced 	% of increase 
1968 	0.0 	1959 	19.4 	1950 	44.6 
1967 	4.2 	1958 	20.4 	1949 	46.0 
1966 	7.2 	1957 	23.7 	1948 	44.6 
1965 	10.3 	1956 	28.0 	1947 	56.6 
1964 	12.1 	1955 	29.9 	1946 	78.2 
1963 	13.6 	1954 	29.5 	1945 	93.3 
1962 	15.0 	1953 	30.0 	1944 	97.7 
1961 	16.3 	1952 	31.1 	1943 	101.0 
1960 	17.6 	1951 	33.9 	1942 	113.4 
 
For any case with monthly payments of the minimum amount of $83.33 or less, the amount of increase will be determined by multiplying the smaller annuity which would have been provided by the regular benefit provisions, before increase to the minimum amount, by the appropriate percentage of increase from the above table. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 11; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 132. - Membership classification. 
Articles II and VIII [Divisions 2 through 8] set forth additional provisions which apply specifically to the various classes of members of this pension plan. When a member's eligibility status changes from one class to another, he will automatically become covered by the provisions of the division which covers his new classification. His continuous service period and years of credited membership and/or years of credited service, as the case may be, will not be broken or diminished by reason of such change. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. I, § 12; Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 132.1. - Optional transfer of pension credits in event a member changes to, or from, permanent employment covered by the policemen and firemen's pension fund. 
In the event of such change of employment within the City of New Haven, the member can elect that the period of prior service for which he made contributions to the first fund shall be included in determining the amount of his pension benefits under the second fund to which he has transferred his participation. Such transfer of cash between the funds equal to the actuarial reserve for his participating service in the first fund, including both the employee's and the city's contributions therefor, and all rights to pension or other benefits under the first fund will be terminated by such transfer. 
(Amd. of 12-1-75; Amd. of 7-6-87) 
Editor's note— The amendments of Dec. 1, 1975 specifically amended the city employees retirement fund provisions pertaining to all bargaining units by adding § 13 which, in order to conform to existing style and at the discretion of the editor, has been redesignated § 132.1 as herein set out. Said section was enacted Dec. 1, 1975, approved by the mayor Dec. 5, 1975 and became effective Jan. 1, 1976.  
Sec. 132.2. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  In the event the fund merges or consolidates with, or there is a transfer of assets or liabilities to any other plan or trust, each member would (if the fund then terminated) receive a benefit immediately after the merger, consolidation or transfer which is equal to or greater than the benefit he would have been entitled to receive immediately before the merger, consolidation or transfer (if the fund had then terminated). 
(b)  Participation under the fund will not give any member any right or claim except to the extent such right is specifically fixed under the terms of the fund and there are fund available therefor. 
(c)  If the fund is terminated or if there shall be a complete discontinuance of the contributions under the fund, the assets held in the fund available for payment after provisions for payment of all expenses of final liquidation or termination shall be allocated pursuant to the direction of the board on the basis of actuarial valuations to the extent of the sufficiency of such assets for the purpose of providing retirement benefits determined by the fund to have accrued under the fund to the date of termination of the fund. The allocation of the available assets in the fund shall be in the manner and order described in the following paragraphs. If the amounts available shall be insufficient for a complete allocation in accordance with any paragraph, such amounts shall be allocated in a uniform manner to all persons in the group mentioned in such paragraph and no allocation shall be made under any subsequent paragraph. 
(1)  First, toward the payment of that portion of a member's benefit earned to date derived from his contributions (after reduction for annuity payments), whether to the contributing members, their survivors or beneficiaries. 
(2)  Second, an amount shall be allocated, which when added to the amount indicated in paragraph (1), will be sufficient to provide retirement benefits to all persons who were receiving benefits on the date of termination of the fund and members remaining in the employ of the city who have reached their normal retirement date. 
(3)  Third, an amount shall be allocated, which when added to the amount indicated in paragraph (1), will be sufficient to provide retirement benefits for members still in the service of the city who were eligible to retire on an early retirement date. 
(4)  Fourth, an amount shall be allocated, which when added to the amount indicated in paragraph (1), will be sufficient to provide benefits earned to date by those members who have earned ten (10) years of credited service (but are not identified in paragraphs (2) or (3)). 
(5)  Fifth, amounts then remaining shall be allocated to provide benefits for all members no provided for above. 
Amounts allocated in accordance with (1) through (5), above, may be applied in the discretion of the board to provide benefits through the purchase of paid-up annuities on an individual or group basis, through allocation of reserves within the then existing fund and/or under a separate trust instrument or through participation in any other retirement plan or by any combination of these alternative or other means. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87) 
Editor's note— The amendments of July 6, 1987, which amended Article IX, retirement plan for city employees, Division 1 (referred to as "Article I" in the amendment), general information, added new provisions designated as § 14 thereto, which, in order to conform to the numbering system used herein, have been redesignated as § 132.2, at the discretion of the editor. Said section was enacted July 6, 1987, approved by the mayor July 13, 1987, and became effective July 23, 1987.  
DIVISION 2. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO EMPLOYEES REPRESENTED BY LOCAL 884 OF THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 133. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Local 884 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees or Local 884 member(s) means all of the full-time employees, of the City of New Haven, for whom Local 884 or its successor has a legal responsibility to represent according to Public Act 159, as amended, of the State of Connecticut 1965 General Assembly. Employees holding positions under new classifications, which shall come under the representation of Local 884 or its successor in the future, shall also accrue the terms and benefits of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 1)  
Sec. 134. - Determination of contributions of participating members. 
The rate of contributions shall be five per cent (5%) of pay, said percentage to be deducted from each eligible participating member's pay and transmitted to said board. Computation of the average rate for use in determining benefits under this division shall be based on the employee's basic rate of pay except that total earnings including overtime if greater, will be used for any year when his contributions were based on such larger amount. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 2)  
Sec. 135. - Provision for refund of contributions or deferred pensions for members withdrawing from service; provision for refund of contributions upon death of member with no qualified survivors; effect of discontinuance of fund; nature of member's interest in fund. 
Withdrawal of contributions of a member shall not be permitted except in the event of discontinuance of employment. In the event of such discontinuance, the retirement board shall pay, upon request, to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. 
In the event of discontinuance after ten (10) or more years of continuous service, and provided he does not qualify for greater benefits under the provisions of section 138, any terminating member who does not request a refund of his contributions will be retained as a conditional member and will be eligible for a deferred pension commencing when he attains age sixty-five (65). Such deferred pension shall be for an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the conditional member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his participating total service in the fund, subject to a maximum of seventy per cent (70%) of such average rate of pay. Such conditional member and his survivors will not be eligible for any disability, survivorship or other benefits which are provided for regular members by other sections of this division. 
In the event of a member's or a conditional member's death, the retirement board shall pay to his beneficiary, or to his estate if no named beneficiary is surviving, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of his total contributions over the total of any annuity payments made to him. 
In the event that a regular member is survived by a qualified widow or child or children under age eighteen (18), the retirement board shall, in lieu of such repayment of contributions, pay the survivorship benefits provided in section 139 of this division. If the total benefit payments to such member and his surviving widow and children shall be less than the amount of his total contributions, the amount of any excess shall be paid to the legal representative of the last survivor who received benefits. 
In the event of the discontinuance of the retirement fund, each member and conditional member shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions less any annuity payments made to him. 
In no event shall a member or a conditional member have a vested interest in the funds of the retirement system, in the amount, or any portion thereof, of the contributions of the city, or in any contribution except his own. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 3; Amd. of 12-1-75)  
Sec. 136. - Eligibility for retirement. 
(a)  Any male member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty-five years; but, at the age of seventy years (sixty-five years if he became a participating member after September 1, 1967) his retirement shall be mandatory. 
(b)  Any female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty years (sixty-five years if she became a participating member after September 1, 1967); but, at the age of seventy years (sixty-five years if she became a member after September 1, 1967) her retirement shall be mandatory. 
(c)  After June 30, 1973 any male or female member who has completed thirty (30) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty (60) years. 
(d)  Any member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement on account of total permanent disability according to the provisions of section 137. 
(e)  "Continuous service" for the purposes of this division, shall mean uninterrupted service or employment, but absence from service or employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. In the case of absence from said service or employment for more than one year, the retirement board shall determine the period within which the member may return without breaking the continuity of his service or employment. 
(f)  Reinstatement of such member's prior participating service in the retirement fund shall be conditioned upon such medical examination as the retirement board may prescribe, and upon payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn with three (3) per cent interest compounded annually. Application for such reinstatement shall be made within six (6) months after his return to employment. 
(g)  In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no year shall be included in which the member has not been in actual service for at least nine (9) months. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (g) of this section, veterans of the U.S. armed forces shall be granted credit toward the computation of their years of service to be eligible for city retirement pension for up to four years served in active duty in the U.S. armed forces. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 4; Amd. of 4-26-72; Amd. of 12-1-75; Amd. of 12-17-90, § 1)  
Sec. 137. - Disability annuities. 
Any member of the retirement fund who, after ten (10) years of continuous service for the city, is permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job shall be entitled to an annuity to be granted on the basis of the completed years of service, provided proof of such disability shall be submitted to the retirement board, which shall cause examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical examiners. The retirement board may, from time to time, call for similar medical evidence that the member continues to be permanently disabled and such member shall be required to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the retirement board. If the retirement board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which the member is receiving an annuity no longer exists, said board shall thereupon order a discontinuance of all such annuities payable to such member and he shall thereafter be entitled to any benefits for which he is eligible to receive as provided for in section 135. If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment by the city as defined by the workmen's compensation act, a member of the fund shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 138.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1973. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 5; Amd. of 4-26-72)  
Sec. 138. - Retirement and disability benefits. 
(a)  For employees retiring by reason of age and service or by reason of disability, the retirement board shall pay to each eligible member an annuity for life in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service; provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. Such annuity shall be paid monthly at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual amount so determined. A minimum annual pension of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or eighty per cent (80%) of the employee's annual rate of pay at the time of his retirement, whichever is smaller, is hereby established for present and future annuities. Any pension payable by reason of disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act or arising after the completion of ten (10) years of continuous service, provided such disability was not incurred as the result of any other gainful employment, shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 138.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1973. 
(b)  Any member who is not otherwise eligible to receive a retirement allowance under the provisions of this section and who, after reaching the age of fifty-five years and being a member of the retirement fund at the time, and after at least fifteen (15) years of continuous service, is obliged to retire involuntarily from such service, which involuntary retirement is not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office, shall receive an annual retirement allowance equal to forty per cent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two per cent (2%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service for each full year of service in excess of fifteen (15) years but in no event more than fifty per cent (50%) of his annual rate of pay for said last five (5) years of his service. This provision shall apply to any person retired on or after January 1, 1957, provided such person makes written application to the retirement board within one year after such involuntary retirement. 
(c)  A member who qualifies for benefits under subsection (b) and who has at least twenty-five (25) years of service may elect an alternative benefit in the form of an annuity for life commencing at age sixty-five (65) for male members and age sixty (60) for female members, or upon qualification for a disability annuity according to the provisions of this division, in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of such average annual rate of pay and provided the member may elect to have said alternative form of annuity commence at any earlier age after the age of fifty-five (55), but in such event the amount of annuity will be reduced so as to be equivalent in present value to the annuity payable at the age of sixty-five (65) on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for determining actuarial reserves for the retirement fund. 
(d)  Early retirement option prior to July 1, 1973: Any active member who has completed twenty (20) years of continuous service may elect to receive a reduced early retirement annuity to commence at any time after he has attained his sixtieth birthday. The reduced amount of such early retirement annuity shall be actuarially equivalent to the full retirement annuity normally payable commencing at a later date when he would have first attained the regular eligibility age for retirement in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) of section 136, and shall be determined by the retirement board on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for actuarial valuations of the retirement fund. 
(e)  Early retirement option after June 30, 1973: Any active member may elect early retirement on any date which is ten (10) or less years prior to the date on which he would first become eligible for normal retirement as prescribed in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of section 136. In such event his annuity, as determined by subsection (a) of this section 138, shall be reduced in amount by four (4) per cent for each full year by which his early retirement date precedes his earliest eligibility date for normal retirement with a further proportionate reduction for any fraction of a year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 6; Amd. of 4-26-72)  
Sec. 138.1. - Additional conditions for all disability annuities approved to commence after June 30, 1973. 
Any disability annuity which is approved by the retirement board with an effective commencement date later than June 30, 1973 shall be subject to adjustment on account of the member's earnings from employment or self-employment of any kind, and his pension shall be discontinued unless he files with the retirement board annually before April 30th a sworn statement of such earnings for the preceding calendar year as shown in his federal income tax return. The reduction in his disability annuity shall equal fifty (50) per cent of any excess of his earnings in the preceding calendar year over the sum of one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) and such deduction shall be spread evenly over twelve (12) months, starting with the payment due on April 30th. No such adjustments for earnings shall be made after the disabled member attains the age of sixty-five. For anyone of these members whose period of credited membership shall have commenced after his fortieth birthday, the amount payable as a disability annuity (before adjustment for earnings) shall be limited to a percentage of his annual rate of pay at the time of disability; this percentage is to be determined by multiplying two (2) per cent by the number of years of membership which he could have accumulated up to his sixty-fifth birthday if he were able to continue his employment for the city until that date. 
(Amd. of 4-26-72) 
Editor's note— The amendments of April 26, 1972 specifically amended the city employees retirement fund provisions pertaining to Local 884 by adding new § 7 which, in order to conform to existing style and at the discretion of the editor, has been redesignated as § 138.1 as herein set out.  
Sec. 139. - Survivorship benefits. 
(a)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his or her surviving child or children under eighteen years of age, and, in the case of a male member, to his qualified widow, monthly benefits consistent with the following table: 
_____
MONTHLY BENEFIT 
Average 
annual 
pay 	Widow only 	Widow and one child 	Widow and two or more children 	One child 	Two children 	Three or more 
children 
$1,800 	$100 	$150 	$150 	$53 	$106 	$150 
 2,400 	 100 	 162 	 200 	 62 	 124 	 186 
 3,000 	 100 	 172 	 244 	 72 	 144 	 216 
 3,600 	 100 	 181 	 262 	 81 	 162 	 243 
 4,200 	 100 	 190 	 270 	 90 	 180 	 270 
 4,800 	 100 	 200 	 280 	100 	 200 	 280 
 5,400 	 105 	 210 	 290 	105 	 210 	 290 
 6,000 	 110 	 220 	 300 	110 	 220 	 300 
 
_____
Any such widow, on her remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to her children alone. 
(b)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member for the final five (5) years of his service or employment by the city, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five (5) years, subject to a maximum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for such average annual pay. 
(c)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors if greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. The minimum monthly benefit when payable to a qualified widow without qualified child or children in her care shall be further reduced in amount by two per cent (2%) for each year that the age of the widow is less than the age of the deceased member. 
(d)  In order to qualify for benefits under this section a widow who does not have children of the deceased member under eighteen years of age in her care must have resided with him, except through no fault of her own, at the time of his death and, if such member had been retired due to age and service or disability, must have been married to him at the time of his retirement. Proof of dates of birth of the widow and children must be submitted before payment of benefits under this section. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 7)  
Sec. 140. - Requirements for participation. 
(a)  All members eligible under this division who were enrolled prior to December 1, 1969 shall continue to participate in the fund so long as they serve as eligible employees of the city. 
(b)  The following provisions shall apply to eligible employees whose service shall commence after December 1, 1969: 
(1)  Any employee who shall enter, or transfer to, the classified civil service prior to attainment of age fifty-five shall be required to participate in the retirement fund. 
(c)  No eligible employee entering service after December 1, 1969 shall be admitted to membership in the retirement fund unless he can complete at least ten (10) years of continuous service to qualify for a retirement annuity at his mandatory retirement age. 
(d)  In computing the benefits provided in section 138, and section 139 no credit shall be given for any period of service subsequent to January 1, 1938 for which the member has not made the contribution required for participation in the retirement fund. 
(e)  An open period of six (6) months starting December 1, 1969 is hereby established during which any eligible employee, who had not previously enrolled as a member, may make written application for membership provided his total period of continuous service will be at least ten (10) years on his mandatory retirement date. Such application should specify that his membership is to be effective either from the date of his application without payment of back contributions, or from the date on which his service commenced. On the latter basis he must agree to pay all back contributions which would have been required for his prior services with three per cent (3%) compound interest, the amount of which will be determined or estimated by the retirement board whose decision shall be final. Such payment must be made in a lump sum or in equal monthly installments of at least ten dollars ($10.00) over a period not exceeding thirty-six (36) months. Such admission to membership will entail the discontinuance of any Social Security coverage on the member's subsequent earnings. Further, any retirement or disability annuity to which he becomes entitled in accordance with section 138 will be subject to reduction by a Social Security adjustment in case he has elected retroactive membership on his prior service. This adjustment will be applied where the city has paid F.I.C.A. taxes for Social Security coverage on his prior earnings and will equal fifty per cent (50%) of a proportion of the Social Security primary benefit available to him on date of his retirement. Such proportion shall be determined as the percentage which the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from the city bears to the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from all sources since January 1, 1938. 
(f)  This open period and the provisions and requirements of paragraph (e) will also be available to any member who wishes to establish credit for any period of non-participating prior service which preceded the effective date of his membership, provided such prior period was of at least twelve months' duration. 
(g)  The provisions of paragraphs (e) and (f) for establishing retroactive membership credits will expire at the end of the open period on May 31, 1970. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 8; Amd. of 12-1-75)  
Sec. 141. - Benefits for periods of military service. 
In determining benefits under section 138 and 139 credit shall be given for periods of military service in World War II, or the Korean War subject to the following conditions: Any member who, after October 16, 1940, entered any branch of the armed forces of the United States or any service auxiliary thereto, or any civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government, including those employees of the municipal airport who were displaced from their regular employment when the army took over the airport and who undertook duties connected with air forces, or any member who shall enter such services while the United States is at war, and who has been or shall be re-employed by the city within six months after the termination of such military service, shall qualify for credit for his period of military service, provided he resumes his participation in the retirement fund, with an effective date antedating his entry into such service. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 9)  
Sec. 142. - Preservation of benefits paid under previous acts. 
The provisions of this division shall not affect the benefits already in course of payment in accordance with the provisions of previous acts. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. II, § 10)  
Sec. 142.1. - Future cost-of-living adjustments. 
On July 1, 1973, and annually on each July 1 thereafter, the monthly payments on those service annuities, disability annuities and survivors' benefits on which at least eighteen (18) monthly payments have been made will be increased, or decreased, for changes in the cost-of-living as indicated by the Federal Consumer Price Index. For this purpose the retirement board will determine an adjustment percentage for July 1, 1973 by relating such index for the full calendar year 1972 to that for the full calendar year 1971, but such adjustment percentage shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred three per cent (103%) and to a minimum of ninety-seven per cent (97%); further, no adjustment will be made where the increase or decrease for the year is less than one-quarter (¼) of one per cent. For each case on which payments commenced prior to January 1, 1972, the monthly payment for June 1973, including any previous cost-of-living adjustments, will be multiplied by such adjustment percentage as determined by the retirement board in order to calculate the adjusted monthly payments for the twelve (12) months following July 1, 1973. A similar procedure will be repeated to adjust payments each year thereafter. However, the monthly benefit originally provided for a retired member or for a survivor shall never be reduced because of the accumulative effect of all cost-of-living adjustments. 
(Amd. of 4-26-72) 
Editor's note— The amendments of April 26, 1972 specifically amended the city employees retirement fund provisions pertaining to Local 884 by adding § 12 which, in order to conform to existing style and at the discretion of the editor, has been redesignated § 142.1 as herein set out.  
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO EMPLOYEES REPRESENTED BY LOCAL 287 OF THE BOARD OF EDUCATION EMPLOYEES, AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 143. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Local 287 of the Board of Education Employees American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, or Local 287 member(s) means all of the non-professional school employees, including probationary employees, of the City of New Haven, for whom Local 287 or its successor has a legal responsibility to represent according to Public Act 159, as amended, of the State of Connecticut 1965 General Assembly. New employees holding positions under new classifications, which shall come under the representation of Local 287 or its successor in the future, shall also accrue the terms and benefits of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 1)  
Sec. 144. - Determination of contributions of participating members. 
The rate of contributions shall be five per cent (5%) of pay, said percentage to be deducted from each eligible participating member's pay and transmitted to said board. Computation of the average rate for use in determining benefits under this division shall be based on the employee's basic rate of pay except that earnings including overtime if greater will be used for any year when his contributions were based on such larger amount. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 2)  
Sec. 145. - Refund of contributions or deferred pension for members withdrawing from service; refund of contributions upon death of member with no qualified survivors; effect of discontinuance of fund; nature of member's interest in fund. 
Withdrawal of contributions of a member shall not be permitted except in the event of a discontinuance of employment. In the event of such discontinuance, the retirement board shall pay upon request, to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. In event of discontinuance after ten (10) or more years of continuous service, and provided he does not qualify for greater benefits under the provisions of subsection (b) of section 148, any terminating member who does not request a refund of his contributions will be retained as a conditional member and will be eligible for a deferred pension commencing when he attains age sixty-five. Such deferred pension shall be for an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the conditional member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, subject to a maximum of seventy per cent (70%) of such average rate of pay. Such a conditional member and his survivors will not be eligible for any disability, survivorship or other benefits which are provided for regular members by other sections of this division. In the event of a member's or a conditional member's death. the retirement board shall pay to his beneficiary, or to his estate if no named beneficiary is surviving, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of his total contributions over the total of any annuity payments made to him. In the event that a regular member is survived by a qualified widow or child or children under age eighteen, the retirement board shall, in lieu of such repayment of contributions, pay the survivorship benefits provided in section 149 of this division. If the total benefit payments to such member and his surviving widow and children shall be less than the amount of his total contributions, the amount of any excess shall be paid to the legal representative of the last survivor who received benefits. In the event of the discontinuance of the retirement fund each member and conditional member shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions less any annuity payments made to him. In no event shall a member or a conditional member have a vested interest in the funds of the retirement system, in the amount, or any portion thereof, of the contributions of the city, or in any contribution except his own. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 3(b)) 
Editor's note— The introductory phrase to § 3(b) provides that effective July 1, 1970, § 3(a) is repealed and § 3(b) substituted therefor, hence § 3(a) has been omitted.  
Sec. 146. - Eligibility for retirement. 
(a)  Any male member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty-five years; but at the age of seventy years (sixty-five years if he became a participating member after July 1, 1970) his retirement shall be mandatory. 
(b)  Any female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty years (sixty-five years if she became a participating member after July 1, 1970); but at the age of seventy years (sixty-five years if she became a member after July 1, 1970) her retirement shall be mandatory. 
(c)  After June 30, 1974 any male or female member who has completed thirty (30) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty (60) years. 
(d)  Any member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement on account of total permanent disability according to the provisions of section 147. 
(e)  Continuous service for the purposes of this division shall mean uninterrupted service or employment but absence from service or employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. In the case of absence from said service or employment for more than one year, the retirement board shall determine the period within which the member may return without breaking the continuity of his service or employment. 
(f)  Reinstatement of a member in the retirement fund shall be conditioned upon such medical examination as the retirement board may prescribe and upon payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn with three per cent interest compounded annually. 
(g)  In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no year shall be included in which the member has not been in actual service for at least nine (9) months. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (g) of this section, veterans of the U.S. armed forces shall be granted credit toward the computation of their years of service to be eligible for city retirement pension for up to four years served in active duty in the U.S. armed forces. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 5; Amd. of 12-17-90, § 2) 
Editor's note— Sec. 4, also outlining eligibility for retirement, provides that said section becomes null and void, effective June 30, 1970; hence the section has been omitted.  
Sec. 147. - Disability annuities. 
Any member of the retirement fund who, after ten (10) years of continuous service for the city, is permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job shall be entitled to an annuity to be granted on the basis of the completed years of service, provided proof of such disability shall be submitted to the retirement board, which shall cause examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical examiners. The retirement board may, from time to time, call for similar medical evidence that the member continues to be permanently disabled and such member shall be required to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the retirement board. If the retirement board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which the member is receiving an annuity no longer exists, said board shall thereupon order a discontinuance of all such annuities payable to such member and he shall thereafter be entitled to any benefits for which he is eligible to receive as provided in section 145. If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment by the city as defined by the workmen's compensation act, a member of the fund shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 6) 
This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 148.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1974.  
Sec. 148. - Retirement and disability benefits. 
(a)  For employees retiring by reason of age and service or by reason of disability, the retirement board shall pay to each eligible member an annuity for life in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service; provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. Such annuity shall be paid monthly at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual amount so determined. A minimum annual pension of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or eighty per cent (80%) of the employee's annual rate of pay at the time of his retirement, whichever is smaller, is hereby established for present and future annuitants. Any pension payable by reason of disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act or arising after the completion of ten (10) years of continuous service, provided such disability was not incurred as the result of any other gainful employment, shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 148.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1974. 
(b)  Any city employee who is not otherwise eligible to receive retirement allowance under the provisions of this section and who, after reaching the age of fifty-five years and being a member of the retirement fund at the time, and after at least fifteen (15) years of continuous service, is obligated to retire involuntarily from such service, which involuntary retirement is not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office, shall receive an annual retirement allowance equal to forty per cent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two per cent (2%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service for each full year of service in excess of fifteen (15) years but in no event more than fifty per cent (50%) of his annual rate of pay for said last five (5) years of his service. This provision shall apply to any person retired on or after January 1, 1957, provided such person makes written application to the retirement board within one year after such involuntary retirement. 
(c)  A member who qualifies for benefits under subsection (b) and who has at least twenty-five (25) years of service may elect an alternative benefit in the form of an annuity for life commencing at age sixty-five for male members and age sixty for female members, or upon qualification for a disability annuity according to the provisions of this plan, in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of such average annual rate of pay and provided the member may elect to have said alternative form of annuity commence at any earlier age after the age of fifty-five, but in such event the amount of annuity will be reduced so as to be equivalent in present value to the annuity payable at the age of sixty-five on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for determining actuarial reserves for the retirement fund. 
(d)  Early retirement option prior to July 1, 1974: Any active member who has completed twenty (20) years of continuous service may elect to receive a reduced early retirement annuity to commence at any time after he has attained his sixtieth birthday. The reduced amount of such early retirement annuity shall be actuarially equivalent to the full retirement annuity normally payable commencing at a later date when he would have first attained the regular eligibility age for retirement in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) of section 146, [12] and shall be determined by the retirement board on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for actuarial valuations of the retirement fund. 
(e)  Early retirement option after June 30, 1974. Any active member may elect early retirement on any date which is ten (10) or less years prior to the date on which he would first become eligible for normal retirement as prescribed in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of section 146. In such event his annuity, as determined by subsection (a) of this section 148, shall be reduced in amount by four (4) per cent for each full year by which his early retirement date precedes his earliest eligibility date for normal retirement with a further proportionate reduction for any fraction of a year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 7) 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Note— Reference in the ordinance as enacted is to §§ 4 and 5. See the editor's note following § 146 for the disposition of § 4. 
 
Sec. 148.1. - Additional conditions for all disability annuities approved to commence after June 30, 1974. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Special Act No. 379 and any amendment thereof, the following additional conditions are to apply to all disability retirement allowances for employees which are approved to commence after June 30, 1974. The amount of each such disability pension is subject to annual adjustment on account of the member's earnings from employment or self-employment of any kind, and his pension shall be discontinued unless he files with the retirement board annually before April 30th a sworn statement of such earnings for the preceding calendar year as shown in his federal income tax return. The reduction in his disability pension shall equal fifty (50) per cent of any excess of his earnings in the preceding calendar year over the amount which a Social Security beneficiary is entitled to earn without causing a reduction of his Social Security benefits. Such deduction shall be spread evenly over twelve (12) months, starting with the payment due on April 30th. No such adjustments for earnings shall be made after the disabled member attains the age of sixty-five (65).  
Sec. 149. - Survivorship benefits. 
(a)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his or her surviving child or children under eighteen years of age, and, in the case of a male member, to his qualified widow, monthly benefits consistent with the following table: 
_____
MONTHLY BENEFIT 
Average 
annual 
pay 	Widow only 	Widow and one child 	Widow and two or more children 	One child 	Two children 	Three or 
more 
children 
$1,800 	$100 	$150 	$150 	$53 	$106 	$150 
 2,400 	 100 	 162 	 200 	 62 	 124 	 186 
 3,000 	 100 	 172 	 244 	 72 	 144 	 216 
 3,600 	 100 	 181 	 262 	 81 	 162 	 243 
 4,200 	 100 	 190 	 270 	 90 	 180 	 270 
 4,800 	 100 	 200 	 280 	100 	 200 	 280 
 5,400 	 105 	 210 	 290 	105 	 210 	 290 
 6,000 	 110 	 220 	 300 	110 	 220 	 300 
 
_____
Any such widow, on her remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to her children alone. 
(b)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member for the final five (5) years of his service or employment by the city, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five (5) years, subject to a maximum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for such average annual pay. 
(c)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors in greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. 
(d)  In order to qualify for benefits under this section a widow who does not have children of the deceased member under eighteen years of age in her care must have resided with him, except through no fault of her own, at the time of his death and, if such member had been retired due to age and service or disability, must have been married to him at the time of his retirement. Proof of dates of birth of the widow and children must be submitted before payment of benefits under this section. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 8)  
Sec. 150. - Requirements for participation. 
(a)  All members eligible under this division who were enrolled prior to December 1, 1969 shall continue participation so long as they are employed by the city. Each new employee entering the service of the city under civil service tenure shall be required to participate in the retirement fund. Each other new eligible employee who enters the service of the city may elect, within the first year of his service, to participate in the retirement fund and, failing such election he shall not thereafter be admitted to said fund unless he makes an application to participate within five (5) years next following and then only with the consent of the retirement board and after having passed a physical examination to be prescribed by the retirement board. In such event he may choose to have the effective date of his entry be either the date of his application or the date following one year after the commencement of his employment, and if he shall choose the latter, he shall pay the amount which he would have been required to contribute during the interim, with interest compounded annually at three per cent (3%). No credit shall be given for service subsequent to January 1, 1938, for any period for which such employee has not made the contribution required for participation in the retirement fund. 
(b)  In no event shall an employee be admitted to membership in the retirement fund unless he can complete at least ten (10) years of continuous service to qualify for a retirement annuity at his mandatory retirement age, unless the retirement board determines that it shall be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 9)  
Sec. 151. - Benefits for periods of military service. 
In determining benefits under sections 148 and 149 credit shall be given for periods of military service in World War II, or the Korean War subject to the following conditions: Any member who, after October 16, 1940, entered any branch of the armed forces of the United States, or any service auxiliary thereto, or any civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government, including those employees of the municipal airport who were displaced from their regular employment when the army took over the airport and who undertook duties connected with the air forces, or any member who shall enter such services while the United States is at war, and who has been or shall be re-employed by the city within six (6) months after the termination of such military service, shall qualify for credit for his period of military service, provided he resumes his participation in the retirement fund, with an effective date antedating his entry into such service. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 10)  
Sec. 152. - Preservation of benefits paid under previous acts. 
The provisions of this division shall not affect benefits already in course of payment in accordance with the provisions of previous acts. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. III, § 11)  
Sec. 152.1. - Future cost-of-living adjustments. 
On July 1, 1975 and annually on each July 1 thereafter, the monthly payments on those service annuities, disability annuities and survivors benefits on which at least eighteen (18) monthly payments have been made will be increased, or decreased, for changes in the cost-of-living as indicated by the Federal Consumer Price Index. For this purpose the retirement board will determine an adjustment percentage for July 1, 1975 by relating such index for the full calendar year 1974 to that for the full calendar year 1973, but such adjustment percentage shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred three per cent (103%) and to a minimum of ninety-seven per cent (97%); further, no adjustment will be made where the increase or decrease for the year is less than one-quarter (¼) of one per cent. For each case on which payments commenced prior to January 1, 1974 the monthly payment for June 1975, including any previous cost-of-living adjustments, will be multiplied by such adjustment percentage as determined by the retirement board in order to calculate the adjusted monthly payments for the twelve (12) months following July 1, 1975. A similar procedure will be repeated to adjust payments each year thereafter. However, the monthly benefit originally provided for a retired member or for a survivor shall never be reduced because of the accumulative effect of all cost-of-living adjustments.  
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO EMPLOYEES REPRESENTED BY LOCAL 713 OF THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY, AND MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 153. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Local 713 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees or Local 713 member(s) means all the unclassified employees, including probationary employees, in the Department of Public Works of the City of New Haven, for whom Local 713 or its successor has a legal responsibility to represent according to Public Act 159 as amended of the State of Connecticut 1965 General Assembly. New employees holding positions under new classifications, which shall come under the representation of Local 713 or its successor in the future, shall also accrue the terms and benefits of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 1)  
Sec. 154. - Determination of contributions of participating members. 
The rate of contributions shall be five per cent (5%) of pay, said percentage to be deducted from each eligible participating member's pay and transmitted to said board. Computation of the average rate for use in determining benefits under this division shall be based on the employee's basic rate of pay except that total earnings including overtime if greater, will be used for any year when his contributions were based on such amount. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 2)  
Sec. 155. - Refund of contributions upon withdrawal of member or upon his death with no qualified survivors; effect of discontinuance of system; nature of member's interest in fund. 
Withdrawal of contributions of a member shall not be permitted except in the event of discontinuance of employment. In the event of such discontinuance, the retirement board shall pay, upon request, to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. In the event of a member's death prior to the commencement of an annuity or a disability annuity, if no widow or dependent children survive, the retirement board shall pay to the member's beneficiary, or to his estate if no named beneficiary is surviving, an amount equal to his total contributions. Upon the death of a member, after commencement of an annuity or disability annuity, the amount of any excess of such total contributions made by him over the total annuity payments made to him shall be paid to his representative designated or otherwise, except that should he be survived by minor children or a wife, they shall receive annuities in lieu of such repayment of contributions, according to the provisions of this division. If the total benefit payments to the member and his surviving widow and minor children shall be less than the amount of his total contributions, the amount of any excess shall be paid to the legal representative of the last survivor who received benefits. In the event of the discontinuance of the retirement fund, each member shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions. In no event shall a member have a vested interest in the funds of the retirement system, in the amount, or any portion thereof, of the contributions of the city, or in any contribution except his own. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 3)  
Sec. 156. - Eligibility for retirement. 
(a)  Any male member who has completed twenty (20) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this plan at the age of sixty-five years; but at the age of seventy years, his retirement shall be mandatory. 
(b)  Any female member who has completed twenty (20) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this plan at the age of sixty years; but at the age of sixty-five years, her retirement shall be mandatory. 
(c)  After June 30, 1974 any male or female member who has completed thirty (30) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty (60) years. 
(d)  Any member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement on account of total permanent disability according to the provisions of this division. 
(e)  "Continuous service," for the purposes of this division, shall mean uninterrupted service or employment, but absence from service or employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. In the case of absence from said service or employment for more than one year, the retirement board shall determine the period within which the member may return without breaking the continuity of his service or employment. 
(f)  Reinstatement of a member in the retirement fund shall be conditioned upon such medical examination as the retirement board may prescribe and upon payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn with three per cent (3%) interest compounded annually. 
(g)  In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no year shall be included in which the member has not been in actual service for at least nine (9) months. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (g) of this section, veterans of the U.S. armed forces shall be granted credit toward the computation of their years of service to be eligible for city retirement pension for up to four years served in active duty in the U.S. armed forces. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 4; Amd. of 11-29-74; Amd. of 12-17-90, § 3)  
Sec. 157. - Disability annuities. 
Any member of the retirement fund who, after ten (10) years of continuous service for the city, is permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job shall be entitled to an annuity to be granted on the basis of the completed years of service provided proof of such disability shall be submitted to the retirement board, which shall cause examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical examiners. The retirement board may, from time to time, call for similar medical evidence that the member continues to be permanently disabled and such member shall be required to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the retirement board. If the retirement board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which the member is receiving an annuity no longer exists, said board shall thereupon order a discontinuance of all such annuities payable to such member and he shall be entitled to any excess of his total contributions over the amount of disability annuities paid. If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment by the city as defined by the workmen's compensation act, a member of the fund shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment. 
This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 157.1.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1974. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 5; Amd. of 11-29-74)  
Sec. 157.1. - Retirement and disability benefits. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1961, for employees retiring by reason of age and service or by reason of disability, the retirement board shall pay to each eligible member an annuity for life in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service; provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. Such annuity shall be paid monthly at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual amount so determined. A minimum annual pension of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or eighty per cent (80%) of the employee's annual rate of pay at the time of his retirement, whichever is smaller, is hereby established for present and future annuitants. Any pension payable by reason of disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act or arising after the completion of ten (10) years of continuous service, provided such disability was not incurred as the result of any other gainful employment, shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 157.1.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1974. 
(b)  Any city employee who is not otherwise eligible to receive a retirement allowance under the provisions of this section and who, after reaching the age of fifty-five years and being a member of the retirement fund at the time, and after at least fifteen (15) years of continuous service, is obliged to retire involuntarily from such service, which involuntary retirement is not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office shall receive an annual retirement allowance equal to forty per cent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two per cent (2%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service for each full year of service in excess of fifteen (15) years but in no event more than fifty per cent (50%) of his annual rate of pay for said last five (5) years of his service. This provision shall apply to any person retired on or after January 1, 1957, provided such person makes written application to the retirement board within one year after such involuntary retirement. 
(c)  Early retirement option prior to July 1, 1974. A member who qualifies for benefits under subsection (b) and who has at least twenty-five (25) years of service may elect an alternative benefit in the form of an annuity for life commencing at age sixty-five for male members and age sixty for female members, or upon qualification for a disability annuity according to the provisions of this division, in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of such average annual rate of pay and provided the member may elect to have said alternative form of annuity commence at any earlier age after the age of fifty-five, but in such event the amount of annuity will be reduced so as to be equivalent in present value to the annuity payable at the age of sixty-five on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for determining actuarial reserves for the retirement fund. 
(d)  Early retirement option after June 30, 1974. Any active member may elect early retirement on any date which is ten (10) or less years prior to the date on which he would first become eligible for normal retirement as prescribed in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of section 136. In such event his annuity, as determined by subsection (a) of this section 156, shall be reduced in amount by four (4) per cent for each full year by which his early retirement date precedes his earliest eligibility date for normal retirement with a further proportionate reduction for any fraction of a year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 6; Amd. of 11-29-74)  
Sec. 157.1.1. - Additional conditions for all disability annuities approved to commence after June 30, 1974. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Special Act No. 379 and any amendment thereof, the following additional conditions are to apply to all disability retirement allowances for employees which are approved to commence after June 30, 1974. The amount of each such disability pension is subject to annual adjustment on account of the member's earnings from employment or self-employment of any kind, and his pension shall be discontinued unless he files with the retirement board annually before April 30th a sworn statement of such earnings for the preceding calendar year as shown in his federal income tax return. The reduction in his disability pension shall equal fifty (50) per cent of any excess of his earnings in the preceding calendar year over the amount which a Social Security beneficiary is entitled to earn without causing a reduction of his Social Security benefits. Such deduction shall be spread evenly over twelve (12) months, starting with the payment due on April 30th. No such adjustments for earnings shall be made after the disabled member attains the age of sixty-five (65). 
(Amd. of 11-29-74) 
Editor's note— The amendments of Nov. 29, 1974 specifically amended the city employees retirement fund provisions pertaining to Local 713 by adding new § 7 to Art. IV which, in order to conform to existing style and at the discretion of the editor, has been redesignated § 157.1.1 as herein set out.  
Sec. 157.2. - Survivorship benefits. 
(a)  On and after the effective date of this division upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his or her surviving child or children under eighteen years of age, and, in the case of a male member, to his qualified widow, monthly benefits consistent with the following table: 
_____
MONTHLY BENEFIT 
Average 
annual 
pay 	Widow only 	Widow and one child 	Widow and two or more children 	One child 	Two children 	Three or 
more 
children 
$1,800 	$100 	$150 	$150 	$53 	$106 	$150 
 2,400 	 100 	 162 	 200 	 62 	 124 	 186 
 3,000 	 100 	 172 	 244 	 72 	 144 	 216 
 3,600 	 100 	 181 	 262 	 81 	 162 	 243 
 4,200 	 100 	 190 	 270 	 90 	 180 	 270 
 4,800 	 100 	 200 	 280 	100 	 200 	 280 
 5,400 	 105 	 210 	 290 	105 	 210 	 290 
 6,000 	 110 	 220 	 300 	110 	 220 	 300 
 
_____
Any such widow, on her remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to her children alone. 
(b)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits, shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member for the final five (5) years of his service or employment by the city, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five (5) years, subject to a maximum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for such average annual pay. 
(c)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors if greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. The minimum monthly benefit when payable to a qualified widow without qualified child or children in her care shall be further reduced in amount by two per cent (2%) for each year that the age of the widow is less than the age of the deceased member. 
(d)  In order to qualify for benefits under this section a widow who does not have children of the deceased member under eighteen years of age in her care must have resided with him, except through no fault of her own, at the time of his death and, if such member had been retired due to age and service or disability, must have been married to him at the time of his retirement. Proof of dates of birth of the widow and children must be submitted before payment of benefits under this section. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 7)  
Sec. 157.3. - Requirements for participation. 
(a)  All members eligible under this division who were enrolled prior to December 1, 1969, shall be required to continue participation so long as they are employed by the city. Each new eligible employee who enters the service of the city may elect, within the first year of his service, to participate in the retirement fund and, failing such election, he shall not thereafter be admitted to said fund unless he makes an application to participate within five (5) years next following and then only with the consent of the retirement board and after having passed a physical examination to be prescribed by the retirement board. In such event he may choose to have the effective date of his entry be either the date of his application or the date following one year after the commencement of his employment, and if he shall choose the latter, he shall pay the amount which he would have been required to contribute during the interim, with interest compounded annually at three per cent (3%). No credit shall be given for service subsequent to January 1, 1938, for any period for which such employee has not made the contribution required for participation in the retirement fund. 
(b)  In no event shall an employee be admitted to membership in the retirement fund unless he can complete at least twenty (20) years of continuous service to qualify for a retirement annuity at his mandatory retirement age, unless the retirement board determines that it shall be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 8)  
Sec. 157.4. - Benefits for periods of military service. 
In determining benefits under sections 157.1 and 157.2 credit shall be given for periods of military service in World War II, or in the Korean War subject to the following conditions: Any member, who, after October 16, 1940, entered any branch of the armed forces of the United States, or any service auxiliary thereto, or any civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government, including those employees of the municipal airport who were displaced from their regular employment when the army took over the airport and who undertook duties with the air forces, or any member who entered such service while the United States is at war, and who has been or shall be re-employed by the city within six (6) months after the termination of such military service shall qualify for credit for his period of military service, provided he resumes his participation in the retirement fund, with an effective date antedating his entry into such service. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 9)  
Sec. 157.5. - Preservation of benefits paid under previous acts. 
The provisions of this division shall not affect benefits already in course of payment in accordance with the provisions of previous acts. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. IV, § 10)  
Sec. 157.5.1. - Future cost of living adjustments. 
On July 1, 1975 and annually on each July 1 thereafter, the monthly payments on those service annuities, disability annuities and survivors benefits on which at least eighteen (18) monthly payments have been made will be increased, or decreased, for changes in the cost-of-living as indicated by the Federal Consumer Price Index. For this purpose the retirement board will determine an adjustment percentage for July 1, 1975 by relating such index for the full calendar year 1974 to that for the full calendar year 1973, but such adjustment percentage shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred three per cent (103%) and to a minimum of ninety-seven per cent (97%); further, no adjustment will be made where increase or decrease for the year is less than one-quarter (¼) of one per cent. For each case on which payments commenced prior to January 1, 1974 the monthly payment for June 1975, including any previous cost-of-living adjustments, will be multiplied by such adjustment percentage as determined by the retirement board in order to calculate the adjusted monthly payments for the twelve (12) months following July 1, 1975. A similar procedure will be repeated to adjust payments each year thereafter. However, the monthly benefit originally provided for a retired member or for a survivor shall never be reduced because of the accumulative effect of all cost-of-living adjustments. 
(Amd. of 11-29-74) 
Editor's note— The amendments of Nov. 29, 1974 specifically amended the city employees retirement fund provisions pertaining to Local 713 by adding § 12 to Art. IV which, in order to conform to existing style and at the editor's discretion, has been codified as § 157.5.1 as herein set out.  
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO EMPLOYEES REPRESENTED BY LOCAL 217 OF THE HOTEL AND RESTAURANT EMPLOYEES AND BARTENDERS UNION, AFL-CIO 
 
Sec. 157.6. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Local 217 of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees, and Bartenders Union, AFL-CIO or Local 217 members means all the non-professional board of education cafeteria employees, including probationary employees, of the City of New Haven, for whom Local 217 or its successor has a legal responsibility to represent according to Public Act 159 as amended of the State of Connecticut 1965 General Assembly. New employees holding positions under new classifications, which shall come under the representation of Local 217 or its successor in the future, shall also accrue the terms and benefits of this division. All full-time employees who work twenty (20) hours or more per week, and who are otherwise eligible in accordance with the provisions of Special Act 379, may join the retirement plan of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 1; Amd. of 1-3-75)  
Sec. 157.7. - Determination of contributions of participating members. 
The rate of contributions shall be five per cent (5%) of pay, said percentage to be deducted from each eligible participating member's pay and transmitted to said board. Computation of the average rate for use in determining benefits under this division shall be based on the employee's basic rate of pay except that total earnings including overtime if greater will be used for any year when his contributions were based on such larger amounts. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 2)  
Sec. 157.8. - Provision for refund of contributions or deferred pensions for members withdrawing from service; provision for refund of contributions upon death of member with no qualified survivors; effect of discontinuance of fund; nature of member's interest in fund. 
Withdrawal of contributions of a member shall not be permitted except in the event of discontinuance of employment. In the event of such discontinuance, the retirement board shall pay, upon request, to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. In the event of discontinuance after the member has made contributions for ten (10) or more years and provided he does not qualify for greater benefits under the provisions of subsection (b) of section 157.11, any terminating member who does not request a refund of his contributions will be retained as a conditional member and will be eligible for a deferred pension commencing on the earliest date on which the member would have become eligible for normal retirement if he had continued in active service. Such deferred pension shall be for an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the conditional member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, subject to a maximum of seventy per cent (70%) of such average rate of pay. Such conditional member and his survivors will not be eligible for any disability, survivorship or other benefits which are provided for regular members by other sections of this article. In the event of a member's or a conditional member's death, the retirement board shall pay to his beneficiary, or to his estate if no named beneficiary is surviving, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of his total contributions over the total of any annuity payments made to him. In the event that a regular member is survived by a qualified widow or child or children under age eighteen (18), the retirement board shall, in lieu of such repayment of contributions, pay the survivorship benefits provided in section 157.12 of this division. If the total benefit payments to such member and his surviving widow and children shall be less than the amount of his total contributions, the amount of any excess shall be paid to the legal representative of the last survivor who received benefits. In the event of the discontinuance of the retirement fund, each member and conditional member shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions less any annuity payments made to him. In no event shall a member or a conditional member have a vested interest in the funds of the retirement system, in the amount, or any portion thereof, of the contributions of the city, or in any contribution except his own. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 3; Amd. of 1-3-75 eff. 7-1-74)  
Sec. 157.9. - Eligibility for retirement. 
(a)  Any male member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty-five (65) years; but, at the age of seventy (70) years (sixty-five (65) years if he became a participating member after July 1, 1974) his retirement shall be mandatory. 
(b)  Any female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty (60) years (sixty-five (65) years if she became a participating member after July 1, 1974); but, at the age of seventy (70) years (sixty-five (65) years if she became a participating member after July 1, 1974) her retirement shall be mandatory. 
(c)  After June 30, 1974 any male or female member who has completed thirty (30) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty (60) years. 
(d)  Any member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement on account of total permanent disability according to the provisions of section 157.10. 
(e)  "Continuous service," for the purposes of this division, shall mean uninterrupted service or employment, but absence from service or employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. In the case of absence from said service or employment for more than one year, the retirement board shall determine the period within which the member may return without breaking the continuity of his service or employment. 
(f)  Reinstatement of such member's prior participating service in the retirement fund shall be conditioned upon such medical examination as the retirement board may prescribe and upon payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn with three per cent (3%) interest compounded annually. Application for such reinstatement shall be made within six (6) months after the employee's return to employment. 
(g)  In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no year shall be included in which the member has not been in actual service for at least eight (8) months. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (g) of this section, veterans of the U.S. armed forces shall be granted credit toward the computation of their years of service to be eligible for city retirement pension for up to four years served in active duty in the U.S. armed forces. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 4; Amd. of 1-3-75 eff. 7-1-74; Amd. of 12-17-90, § 4)  
Sec. 157.10. - Disability annuities. 
Any member of the retirement fund who, after ten (10) years of continuous service for the city, is permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job shall be entitled to an annuity to be granted on the basis of the completed years of service, provided proof of such disability shall be submitted to the retirement board, which shall cause examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical examiners. The retirement board may, from time to time, call for similar medical evidence that the member continues to be permanently disabled and such member shall be required to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the retirement board. If the retirement board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which the member is receiving an annuity no longer exists, said board shall thereupon order a discontinuance of all such annuities payable to such member and he shall be entitled to any excess of his total contributions over the amount of disability annuities paid. If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment by the city as defined by the workmen's compensation act, a member of the fund shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the condition set forth in section 157.11.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1974. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 5; Amd. of 1-3-75)  
Sec. 157.11. - Retirement and disability benefits. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1961, for employees retiring by reason of age and service or by reason of disability, the retirement board shall pay to each eligible member an annuity for life in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. Such annuity shall be paid monthly at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual amount so determined. A minimum annual pension of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or eighty per cent (80%) of the employee's annual rate of pay at the time of his retirement, whichever is smaller, is hereby established for present and future annuitants. Any pension payable by reason of disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act or arising after the completion of ten (10) years of continuous service, provided such disability was not incurred as the result of any other gainful employment, shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 157.11.1 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than June 30, 1974. 
(b)  Any city employee who is not otherwise eligible to receive a retirement allowance under the provisions of this section and who, after reaching the age of fifty-five years and being a member of the retirement fund at the time, and after at least fifteen (15) years of continuous service, is obliged to retire involuntarily from such service, which involuntary retirement is not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office, shall receive an annual retirement allowance equal to forty per cent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two per cent (2%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service for each full year of service in excess of fifteen (15) years but in no event more than fifty per cent (50%) of his annual rate of pay for said last five (5) years of his service. This provision shall apply to any person retired on or after January 1, 1957, provided such person makes written application to the retirement board within one year after such involuntary retirement. 
(c)  A member who qualifies for benefits under subsection (b) and who has at least twenty-five (25) years of service may elect an alternative benefit in the form of an annuity for life commencing at age sixty-five for male members and age sixty for female members, or upon qualification for a disability annuity according to the provisions of this plan, in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of such average annual rate of pay and provided the member may elect to have said alternative form of annuity commence at any earlier age after the age of fifty-five, but in such event the amount of annuity will be reduced so as to be equivalent in present value to the annuity payable at the age of sixty-five on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for determining actuarial reserves for the retirement fund. 
(d)  Early retirement option after June 30, 1974. Any active member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city may elect early retirement on any date which is ten (10) or less years prior to the date on which he would first become eligible for normal retirement as prescribed in subsection (a), (b) or (c) of section 157.9. In such event his annuity, as determined by subsection (a) of this section 157.11, shall be reduced in amount by four (4) per cent for each full year by which his early retirement date precedes his earliest eligibility date for normal retirement with a further proportionate reduction for any fraction of a year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 6; Amd. of 1-3-75)  
Sec. 157.11.1. - Additional conditions for all disability annuities approved to commence after June 30, 1974. 
Any disability annuity which is approved by the retirement board with an effective commencement date later than June 30, 1974 shall be subject to adjustment on account of the member's earnings from employment or self-employment of any kind, and his pension shall be discontinued unless he files with the retirement board annually before April 30th a sworn statement of such earnings for the preceding calendar year as shown in his federal income tax return. The reduction in his disability annuity shall equal fifty per cent (50%) of any excess of his earnings in the preceding calendar year over the amount which a Social Security beneficiary is entitled to earn without causing a reduction of his Social Security benefits. Such deduction shall be spread evenly over twelve (12) months, starting with the payment due on April 30th. No such adjustments for earnings shall be made after the disabled member attains the age of sixty-five (65). For any one of these members whose period of credited membership shall have commenced after his fortieth birthday the amount payable as a disability annuity (before adjustment for earnings) shall be limited to a percentage of his annual rate of pay at the time of disability; this percentage is to be determined by multiplying two per cent (2%) by the number of years of membership which he could have accumulated up to his sixty-fifth birthday if he were able to continue his employment for the city until that date. 
(Amd. of 1-3-75) 
Editor's note— The amendments of Jan. 3, 1975 specifically amended the city employees retirement fund provisions pertaining to Local 217 by adding a new § 7 to Art. V which, in order to preserve Code style and at the editor's discretion, has been redesignated § 157.11.1 as herein set out.  
Sec. 157.12. - Survivorship benefits. 
(a)  On and after the effective date of this division, upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his or her surviving child or children under eighteen years of age, and in the case of a male member, to his qualified widow, monthly benefits consistent with the following table: 
_____
MONTHLY BENEFIT 
Average 
annual 
pay 	Widow only 	Widow and one child 	Widow and two or more children 	One child 	Two children 	Three or 
more 
children 
$1,800 	$100 	$150 	$150 	$53 	$106 	$150 
 2,400 	 100 	 162 	 200 	 62 	 124 	 186 
 3,000 	 100 	 172 	 244 	 72 	 144 	 216 
 3,600 	 100 	 181 	 262 	 81 	 162 	 243 
 4,200 	 100 	 190 	 270 	 90 	 180 	 270 
 4,800 	 100 	 200 	 280 	100 	 200 	 280 
 5,400 	 105 	 210 	 290 	105 	 210 	 290 
 6,000 	 110 	 220 	 300 	110 	 220 	 300 
 
_____
Any such widow, on her remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to her children alone. 
(b)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member for the final five (5) years of his service or employment by the city, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five (5) years, subject to a maximum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for such average annual pay. 
(c)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors if greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. The minimum monthly benefit when payable to a qualified widow without qualified child or children in her care shall be further reduced in amount by two per cent (2%) for each year that the age of the widow is less than the age of the deceased member. 
(d)  In order to qualify for benefits under this section a widow who does not have children of the deceased member under eighteen years of age in her care must have resided with him, except through no fault of her own, at the time of his death and, if such member had been retired due to age and service or disability, must have been married to him at the time of his retirement. Proof of dates of birth of the widow and children must be submitted before payment of benefits under this section. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 7)  
Sec. 157.13. - Requirements for participation. 
(a)  All members eligible under this division who were enrolled prior to December 1, 1969 shall be required to continue participation so long as they are employed by the city. Each new eligible employee who enters the service of the city may elect, within the first year of his service, to participate in the retirement fund and, failing such election, he shall not thereafter be admitted to said fund unless he makes the application to participate within five (5) years next following and then only with the consent of the retirement board and after having passed a physical examination to be prescribed by the retirement board. In such event he may choose to have the effective date of his entry be either the date of his application or the date following one year after the commencement of his employment, and if he shall choose the latter, he shall pay the amount which he would have been required to contribute during the interim, with interest compounded annually at three per cent (3%). No credit shall be given for service subsequent to January 1, 1938, for any period for which such employee has not made the contribution required for participation in the retirement fund. 
(b)  In no event shall an employee be admitted to membership in the retirement fund unless he can complete at least ten (10) years of continuous service to qualify for a retirement annuity at his mandatory retirement age. 
(c)  An open period of six (6) months starting on the date that the contract is signed is hereby established during which any eligible employee, who had not previously enrolled as a member, may make written application for membership provided he can complete at least ten (10) years of continuous service before he attains age sixty-five (65). Such application should specify that his membership is to be effective either from the date of his application without payment of back contributions provided his present age is less than fifty-five (55), or from the date on which his service commenced. On the latter basis he must agree to pay all back contributions which would have been required for his prior services with three per cent (3%) compound interest, the amount of which will be determined or estimated by the retirement board whose decision shall be final. Such payment must be made in a lump sum or in equal monthly installments of at least ten dollars ($10.00) over a period not exceeding thirty-six (36) months. Such admission to membership will entail the discontinuance of any Social Security coverage on the member's subsequent earnings. Further, any retirement or disability annuity to which he becomes entitled in accordance with section 157.11 will be subject to reduction by a Social Security adjustment in case he has elected retroactive membership on his prior service. This adjustment will be applied where the city has paid F.I.C.A. taxes for Social Security coverage on his prior earnings and will equal fifty per cent (50%) of a proportion of the Social Security primary benefit available to him on date of his retirement. Such proportion shall be determined as the percentage which the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from the city bears to the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from all sources since January 1, 1938. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 8; Amd. of 1-3-75 eff. 7-1-74)  
Sec. 157.14. - Benefits for periods of military service. 
In determining benefits under sections 157.11 and 157.12 credit shall be given for periods of military service in World War II, or the Korean War subject to the following conditions: Any member who, after October 16, 1940, entered any branch of the armed forces of the United States, or any auxiliary thereto, or any civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government, including those employees of the municipal airport who were displaced from their regular employment when the army took over the airport and who undertook duties connected with the air forces, or any member who shall enter such services while the United States is at war, and who has been or shall be re-employed by the city within six (6) months after the termination of such military service, shall qualify for credit for his period of military service, provided he resumes his participation in the retirement fund, with an effective date antedating his entry into such service. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 9)  
Sec. 157.15. - Preservation of benefits under previous plans. 
The provisions of this division shall not affect benefits already in course of payment in accordance with the provisions of previous plans. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. V, § 10)  
Sec. 157.15.1. - Future cost-of-living adjustments. 
On July 1, 1975, and annually on each July 1 thereafter, the monthly payments on those service annuities, disability annuities and survivors' benefits on which at least eighteen (18) monthly payments have been made will be increased, or decreased, for changes in the cost-of-living as indicated by the Federal Consumer Price Index. For this purpose the retirement board will determine an adjustment percentage for July 1, 1975 by relating such index for the full calendar year 1974 to that for the full calendar year 1973, but such adjustment percentage shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred three per cent (103%) and to a minimum of ninety-seven per cent (97%); further, no adjustment will be made where the increase or decrease for the year is less than one-quarter (¼) of one per cent. For each case on which payments commenced prior to January 1, 1974, the monthly payment for June 1975, including any previous cost-of-living adjustments, will be multiplied by such adjustment percentage as determined by the retirement board in order to calculate the adjusted monthly payments for the twelve (12) months following July 1, 1975. A similar procedure will be repeated to adjust payments each year thereafter. However, the monthly benefit originally provided for a retired member or for a survivor shall never be reduced because of the accumulative effect of all cost-of-living adjustments. 
(Amd. of 1-3-75) 
Editor's note— The amendments of Jan. 3, 1975 specifically amended the city employees retirement fund provisions pertaining to Local 217 by adding a new § 13 to Art. V. In order to maintain existing Code format and at the discretion of the editor, said section has been redesignated § 157.15.1 as herein set out.  
DIVISION 6. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO EMPLOYEES REPRESENTED BY LOCAL 24 OF THE UNITED BROTHERHOOD OF CARPENTERS AND JOINERS OF AMERICA, LOCAL 186 OF THE BROTHERHOOD OF PAINTERS AND ALLIED TRADES, LOCAL 90 OF THE INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, AND LOCAL 349 OF THE UNITED ASSOCIATION OF JOURNEYMEN AND APPRENTICES OF THE PLUMBING AND PIPE FITTING INDUSTRY OF THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— By special request of the city, the scope of Div. 6 has been expanded to include Local 90 and Local 349. 
 
Sec. 157.16. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Local 24 of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, Local 186 of the Brotherhood of Painters and Allied Trades, Local 90 of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, and Local 349 of the United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of the United States and Canada means all the nonprofessional board of education craft employees, including probationary employees, of the City of New Haven, for whom Local 24, Local 186, Local 90 and Local 349, or its successors, has a legal responsibility to represent according to Public Act 159, as amended, of the State of Connecticut 1965 General Assembly. New employees holding positions under new classifications, which shall come under the representation of Local 24, Local 186, Local 90 and Local 349, or its successors in the future, shall also accrue the terms and benefits of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 1)  
Sec. 157.17. - Determination of contributions of participating members. 
The rate of contributions shall be five per cent (5%) of pay, said percentage to be deducted from each eligible participating member's pay and transmitted to said board. Computation of the average rate for use in determining benefits under this division shall be based on the employee's basic rate of pay except that total earnings including overtime if greater will be used for any year when his contributions were based on such larger amounts. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 2)  
Sec. 157.18. - Refund of contributions upon withdrawal of member or upon his death with no qualified survivors; effect of discontinuance of system; nature of member's interest in fund. 
Withdrawal of contributions of a member shall not be permitted except in the event of discontinuance of employment. In the event of such discontinuance, the retirement board shall pay, upon request, to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. In the event of a member's death prior to the commencement of an annuity or a disability annuity, if no widow or dependent children survive, the retirement board shall pay to the member's beneficiary, or to his estate if no named beneficiary is surviving, an amount equal to his total contributions. Upon the death of a member, after commencement of an annuity or disability annuity, the amount of any excess of such total contributions made by him over the total annuity payments made to him shall be paid to his representative designated or otherwise, except that should he be survived by minor children or a wife, they shall receive annuities in lieu of such repayment of contributions, according to the provisions of this plan. If the total benefit payments to the member and his surviving widow and minor children shall be less than the amount of his total contributions, the amount of any excess shall be paid to the legal representative of the last survivor who received benefits. In the event of the discontinuance of the retirement fund, each member shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions. In no event shall a member have a vested interest in the funds of the retirement system, in the amount, or any portion thereof, of the contributions of the city, or in any contributions except his own. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 3)  
Sec. 157.19. - Eligibility for retirement. 
(a)  Any male member who has completed twenty (20) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty-five years; but at the age of seventy years, his retirement shall be mandatory. 
(b)  Any female member who has completed twenty (20) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty years; but, at the age of sixty-five years, her retirement shall be mandatory. 
(c)  Any member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement on account of total permanent disability according to the provisions of this division. 
(d)  "Continuous service," for the purposes of this division shall mean uninterrupted service or employment, but absence from service or employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. In the case of absence from said service or employment for more than one year, the retirement board shall determine the period within which the member may return without breaking the continuity of his service or employment. 
(e)  Reinstatement of a member in the retirement fund shall be conditioned upon such medical examination as the retirement board may prescribe and upon payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn with three per cent (3%) interest compounded annually. 
(f)  In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no year shall be included in which the member has not been in actual service for at least nine (9) months. 
(g)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (f) of this section, veterans of the U.S. armed forces shall be granted credit toward the computation of their years of service to be eligible for city retirement pension for up to four years served in active duty in the U.S. armed forces. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 4; Amd. of 12-17-90, § 5)  
Sec. 157.20. - Disability annuities. 
Any member of the retirement fund who, after ten (10) years of continuous service for the city, is permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job shall be entitled to an annuity to be granted on the basis of the completed years of service, provided proof of such disability shall be submitted to the retirement board, which shall cause examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical examiners. The retirement board may, from time to time, call for similar medical evidence that the member continues to be permanently disabled and such member shall be required to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the retirement board. If the retirement board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which the member is receiving an annuity no longer exists, said board shall thereupon order a discontinuance of all such annuities payable to such member and he shall be entitled to any excess of his total contributions over the amount of disability annuities paid. If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment by the city as defined by the workmen's compensation act, a member of the fund shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 5)  
Sec. 157.21. - Retirement and disability benefits. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1961, for employees retiring by reason of age and service or by reason of disability, the retirement board shall pay to each eligible member an annuity for life in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. Such annuity shall be paid monthly at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual amount so determined. A minimum annual pension of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or eighty per cent (80%) of the employee's annual rate of pay at the time of his retirement, whichever is smaller, is hereby established for present and future annuitants. Any pension payable by reason of disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act or arising after the completion of ten (10) years of continuous service, provided such disability was not incurred as the result of any other gainful employment, shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. 
(b)  Any city employee who is not otherwise eligible to receive a retirement allowance under the provisions of this section and who, after reaching the age of fifty-five years and being a member of the retirement fund at the time, and after at least fifteen (15) years of continuous service, is obliged to retire involuntarily from such service, which involuntary retirement is not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office, shall receive an annual retirement allowance equal to forty per cent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two per cent (2%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service for each full year of service in excess of fifteen (15) years but in no event more than fifty per cent (50%) of his annual rate of pay for said last five (5) years of his service. This provision shall apply to any person retired on or after January 1, 1957, provided such person makes written application to the retirement board within one year after such involuntary retirement. 
(c)  A member who qualifies for benefits under subsection (b) and who has at least twenty-five (25) years of service may elect an alternative benefit in the form of an annuity for life commencing at age sixty-five for male members and age sixty for female members, or upon qualification for a disability annuity according to the provisions of this plan, in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of such average annual rate of pay and provided the member may elect to have said alternative form of annuity commence at any earlier age after the age of fifty-five, but in such event the amount of annuity will be reduced so as to be equivalent in present value to the annuity payable at the age of sixty-five on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for determining actuarial reserves for the retirement fund. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 6)  
Sec. 157.22. - Survivorship benefits. 
(a)  On and after the effective date of this division, upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his or her surviving child or children under eighteen years of age, and in the case of a male member, to his qualified widow, monthly benefits consistent with the following table: 
_____
MONTHLY BENEFIT 
Average 
annual 
pay 	Widow only 	Widow and one child 	Widow and two or more children 	One child 	Two children 	Three or 
more 
children 
$1,800 	$100 	$150 	$150 	$53 	$106 	$150 
 2,400 	 100 	 162 	 200 	 62 	 124 	 186 
 3,000 	 100 	 172 	 244 	 72 	 144 	 216 
 3,600 	 100 	 181 	 262 	 81 	 162 	 243 
 4,200 	 100 	 190 	 270 	 90 	 180 	 270 
 4,800 	 100 	 200 	 280 	100 	 200 	 280 
 5,400 	 105 	 210 	 290 	105 	 210 	 290 
 6,000 	 110 	 220 	 300 	110 	 220 	 300 
 
_____
Any such widow, on her remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to her children alone. 
(b)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member for the final five (5) years of his service or employment by the city, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five years, subject to a maximum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for such average annual pay. 
(c)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors if greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty per cent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. The minimum monthly benefit when payable to a qualified widow without qualified child or children in her care shall be further reduced in amount by two per cent (2%) for each year that the age of the widow is less than the age of the deceased member. 
(d)  In order to qualify for benefits under this section a widow who does not have children of the deceased member under eighteen years of age in her care must have resided with him, except through no fault of her own, at the time of his death and, if such member had been retired due to age and service disability, must have been married to him at the time of his retirement. Proof of dates of birth of the widow and children must be submitted before payment of benefits under this section. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 7)  
Sec. 157.23. - Requirements for participation. 
(a)  All members eligible under this division who were enrolled prior to December 1, 1969 shall be required to continue participation so long as they are employed by the city. After December 1, 1969 any employee who shall enter, or transfer to, the classified civil service prior to the attainment of age forty-five, shall be required to participate in the retirement fund. Each eligible employee who enters the service of the city between the age of forty-five and fifty, may elect, within the first year of his service, to participate in the retirement fund and, failing such election, he shall not thereafter be admitted to said fund unless he makes the application to participate within five (5) years next following and then only with the consent of the retirement board and after having passed a physical examination to be prescribed by the retirement board. In such event he may choose to have the effective date of his entry be either the date of his application or the date following one year after the commencement of his employment, and if he shall choose the latter, he shall pay the amount which he would have been required to contribute during the interim, with interest compounded annually at three per cent (3%). No credit shall be given for service subsequent to January 1, 1938, for any period for which such employee has not made the contribution required for participation in the retirement fund. 
(c)  In no event shall an employee be admitted to membership in the retirement fund unless he can complete at least twenty (20) years of continuous service to qualify for a retirement annuity at his mandatory retirement age, unless the retirement board determines that it shall be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 8)  
Sec. 157.24. - Benefits for periods of military service. 
In determining benefits under section 157.21 and 157.22 credit shall be given for periods of military service in World War II, or the Korean War subject to the following conditions: Any member who, after October 16, 1940, entered any branch of the armed forces of the United States, or any auxiliary thereto, or any civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government, including those employees of the municipal airport who were displaced from their regular employment when the army took over the airport and who undertook duties connected with the air forces, or any member who shall enter such services while the United States is at war, and who has been or shall be re-employed by the city within six (6) months after the termination of such military service, shall qualify for credit for his period of military service, provided he resumes his participation in the retirement fund, with an effective date antedating his entry into such service. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 9)  
Sec. 157.25. - Preservation of benefits under previous plans. 
The provisions of this division shall not affect benefits already in course of payment in accordance with the provisions of previous plans. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VI, § 10)  
DIVISION 7. - MANAGEMENT AND PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 157.26. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the following term shall have the following meaning: 
Management and professional member(s) means all the 
(a)  Municipal employees engaged in work 
(i)  Predominantly intellectual and varied in character as opposed to routine mental, manual, mechanical, or physical work; 
(ii)  Involving the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment in its performance; 
(iii)  Of such a character that the output produced or the result accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a given time period; 
(iv)  Requiring knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction and study in an institution of higher learning or a hospital, as distinguished from a general academic education or from an apprenticeship or from training in the performance of routine mental, manual, or physical processes; or 
(b)  Any employee who 
(i)  Has completed the courses of specialized intellectual instruction and study described in clause (iv) of subparagraph (a); and 
(ii)  Is performing related work under the supervision of a professional person to qualify himself to become a professional employee as defined in subparagraph (a) hereof; 
(c)  Any paid full-time elected or appointed official who is eligible for membership as provided for in this division. 
Specifically excluded are all those members who are eligible for retirement benefits of divisions 2 through 6 inclusive. New employee classifications, which shall come under the category of management and professional employees in the future shall also accrue the terms and benefits of this division. The terms and benefits of this division shall also apply to all other eligible full-time employees who are not specifically eligible for benefits under Divisions 2 through 6. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 1; Amd. of 12-1-75)  
Sec. 157.27. - Determination of contributions of participating members. 
The rate of contributions shall be five per cent (5%) of pay, said percentage to be deducted from each eligible participating member's pay and transmitted to said board. Computation of the average rate for use in determining benefits under this division shall be based on the employee's basic rate of pay except that total earnings including overtime if greater, will be used for any year when his contributions were based on such larger amount. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 2)  
Sec. 157.28. - Provision for refund of contributions or deferred pensions for members withdrawing from service; provision for refund of contributions upon death of member with no qualified survivors; effect of discontinuance of fund; nature of member's interest in fund. 
Withdrawal of contributions of a member shall not be permitted except in the event of discontinuance of employment. In the event of such discontinuance, the retirement board shall pay, upon request, to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. 
In the event of discontinuance after ten (10) or more years of continuous service, and provided he does not qualify for greater benefits under the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 157.31, any terminating member who does not request a refund of his contributions will be retained as a conditional member and will be eligible for a deferred pension commencing when he attains age sixty-five (65). Such deferred pension shall be for an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the conditional member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his participating total service in the fund, subject to a maximum of seventy per cent (70%) of such average rate of pay. Such a conditional member and his survivors will not be eligible for any disability, survivorship or other benefits which are provided for regular members by other sections of this division. 
In the event of a member's or a conditional member's death, the retirement board shall pay to his beneficiary, or to his estate if no named beneficiary is surviving, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of his total contributions over the total of any annuity payments made to him. 
In the event that a regular member is survived by a qualified widow or child or children under age eighteen (18), the retirement board shall, in lieu of such repayment of contributions, pay the survivorship benefits provided in section 157.33 of this division. If the total benefit payments to such member and his surviving widow and children shall be less than the amount of his total contributions, the amount of any excess shall be paid to the legal representative of the last survivor who received benefits. 
In the event of the discontinuance of the retirement fund each member and conditional member shall be paid an amount equal to his total contributions less any annuity payments made to him. 
In no event shall a member or a conditional member have a vested interest in the funds of the retirement system, in the amount or any portion thereof, of the contributions of the city, or in any contribution except his own. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 3; Amd. of 12-1-75)  
Sec. 157.29. - Eligibility for retirement. 
(a)  Any male who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty-five (65) years; but, at the age of seventy (70) years (sixty-five (65) years if he became a participating member after September 1, 1967) his retirement shall be mandatory unless he is a paid full-time elected officer. 
(b)  Any female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this article at the age of sixty (60) years (sixty-five (65) years if she became a participating member after September 1, 1967); but, at the age of seventy (70) years (sixty-five (65) years if she became a member after September 1, 1967) her retirement shall be mandatory unless she is a paid full-time elected officer. 
(c)  After June 30, 1973 any male or female member who has completed thirty (30) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty (60) years. 
(d)  Any member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city shall be eligible for retirement on account of total permanent disability according to the provisions of section 157.30. 
(e)  "Continuous service," for the purposes of this division, shall mean uninterrupted service or employment, but absence from service or employment for any reason, followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. In the case of absence from said service or employment for more than one year, the retirement board shall determine the period within which the member may return without breaking the continuity of service or employment. 
(f)  Reinstatement of such member's prior participating service in the retirement fund shall be conditioned upon such medical examination as the retirement board may prescribe and upon payment to the retirement fund of contributions previously withdrawn with three per cent (3%) interest compounded annually. Application for such reinstatement shall be made within six (6) months after his return to employment. 
(g)  In computing years of service to determine eligibility for retirement, no year shall be included in which the member has not been in actual service for at least nine (9) months. 
(h)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (g) of this section, veterans of the U.S. armed forces shall be granted credit toward the computation of their years of service to be eligible for city retirement pension for up to four years served in active duty in the U.S. armed forces. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 4; Amd. of 12-1-75; Amd. of 12-17-90, § 6)  
Sec. 157.30. - Disability annuities. 
Any member of the retirement fund who, after ten (10) years of continuous service for the city, is permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job shall be entitled to an annuity to be granted on the basis of the completed years of service, provided proof of such disability shall be submitted to the retirement board, which shall cause examinations to be made by at least two impartial medical examiners. The retirement board may, from time to time, call for similar medical evidence that the member continues to be permanently disabled and such member shall be required to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the retirement board. If the retirement board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which the member is receiving an annuity no longer exists, said board shall thereupon order a discontinuance of all such annuities payable to such member and he shall thereafter be entitled to any benefit for which he is eligible to receive as provided for in sections 157.28 and 157.31. If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment by the city as defined by the workmen's compensation act, a member of the fund shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 157.32 for any member whose participation in the retirement fund commences after January 1, 1970. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 5)  
Sec. 157.31. - Retirement and disability benefits. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1969, for employees retiring by reason of age and service or by reason of disability, the retirement board shall pay to each eligible member an annuity for life in an amount determined as two per cent (2%) of the member's average rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service; provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy per cent (70%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. Such annuity shall be paid monthly at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual amount so determined. A minimum annual pension of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or eighty per cent (80%) of the employee's annual rate of pay at the time of his retirement, whichever is smaller, is hereby established for present and future annuitants. Any pension payable by reason of disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act or arising after the completion of ten (10) years of continuous service, provided such disability was not incurred as the result of any other gainful employment shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 157.32 for any member whose participation in the retirement fund commences after January 1, 1970. 
(b)  Any city employee who is not otherwise eligible to receive a retirement allowance under the provisions of this section and who, after reaching the age of fifty-five years and being a member of the retirement fund at the time, and after at least fifteen (15) years of continuous service, is obliged to retire involuntarily from such service, which involuntary retirement is not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office, shall receive an annual retirement allowance equal to forty per cent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two per cent (2%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service for each full year of service in excess of fifteen (15) years but in no event more than fifty per cent (50%) of his annual rate of pay for said last five (5) years of his service. This provision shall apply to any person retired on or after January 1, 1957, provided such person makes written application to the retirement board within one year after such involuntary retirement. 
(c)  Any paid full-time elected official whose period in office expires, or any paid full-time elected or appointed official whose service is terminated involuntarily, not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office, after completion of ten (10) years of service and attainment of the age of forty-five shall subsequently receive, commencing upon the attainment of the age of sixty or upon qualification for disability annuity according to the provisions of this division, an annuity for life equal to forty per cent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two per cent (2%) of such average annual rate of pay for each full year of service in excess of ten (10) years, provided such annuity shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. 
(d)  A member who qualifies for benefits under either of the two preceding subsections and who has at least twenty-five years of service may elect an alternative benefit in the form of an annuity for life commencing at age sixty-five for male members and age sixty for female members, or upon qualification for disability annuity according to the provisions of this division, in an amount determined as two percent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service for each year of his total service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of such average annual rate of pay and provided the member may elect to have said alternative form of annuity commence at any earlier age after the age of fifty-five, but in such event the amount of annuity will be reduced so as to be equivalent in present value to the annuity payable at the age of sixty-five on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for determining actuarial reserves for the retirement fund. 
(e)  Early retirement option prior to July 1, 1973. Any active or conditional member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service may elect to receive a reduced early retirement annuity to commence at any time after he has attained his sixtieth birthday. The reduced amount of such early retirement annuity shall be actuarially equivalent to the full retirement annuity normally payable commencing at a later date when he would have first attained the regular eligibility age for retirement in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) of section 157.29, and shall be determined by the retirement board on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for actuarial valuations of the retirement fund. 
(f)  Early retirement option after June 30, 1973. Any active or conditional member may elect early retirement on any date which is ten (10) or less years prior to the date on which he would first become eligible for normal retirement as prescribed in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of section 157.29. In such event his annuity, as determined by subsection (a) of this section 157.31, shall be reduced in amount by four percent (4%) for each full year by which his early retirement date precedes his earliest eligibility date for normal retirement with a further proportionate reduction for any fraction of a year. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 6; Amd. of 12-1-75)  
Sec. 157.32. - Additional conditions for disability annuities for members enrolled after January 1, 1970. 
The disability annuity payable to any member whose participation in the retirement fund commences after January 1, 1970 shall be adjusted by an amount equal to a percentage of his earnings from employment or self-employment of any kind; and his pension shall be discontinued unless he files with the retirement board annually before April 30th a sworn statement of such earnings for the preceding calendar year as shown in his federal income tax return; the percentage of his earnings, if any, for the preceding calendar year to be deducted from his disability annuity will be determined by the ratio of his disability annuity (before adjustment) to his annual rate of pay at the time of disability, and the amount of such deduction shall be spread evenly over twelve months, starting with the payment due on April 30th. No such adjustments for earnings shall be made after the disabled member attains the age of sixty-five. For any one of these members whose period of credited membership shall have commenced after his fortieth birthday the amount payable as a disability annuity (before adjustment for earnings) shall be limited to a percentage of his annual rate of pay at the time of disability; this percentage is to be determined by multiplying two percent (2%) by the number of years of membership which he could have accumulated up to his sixty-fifth birthday if he were able to continue his employment for the city until that date. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 7)  
Sec. 157.33. - Survivorship benefits. 
(a)  On and after the effective date of this division upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his or her surviving child or children under eighteen years of age, and, in the case of a male member, to his qualified widow, monthly benefits consistent with the following table: 
_____
MONTHLY BENEFIT 
Average 
annual 
pay 	Widow only 	Widow and one child 	Widow and two or more children 	One child 	Two children 	Three or 
more 
children 
$1,800 	$100 	$150 	$150 	$53 	$106 	$150 
 2,400 	 100 	 162 	 200 	 62 	 124 	 186 
 3,000 	 100 	 172 	 244 	 72 	 144 	 216 
 3,600 	 100 	 181 	 262 	 81 	 162 	 243 
 4,200 	 100 	 190 	 270 	 90 	 180 	 270 
 4,800 	 100 	 200 	 280 	100 	 200 	 280 
 5,400 	 105 	 210 	 290 	105 	 210 	 290 
 6,000 	 110 	 220 	 300 	110 	 220 	 300 
 
_____
Any such widow, on her remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to her children alone. 
(b)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member for the final five (5) years of his service or employment by the city, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five (5) years, subject to a maximum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for such average annual pay. 
(c)  Upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors if greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty percent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. The minimum monthly benefit when payable to a qualified widow without qualified child or children in her care shall be further reduced in amount by two percent (2%) for each year that the age of the widow is less than the age of the deceased member. 
(d)  In order to qualify for benefits under this section a widow who does not have children of the deceased member under eighteen years of age in her care must have resided with him, except through no fault of her own, at the time of his death and, if such member had been retired due to age and service or disability, must have been married to him at the time of his retirement. Proof of dates of birth of the widow and children must be submitted before payment of benefits under this section. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 8)  
Sec. 157.34. - Requirements for participation. 
(a)  All management and professional members and elected or appointed officers who were enrolled in this plan prior to December 1, 1969 shall continue to participate in the fund so long as they serve as eligible employees or officers of the city in accordance with the terms and conditions then prevailing for membership. 
(b)  The following provisions shall apply to eligible elected or appointed officers and management and professional employees whose service commences after December 1, 1969: 
(1)  Any employee who shall enter, or transfer to, the classified civil service prior to attainment of age fifty-five shall be required to participate in the retirement fund. 
(2)  Each other new employee who shall be hired prior to attainment of age fifty-five (55) may elect to be enrolled as a contributing member of the fund as of the first anniversary of the date of his employment by filing a written application before that date; such participation may also include the first year of his employment if the employee elects to pay the back contributions with three percent (3%) interest compounded annually on his first anniversary date or within six (6) months of the effective date of this amendment, if later. Failing this required application, he will be continued under the Federal Social Security program which will apply to all such noncivil service employees during their first year of service unless an application for immediate participation is filed with the retirement board during his first thirty (30) calendar days of service. Such Social Security coverage will be discontinued on the employee's earnings after the first year if he makes the application required for enrollment in the retirement fund. This provision for optional participation shall also apply to each appointed officer whose service commences prior to age fifty-five (55) and to each elected officer regardless of age. 
(c)  No eligible employee or officer entering service after December 1, 1969 shall be admitted to membership in the retirement fund unless he can complete at least ten (10) years of continuous service to qualify for a retirement annuity at his mandatory retirement age. 
(d)  In computing the benefits provided sections 157.31, 151.32 and 157.33 no credit shall be given for any period of service subsequent to January 1, 1938 for which the member has not made the contribution required for participation in the retirement fund. 
(e)  An open period of six (6) months starting December 1, 1969 is hereby established during which any eligible employee or officer, who had not previously enrolled as a member, may make written application for membership provided his total period of continuous service will be at least ten (10) years on his mandatory retirement date. Such application should specify that his membership is to be effective either from the date of his application without payment of back contributions, or from the date on which his service commenced. On the latter basis he must agree to pay all back contributions which would have been required for his prior service with three percent (3%) compounded interest, the amount of which will be determined or estimated by retirement board whose decision shall be final. Such payment must be made in a lump sum or in equal monthly installments of at least ten dollars ($10.00) over a period not exceeding thirty-six (36) months. Such admission to membership will entail the discontinuance of any Social Security coverage on the member's subsequent earnings. Further any retirement or disability annuity to which he becomes entitled in accordance with sections 157.31 and 157.32 will be subject to reduction by a Social Security adjustment in case he has elected retroactive membership on his prior service. This adjustment will be applied where the city has paid F.I.C.A. taxes for Social Security coverage on his prior earnings and will equal fifty percent (50%) of a proportion of the Social Security primary benefit available to him on the date of his retirement. Such proportion shall be determined as the percentage which the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from the city bears to the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from all sources since January 1, 1938. 
(f)  This open period and the provisions and requirements of paragraph (e) will also be available to any member who wishes to establish credit for any period of non-participating prior service which preceded the effective date of his membership, provided such prior period was of at least twelve (12) months' duration. 
(g)  The provisions of paragraphs (e) and (f) for establishing retroactive membership credits will expire at the end of the open period on May 31, 1970. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 9; Amd. of 12-1-75)  
Sec. 157.35. - Benefits for periods of military service. 
In determining benefits under sections 157.31, 157.32 and 157.33 credit shall be given for periods of military service in World War II, or the Korean War subject to the following conditions: Any member who, after October 16, 1940, entered any branch of the armed forces of the United States, or any auxiliary thereto, or any civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government, including those employees of the municipal airport who were displaced from their regular employment when the army took over the airport and who undertook duties connected with the air forces or any member who shall enter such services while the United States is at war, and who has been or shall be re-employed by the city within six months after the termination of such military service, shall qualify for credit for his period of military service, provided he resumes his participation in the retirement fund, with an effective date antedating his entry into such service. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 10)  
Sec. 157.36. - Preservation of benefits under previous acts. 
The provisions of sections 157.26 through 157.35 of this division shall not affect benefits already in course of payment in accordance with the provisions of previous acts. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 11)  
Sec. 157.37. - Future cost of living adjustments. 
On July 1, 1970, and annually on each July 1 thereafter, the monthly payments on those service annuities, disability annuities and survivor's benefits on which at least eighteen (18) monthly payments have been made will be increased or decreased for changes in the cost-of-living as indicated by the Federal Consumer Price Index. For this purpose the retirement board will determine an adjustment percentage for July 1, 1970 by relating such index for the full calendar year 1969 to that for the full calendar year 1968, but such adjustment percentage shall be limited to a maximum of 103% and to a minimum of 97%; further, no adjustment will be made where the increase or decrease for the year is less than ¼ of 1%. For each case on which payments commenced prior to January 1, 1969, the monthly payment for June 1970, including any previous cost-of-living adjustments, will be multiplied by such adjustment percentage as determined by the retirement board in order to calculate the adjusted monthly payments for the twelve months following July 1, 1970. A similar procedure will be repeated to adjust payment each year thereafter. However, the monthly benefit originally provided for a retired member or for a survivor shall never be reduced because of the accumulative effect of all cost of living adjustments. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69, Art. VII, § 12)  
DIVISION 8. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— The amendments of July 6, 1987, specifically amended the city employees' retirement plan provisions by adding new material designated as Article VIII, §§ 1—12. In order to maintain existing Code format and at the discretion of the editor, the new provisions have been redesignated as Division 8, §§ 157.38—157.49, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 157.38. - Definitions. 
As used in this article [this division] the following term shall have the following meanings: 
Eligible employee or officer means: 
(1)  Any non-bargaining unit employee appointed to a full time general fund position, scheduled to work at least 35 hours per week and employed in one of the position titles under Section II "Executive Management and Confidential Employees Personnel Policy and Procedures" manual. 
(2)  Any non-bargaining unit employees as defined in the decision of the Connecticut State Labor Board or defined as confidential employees by the Management Union Contract and employed in a position title under Section II, "Confidential Employees of the City of New Haven Executive Management and Confidential Employees Personnel Policy and Procedures" manual. 
Specifically excluded are all those members who are eligible for retirement benefits of Articles II through VII [Divisions 2 through 7] inclusive; all positions represented by any employee organization recognized by the city and/or board of education under the Municipal Employee Relations Act (CGS 4-474 et seq.) or the Teacher Negotiations Act (CGS 153(a) et seq.); all temporary, seasonal, contractual (including board of education administrators), or part-time personnel. Eligible employees holding positions under new classifications which shall come under the category of executive management and confidential employees in the future shall also accrue the terms and benefits of this article. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.39. - Determination of contributions of participating members. 
The rate of contributions shall be six percent (6%) of pay, said percentage to be deducted from each eligible participating member's pay and transmitted to said board. Computation of the average rate for use in determining benefits under this article [this division] shall be based on such member's basic rate of pay except that total earnings including overtime, if greater, will be used for any year when such member's contributions were based on such larger amount. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.40. - Provision for refund of contributions or deferred pensions for members withdrawing from service; provisions for refund of contributions upon death of member with no qualified survivors; recovery from disability. 
Withdrawal of contributions of a member shall not be permitted except in the event of discontinuance of employment. In the event of such discontinuance, the retirement board shall pay, upon request, to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. 
Even if no such request is made, in the event of such discontinuance before the member has earned ten (10) or more years of credited service, the retirement board, in its sole discretion, may pay to the member or to his representative, designated or otherwise, an amount equal to his total contributions to the retirement fund. 
In the event of such discontinuance after ten (10) or more years of credited service, and provided he does not qualify for greater benefits under the provisions of section 157.43, any terminating member who does not request a refund of his contributions will be retained as a conditional member and will be eligible for a deferred pension commencing when he attains age sixty-five (65) or upon such earlier date as may be elected by the member pursuant to section 157.43(e) and (f). Such deferred pension shall be for an amount determined as two percent (2%) of the conditional member's average rate of pay averaged over those five (5) years of service producing the highest average, for each year of credited service, subject to a maximum of seventy percent (70%) of such average rate of pay and reduced as provided in section 157.43(d), if applicable. Such conditional member and his survivors will not be eligible for any disability, survivorship or other benefits which are provided for non-conditional members by other sections of this article [this division]. 
In the event of a member's or a conditional member's death, the retirement board shall pay to his beneficiary, or to his estate if no named beneficiary is surviving, an amount equal to the excess, if any, of his total contributions over the total of any annuity payments made to him. 
In the event that a member is survived by a widow, widower, or child or children under age eighteen (18), the retirement board shall, in lieu of such repayment of contributions, pay the survivorship benefits provided in section 157.45 of this article [this division]. If the total benefit payments to such member and his surviving widow or widower and children shall be less than the amount of his total contributions the amount of any excess shall be paid to the legal representative of the last survivor who received benefits. 
A member whose disability benefits are terminated by reason of the member's recovery shall be entitled to the benefits of this section, without regard to the amount of his credited service. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the retirement board shall not have the authority to pay any such member the amount of his total contributions to the retirement fund except upon such member's request. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.41. - Eligibility for retirement. 
(a)  Any male member who has completed ten (10) years of credited service for the city shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty-five years; but at the age of seventy years his retirement shall be mandatory. 
(b)  Any female member who has completed ten (10) years of credited service for the City shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this division at the age of sixty years (sixty-five years if she became a participating member after September 1, 1967); but at the age of seventy years her retirement shall be mandatory. 
(c)  After June 30, 1980 any (male or female) member the sum of whose age and years of credited service for the city equals or exceeds eighty-five (85) shall be eligible for retirement according to the provisions of this article [this division]. 
(d)  Any member who has completed ten (10) years of credited service for the city shall be eligible for retirement on account of total permanent disability according to the provisions of section 157.42. 
(e)  "Credited service" for the purposes of this article [this division] shall mean that number of full and fractional years (calculated on a daily basis) with respect to which a member's pay is reduced by the amounts provided in section 157.39; provided, however, that the number of full and fractional years of credited service of a member as of July 1, 1986 shall not be less than the member's continuous service as of such date, as calculated pursuant to this section as if in effect on June 30, 1986. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, in the event a member separates from the city's service and receives a refund of his contributions pursuant to section 157.40, the member's credited service shall include only those full and fractional years (calculated on a daily basis), occurring after the latest such refund, with respect to which the member's pay is reduced by the amounts provided in section 157.39, unless: 
(1)  The member, within six (6) months of his return to the city's service, requests a reinstatement of his prior credited service, if any; and 
(2)  The member's prior credit service calculated as of the date of the latest refund exceeds the number of full and fractional years (calculated on a daily basis) falling between the date the member last separated from the city's service and the date first following such separation on which the member contributed to the fund pursuant to section 157.39; 
(3)  The member repays the latest refund together with three percent (3%) interest compounded annually; and 
(4)  The member passes such medical examinations as the retirement board, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. The retirement board shall have the sole discretion to determine whether the member has passed such medical examinations, and its decision shall be final and conclusive on all parties. 
In the event a member satisfies all of the foregoing conditions, his credited service shall consist of those full and fractional years (calculated on a daily basis) occurring after the latest such refund with respect to which the member's pay is reduced by the amounts provided in section 157.39 plus his prior credited service. 
For purposes of this section the term "prior credited service" shall mean those full and fractional years (calculated on a daily basis) with respect to which the latest refund was made. 
(g)  "Credited service" shall also include those full and fractional years (calculated on a daily basis) during which a member receives a disability benefit, provided such member recovers from such disability, is rehired by the city and thereafter earns at least five (5) years of credited service. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.42. - Disability annuities. 
Any member of the retirement fund who, after ten (10) years of credited service for the city, is permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job; or, irrespective of the duration of his employment, suffers such a disability which is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of or in the course of his employment by the city, as defined in the Worker's Compensation Act, shall be entitled to an annuity in an amount determined pursuant to section 157.43; provided satisfactory proof of such disability shall be submitted to the retirement board. 
The retirement board shall cause examinations to be made by at least two (2) impartial medical examiners initially to verify the existence of such disability. 
The retirement board may, from time to time, call for similar medical evidence that the member continues to be permanently disabled. Such member shall be required to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the retirement board. If the retirement board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which the member is receiving an annuity no longer exists, such board shall thereupon order a discontinuance of all such annuities payable to such member, effective on the date which is ninety (90) days after the board concludes that the disability no longer exists. Each member whose benefits are terminated in accordance with this paragraph, shall regardless of the number of his years of credited service, thereafter be entitled to those benefits provided in section 157.40. 
Disability annuity benefits shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 157.44 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than January 1, 1970. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.43. - Retirement and disability benefits. 
(a)  For employees retiring by reason of age and service or by reason of disability, the retirement board shall pay to each eligible member an annuity for life in an amount determined as two percent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay averaged over those five (5) years of service producing the highest average, for each year (or fraction) of credited service; provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of his average annual rate of pay averaged over those five (5) years of service producing the highest average. Such annuity shall be paid monthly at the rate of one-twelfth of the annual amount so determined. A minimum annual pension of one thousand ($1,000.00) or eighty percent (80%) of the employee's annual rate of pay at the time of his retirement, whichever is smaller, is hereby established for present and future annuities. Any pension payable by reason of disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the Worker's Compensation Act or arising after the completion of ten (10) years of credited service, provided such disability was not incurred as a result of any other gainful employment, shall not be less than one-half of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. This disability annuity benefit shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 157.44 for any member whose annuity is approved by the retirement board with an effective date later than January 1, 1970. 
(b)  Any appointed official whose service is terminated involuntarily, not due to malfeasance or misfeasance in office, after completion of ten (10) years of service and attainment of the age of forty-five shall subsequently receive, commencing upon the attainment of the age of sixty or upon qualification for disability annuity according to the provisions of this article [this division], an annuity for life equal to forty percent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay for the last five (5) years of his service, plus two percent (2%) of such average annual rate of pay for each full year of service in excess of ten (10) years, provided such annuity shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of his average annual rate of pay for his final five (5) years of service. 
(c)  Any member who is not eligible to receive a normal retirement or disability benefit under the provisions of this section and who, after reaching the age of fifty-five years and being a member of the retirement fund at the time, and after at least fifteen (15) years of credited service, is obligated to retire involuntarily from such service, which involuntary retirement is not due to malfeasance in office, shall receive an annual retirement benefit equal to forty percent (40%) of his average annual rate of pay averaged over those five (5) years of service producing the highest average, plus two percent (2%) of his average annual rate of pay averaged over those five (5) years of his service producing the highest average, for each full or fractional year of credited service in excess of fifteen (15) years but in no event more than fifty percent (50%) of his annual rate of pay for said (5) years of his service. This provision shall apply to any person retired on or after January 1, 1957, provided such person makes writing application to the retirement board within one year after such involuntary retirement. 
(d)  A member who qualifies for benefits under subsections (b) and (c) and who has at least twenty-five (25) years of credited service my elect an alternative benefit in the form of an annuity for life commencing at age sixty-five (65) for male and female members, but age sixty (60) for female members who became participating members prior to September 1, 1967, or upon qualification for a disability annuity according to the provisions of this article [this division], in an amount determined as two percent (2%) of the member's average annual rate of pay averaged over those five (5) years of service producing the highest average for each year of his credit service, provided such annuity shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of such average annual rate of pay and provided the member may elect to have said alternative form of annuity commence at any earlier age after the age of fifty-five (55), but in such event the amount of annuity will be reduced so as to be equivalent in present value to the annuity payable at the age of sixty-five (65) in the case of male and female members, and at age sixty (60) in the case of female members who became participating members prior to September 1, 1967 on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for determining actuarial reserves for the retirement fund. 
(e)  Early retirement option prior to July 1, 1973: Any active member who has completed ten (10) years of credited service may elect to receive a reduced early retirement annuity to commence at any time after he has attained his sixtieth birthday. The reduced amount of such early retirement annuity shall be actuarially equivalent to the full retirement annuity normally payable commencing at a later date when he would have first attained the regular eligibility age for retirement in accordance with subsection (a) and (b) of section 157.43, and shall be determined by the retirement board on the basis of the interest and mortality tables used for actuarial valuations of the retirement board. 
(f)  Early retirement option after June 30, 1973: Any (i) active member or (ii) conditional member having ten (10) or more years of credited service or (iii) member whose disability benefits are terminated by reason of his recovery, may elect early retirement on any date which is ten (10) or less years prior to the date on which he would first become eligible for normal retirement as prescribed in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of section 157.41, in the case of an active member; or would have become eligible for normal retirement as prescribed in subsection (a) or (b) of Section 157.41 in all other situations covered by this section had he remained in the city's employ. In such event his annuity, as determined by subsection (a) of this section or section 157.40, as the case may be, shall be reduced in amount by two percent (2%) for each full year by which his early retirement date precedes the earliest eligibility date for normal retirement as prescribed in subsections (a) or (b) or (c) of section 157.41, in the case of an active member, or subsection (a) or (b) of section 157.41 in all other situations covered by this section, with a further proportionate reduction for any fraction of a year. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.44. - Additional conditions for all disability annuities payable to any member approved after January 1, 1970. 
Any disability annuity payable to any member whose participation in the retirement fund commences after January 1, 1970 shall be subject to adjustment on account of such member's earnings from employment or self-employment of any kind, and his pension shall be discontinued unless he files with the retirement board annually before April 30th a sworn statement of such earnings for the preceding calendar year as shown in his federal income tax return. The reduction in his disability annuity shall equal fifty percent (50%) of any excess of his earnings in the preceding calendar year over six thousand eight hundred dollars ($6,800.00), but in no event shall such reduction exceed the amount of disability annuity paid for the period during which such excess earnings were earned. Such deduction shall be spread evenly over twelve (12) months, starting with the payment due on April 30th. No such adjustments for earnings shall be made after the disabled member attains the age of sixty-five. 
For any one of these members whose period of credited membership shall have commenced after his fortieth birthday, the amount payable as a disability annuity (before adjustment for earnings) shall be limited to a percentage of his annual rate of pay at the time of disability; this percentage is to be determined by multiplying two percent (2%) by the number of years of membership which he could have accumulated up to his sixty-fifth birthday if he were able to continue his employment for the City until that date. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.45. - Survivorship benefits. 
(a)  Upon the death of a member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his surviving child or children under eighteen years of age and, to his widow or widower, monthly benefits consistent with the following table. 
Column 1: Average Annual Pay 
Column 2: Widow or Widower Only 
Column 3: Widow or Widower and One Child 
Column 4: Widow or Widower and Two or More Children 
Column 5: One Child 
Column 6: Two Children 
Column 7: Three or More Children 
 1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
$2,400 	$130 	$200 	$200 	 $70 	$140 	$200 
 3,000 	 140 	 225 	 250 	
 85 	 170 	 250 
 3,600 	 150 	 250 	 300 	 100 	 200 	 300 
 4,200 	 160 	 270 	 320 	 110 	 220 	 320 
 4,800 	 170 	 290 	 340 	 120 	 240 	 340 
 5,400 	 180 	 310 	 360 	 130 	 260 	 360 
 6,000 	 190 	 330 	 380 	 140 	 280 	 380 
 6,600 	 195 	 345 	 400 	 150 	 300 	 400 
 7,200 	 200 	 360 	 420 	 160 	 320 	 420 
 7,800 	 200 	 370 	 440 	 170 	 340 	 440 
 8,400 	 200 	 375 	 460 	 175 	 350 	 460 
 9,000 	 200 	 380 	 480 	 180 	 360 	 480 
 9,600 	 205 	 390 	 500 	 185 	 370 	 500 
 10,200 	 210 	 400 	 525 	 190 	 380 	 525 
 10,800 	 215 	 410 	 550 	 195 	 390 	 550 
 11,400 	 220 	 420 	 575 	 200 	 400 	 575 
 12,000 	 225 	 430 	 600 	 205 	 410 	 600 
 
Any such widow or widower, on remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to his children alone. 
In the event that payments are made pursuant to this section to surviving children under eighteen years of age who are represented by more than one legal guardian, such payments shall be apportioned among such guardians in proportion to the number of children represented by each guardian, respectively. 
(b)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits, shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member averaged over those five (5) years of service or employment by the city producing the highest average, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five (5) years, subject to a maximum of twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) for such average annual pay. 
(c)  Upon the death of a member who has completed ten (10) years of credited service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors if greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty percent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. 
(d)  In order to qualify for benefits under this section, a widow or widower must have been married to the deceased member at the time of his death and, if such member had been retired due to age and service or disability, must have been married to him at the time of retirement. Proof of dates of birth of the children must be submitted before payment of benefits under this section. 
(e)  These benefits in section 157.45 shall no longer apply should such widow or widower remarry. In such cases they shall receive only such benefits as are payable to his children alone. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.46. - Requirements for participation. 
(a)  All executive management or confidential employee members who were enrolled in a city pension plan prior to December 1, 1969 shall continue to participate in the fund so long as they serve as eligible employees or officers of the city in accordance with the terms and conditions then prevailing for membership. 
(b)  The following provisions shall apply to eligible appointed officers and executive management or confidential employees whose service commences after December 1, 1969: 
(1)  Any employee who shall enter or transfer to executive management or confidential employee status prior to attainment of age fifty-five shall be required to participate in the retirement fund. 
(2)  Each other new officer or employee who shall be appointed or hired prior to attainment of age fifty-five (55) may elect to be enrolled as a contributing member of the fund as of the first anniversary of the date of his appointment or employment by filing a written application before that date; such participation may also include the first year participation may also include the first year of his appointment or employment if the employee elects to pay the back contribution with three percent (3%) interest compounded annually on his first anniversary date or within six (6) months of the effective date of this amendment, if later. 
Failing this required application, he will be continued under the federal Social Security program which will apply to all such non-civil service employees during their first year of service unless an application for immediate participation is filed with the retirement board during his first thirty (30) calendar days of service. Such Social Security coverage will be discontinued on the employee's earnings after the first year if he makes the application required for enrollment in the retirement fund. This provision for optional participation shall also apply to each appointed officer whose service commences prior to age fifty-five (55) and to each elected officer regardless of age. 
(c)  Each eligible employee shall, upon entering service after approval of these pension provisions by the board of aldermen, submit to such medical examinations as the retirement board shall by regulation or bylaw require in order to determine whether the eligible employee is then permanently disabled from performing duties of the nature required by his job and for use by the retirement board in evaluating future claims for disability. In the event any such employee refuses to submit to any such medical examination, he shall bear the burden of providing by clear and convincing evidence that he is entitled to a disability benefit. 
(d)  No eligible employee entering service after December 1, 1969, shall be admitted to membership in the retirement fund unless he can complete at least ten (10) years of credited service to qualify for a retirement annuity at his mandatory retirement age. 
(e)  An open period of six (6) months commencing with approval of these provisions is hereby established during which any eligible employee who had not previously enrolled as a member may make written application for membership, provided his total period of credited service will be at least ten (10) years on his mandatory retirement date. 
Such application should specify that his membership is to be effective either from the date of his application without payment of back contributions, or from the date on which his service commenced. On the latter basis he must agree to pay all back contributions which would have been required for his prior service with three percent (3%) compound interest, the amount of which will be determined or estimated by the retirement board whose decision shall be final. 
Such payment must be made in a lump sum or equal monthly installments of at least ten dollars ($10.00) over a period not exceeding thirty-six (36) months. Such admission to membership will entail the discontinuance of any Social Security coverage on the member's subsequent earnings. Further, any retirement or disability annuity to which he becomes entitled in accordance with section 157.43 will be subject to reduction by a Social Security adjustment in case he has elected retroactive membership on his prior service. This adjustment will be applied where the city has paid F.I.C.A. taxes for Social Security coverage on his prior earnings and will equal fifty percent (50%) of a proportion of the Social Security primary benefit available on the date of his retirement. Such proportion shall be determined as the percentage which the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from the city bears to the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from all sources since January 1, 1938. 
(f)  This open period subject to the provisions and requirements of paragraph (e) will also be available to any member who wishes to reinstate prior credited service or to establish credit for any period of non-participating prior service which preceded the effective date of his membership, provided such prior period was of at least twelve month's duration. 
(g)  The provisions of paragraphs (e) and (f) for establishing retroactive membership credits will expire at the end of the open period which will be six (6) months after aldermanic approval of these pension provisions. 
(h)  An open period of six (6) months is established starting the day this amendment is legally enacted, during which any eligible employee who has not previously enrolled as a member may make written application for membership. Such application should specify that this membership is to be effective either from the date of this application without payment of back contributions, or from the date which his service commenced. On the latter basis he must pay all back contributions which would have been required for his prior services, the amount of which shall be determined or estimated by the retirement board, with three percent (3%) compound interest. The decision of the retirement board shall be final. Such payment must be made in a lump sum or in equal monthly installments of at least ten dollars ($10.00) over a period not exceeding thirty-six (36) months. Such admission to membership shall entail the discontinuance of any Social Security coverage on the member's subsequent earnings. Further, any retirement or disability annuity to which he becomes entitled in accord with section 6 [157.43] shall be subject to reduction by a Social Security adjustment in case he has elected retroactive membership on his prior service. This adjustment shall be applied where the city has paid F.I.C.A. taxes for Social Security coverage on his prior earnings and shall equal fifty percent (50%) of a proportion of the Social Security primary benefit available to him on the date of his retirement. Such proportion shall be determined as the percentage which the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from the city bears to the total F.I.C.A. taxes paid on his earnings from all sources since January 1, 1938. Employees who had previously worked for CETA in city jobs without a break in service of greater than two (2) years and/or special funds without a break in service of greater than two (2) years or for redevelopment (who were previously offered a chance to have such redevelopment time credited as pension time) shall specifically be included in this section and be given one last opportunity to buy back said periods of service. 
(i)  This open period subject to the provisions and requirements of paragraph (h) shall also be available to any member who wishes to establish credit for any period of non-participating prior service which preceded the effective date of his membership, provided such prior period was of at least twelve months duration. 
(j)  The provisions of paragraphs (h) and (i) for establishing retroactive membership credits shall expire six (6) months after the date on which the open period shall have commenced. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87; Amd. of 2-6-89)  
Sec. 157.47. - Benefits for periods of military service. 
In determining benefits under sections 157.43 and 157.44, credit shall be given for periods of military service in World War II, the Korean War, or the Vietnam War, subject to the following conditions: Any member who, after October 16, 1940, entered any branch of the armed forces of the United States or any service auxiliary thereto, or any civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government, including those employees of the municipal airport who were displaced from their regular employment when the army took over the airport and who undertook duties connected with air force, or any member who shall enter such services while the United States is at war, and who has been or shall be re-employed by the city within six months after the termination of such military service, shall qualify for credit for his period of military service, provided he resumes his participation in the Retirement Fund, with an effective date antedating his entry into such service. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.48. - Preservation of benefits paid under previous acts. 
The provisions of this article [this division] shall not affect the benefits already in course of payment in accordance with the provisions of previous acts. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 157.49. - Future cost-of-living adjustments. 
On July 1, 1970, and annually on each July 1 thereafter, the monthly payments on those service annuities, disability annuities and survivors' benefits on which at least eighteen (18) monthly payments have been made will be increased, or decreased, for changes in the cost-of-living as indicated by the federal Consumer Price Index. Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, all Cities, revised (1967—100). For this purpose the retirement board will determine an adjustment percentage for July 1, 1970, by relating such index for the full calendar year 1969 to that for the full calendar year 1968, but such adjustment percentage shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred three percent (103%) and to a minimum of ninety-seven percent (97%); further, no adjustment will be made where the increase or decrease for the year is less than one-quarter (¼) of one (1) percent. For each case on which payments commenced prior to January 1, 1969, the monthly payment for June 1970, including any previous cost-of-living adjustments, will be multiplied by such adjustment percentage as determined by the retirement board in order to calculate the adjusted monthly payments for the twelve (12) months following July 1, 1970. A similar procedure will be repeated to adjust payments each year thereafter. However, the monthly benefit originally provided for a retired member or for a survivor shall never be reduced because of the accumulative effect of all cost-of-living adjustments. 
(Amd. of 7-6-87)  
Sec. 158. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IXA. - PENSIONS FOR FORMER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 159. - Pensions for former mayor and surviving spouse. 
The City of New Haven shall grant to any former mayor of said city, who has served as mayor for not less than eight (8) years and is not entitled to a pension from said city under any other law, and upon his or her death, any surviving spouse thereof, a pension of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per annum, payable monthly, commencing for such mayor at age sixty-five (65) and for such surviving spouse upon the former mayor's death and upon the surviving spouse attaining age sixty-five (65) and continuing until the death of the former mayor and until the death of the surviving spouse. During the years for which said pension shall be payable, an appropriation therefor may be made annually in the New Haven city budget. The provision for a pension for a surviving spouse shall apply prospectively, and retroactively, to any surviving spouse of a deceased qualified mayor herein, which spouse is living at the date of passage hereof. 
(Special Laws 1967, Act No. 62; Ord. No. 1258, 3-21-00) 
Editor's note— Section 159 is derived from Act No. 62, Special Laws 1967.  
ARTICLE X. - RETIREMENT OF CUSTODIANS AND ENGINEERS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Prior provisions concerning retirement of janitors and engineers may be found in Special Laws 1911, Act No. 366. Said 1911 act was expressly repealed by Special Laws 1925, Act No. 223, which established a custodians' and engineers' retirement fund and was subsequently amended by Special Laws 1941, Acts Nos. 358, 360 and 551; by Special Laws 1947, Act No. 324; and by Special Laws 1949, Act No. 500. The 1925 act and all amendments thereto were repealed by Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, which comprises Article X of this compilation, and have therefore been omitted. The editors have also omitted Special Laws 1927, Act No. 137, which provided for transfer of assets accumulated under the 1911 act to a fund established by the 1925 act. The provisions of §§ 260—267 of the 1952 Revised Charter were taken directly from these repealed acts establishing and amending the 1925 retirement fund, except that said revision omitted § 6 of the 1925 act providing that it should not be construed as preventing discontinuance of employment for cause. 
 
Sec. 160. - Definition of custodians and engineers. 
The term "custodian and engineer" or "custodians and engineers," as used in this act [article], shall include all custodians and engineers regularly appointed in the public day schools by the board of education, including the director of buildings and grounds. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 9)  
Sec. 161. - Personnel hired after January 1, 1948 to participate in city employees' retirement fund. 
No person who shall have been employed as a custodian or engineer after January 1, 1948 shall be eligible to participate in the custodians' and engineers' retirement fund but shall be eligible to participate in the city employees' retirement system. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 11) 
Cross reference— City employees' retirement fund, Art. IX, §§ 130—159.  
Sec. 162. - Custodians' and engineers' retirement fund established; assets. 
There shall be a fund known as the custodians' and engineers' retirement fund for the benefit of custodians and engineers of the public day schools of the City of New Haven, who were employed as custodians and engineers in the public day schools prior to January 1, 1948, which fund shall consist of moneys received from the following sources: 
(1)  All appropriations, gifts or bequests made to the fund from public or private sources, for the purpose for which said retirement fund is established; 
(2)  An assessment of one and one-half percent (1½%) on all moneys appropriated for custodians' and engineers' salaries, which shall be retained from such appropriations and paid into said fund, the custodians and engineers to pay an assessment of five percent (5%) on the salaries received by them from such appropriations; 
(3)  All compensation for services that may be unclaimed by any custodian or engineer for a period of six (6) months after the same shall have become due; 
(4)  An appropriation to said fund by the City of New Haven of an amount equal to the difference between the one and one-half percent (1½%) deducted from such appropriation for salaries and the amount required to meet the expenditures hereinafter provided for. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-70) 
Editor's note— The ordinance enacted April 6, 1970, approved April 15, 1970, and enacted May 5, 1970, amended § 162 by increasing 4% to 5% in (2).  
Sec. 163. - Duties of board of education, city treasurer; payment of order on fund; disposition of income. 
The board of education of the City of New Haven shall be trustee of said fund, and may invest and reinvest the same in accordance with the laws relating to investment of trust funds. The city treasurer shall be treasurer of said fund. All orders on said fund shall be signed by the secretary and countersigned by the president of the board of education. The unexpended yearly balance of said fund, if any, shall be set apart by said trustee and constitute a permanent fund to be invested by the trustee as aforesaid, and the income of such permanent fund shall be used in carrying out the provisions of this act [article]. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 2)  
Sec. 164. - Board of retirement created; duty to recommend personnel eligible for retirement. 
There shall be a board of retirement in said city which shall consist of the mayor, the president of the board of aldermen, the secretary of the board of education and two (2) members who shall be chosen by the custodians and engineers of said public day schools from their members, at a meeting held for that purpose. One (1) of such members shall be elected annually to serve for a term of two (2) years from the first day of October. Said board shall annually choose a secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to give proper notice to the custodians and engineers who are members of this retirement system to attend the annual meeting to be held on the third Monday of September for the election of one of their members to said retirement board and said secretary shall preside at and conduct such meeting. In the event of a vacancy in an elected position on said board, the secretary, within thirty (30) days thereafter, shall call a meeting of all members of the retirement system for the election of one of their number to fill such vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term. Said board shall investigate and recommend to the board of education, custodians and engineers eligible for retirement under the provisions of this act [article]. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 3)  
Sec. 165. - Engineers, custodians eligible for retirement. 
(1)  Upon the recommendation of the board of retirement, the board of education may retire: 
(a)  Any custodian or engineer who shall have been connected with the public day schools of the city of New Haven for a period of twenty-five years or more or 
(b)  Any custodian or engineer who may have become incapacitated while in the service from further duty as a custodian or engineer, and thereupon said trustee shall pay to such custodian or engineer during the rest of his life a sum equal to one-half his average salary for the five highest salaried years of his employment. 
(2)  Upon the written request of any custodian or engineer, when such custodian or engineer has performed twenty-five years of service and has attained the age of sixty-five or has performed thirty years of service and has attained the age of sixty, or has performed thirty-five years of service regardless of age, the board of retirement shall recommend the permanent retirement of such person, and the board of education shall permanently retire such custodian or engineer and thereupon, pay to such custodian or engineer during the rest of his life, a sum equal to one-half of his average salary for the five highest-salaried years of his employment. 
(3)  At the age of sixty-eight years, the retirement of any custodian or engineer shall be compulsory and no custodian or engineer shall be continued in service or employed after having reached such age of sixty-eight years, except that custodians and engineers already regularly appointed attaining the age of sixty-eight years before completing twenty-five years of service may continue in the service after reaching their sixty-eighth birthday until the completion of twenty-five years of service, at the expiration of which such employee shall then be retired and shall not continue to be employed in the service. Thereupon, said trustee shall pay to such custodian or engineer during the rest of his life, a sum equal to one-half of his average salary for the five highest-salaried years of his employment. As used in this act [article], the word "salary" shall mean all compensation for services paid by the board of education of the city of New Haven. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 4; Special Laws 1961, Act No. 238, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 166. - Additional pension payments for service more than twenty-five years. 
After twenty-five years of service for each additional full year of service, but in no event for a period of more than ten years, there shall be added to the retirement annuity of each custodian or engineer a sum equaling two percent computed upon his average salary for the five highest-salaried years of his employment. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 5)  
Sec. 167. - Retirement provisions not to affect authority of board of education to dismiss for cause. 
No provision of this act [article] shall be so construed as to prevent the board of education from discontinuing the employment of any custodian or engineer for cause. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 6)  
Sec. 168. - Board of examiners created; disability retirements. 
The board of retirement herein provided for shall annually appoint three physicians, or surgeons of the city of New Haven, of at least ten years' active practice, who shall be known as the board of examiners, who shall serve without pay and who shall, upon request of the board of education or the board of retirement, make such examinations as may be called for under the terms of this section and report their findings in writing to the board making such request. On recommendation by a majority vote of the board of retirement, the board of education may, by a majority of its members, place on the disability list for the remainder of his or her life, or any part thereof, any such custodian or engineer qualifying under subsection 1 (b) of section 4, [16] provided no custodian or engineer shall be placed upon the disability list until the board of examiners shall have filed a written report within thirty days of examination, certifying that such custodian or engineer is incapacitated for further service as a custodian or engineer. Any applicant for retirement to the disability list under the provisions of subsection 1 (b) of section 4* shall submit to a medical examination by the board of examiners before his or her application shall be considered. The board of education may, by a majority vote of its members and upon recommendation by a majority vote of the board of retirement, place such custodian or engineer on the disability list when such disability shall have been found to exist. No provision of this act [article] shall be construed as prohibiting the board of retirement from recommending, by a majority vote, to the board of education that the disability of any custodian or engineer retired as provided under subsection 1 (b) of section 4*; shall be declared ended. The board of education may, by a majority vote of its members, on such recommendation of said board of retirement, declare ended the disability of such custodian or engineer retired as provided under the terms of subsection 1 (b) of section 4*; and, upon delivery to such custodian or engineer, of a written offer of re-appointment to a position as custodian or engineer equal in remuneration to the one previously held by such custodian or engineer, the payment of the annuity of such custodian or engineer under the disability clause as provided in subsection 1 (b) of section 4*; shall be discontinued. No provision of this act [article] shall be construed as prohibiting a custodian or engineer who shall have been placed upon the disability list from applying once each year to be re-instated to active duty as custodian or engineer. On recommendation by a majority vote of the board of retirement after an examination of such applicant by the board of examiners, the board of education may, by a majority vote, restore such custodian or engineer to active duty, and the disability annuity shall cease on the day that such custodian or engineer shall resume his work at his former remuneration. The disability provided for in subsection 1 (b) of section 4*; shall not be declared ended until an examination shall have been made by the board of examiners and the board of examiners shall have certified, by a majority vote, that such custodian or engineer has been found to be physically and mentally fitted for further service in the public day schools of the city of New Haven. The provisions of this section shall not apply to ordinary cases of temporary disability. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 7) 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Note— Subsection (1)(b) of section 4 of Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518 appears as § 165(1)(b) of this compilation. 
 
Sec. 169. - Reports on retirement fund by board of education. 
Each September the board of education shall file with the board of aldermen an annual report showing the financial condition of the custodians' and engineers' retirement fund. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 8)  
Sec. 170. - Payments to widows, children, other beneficiaries. 
In the event of the death of a member of this retirement fund, prior to the commencement of an annuity, and no wife or dependent child or children survive, the trustee may pay to the member's beneficiary an amount equal to his total contributions. Upon the death of a retired member his beneficiary, designated or otherwise, may upon written request, withdraw the total amount of his contributions less the amount paid to him during his retirement except that should he be survived by a wife or dependent child or children they shall receive annuities in lieu of such repayment of contributions, according to the provisions of this act [article]. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 10; Special Laws 1961, Act No. 238, § 3)  
Sec. 171. - Effect of resignation before becoming eligible for retirement. 
Any member leaving the employment of the board of education before becoming eligible for retirement may, upon written request to the retirement board, withdraw the total of all contributions made by him, without interest, provided, if no request is made within one year of the date of termination of employment, such contributions shall revert to the fund. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 12)  
Sec. 172. - Computation of benefits. 
(1)  On and after October 1, 1961, upon the death of an active or retired member of this fund, there shall be paid to or on account of his child or children under 18 years of age and to his widow such monthly benefits, if any, as such person or persons may be entitled to receive in accordance with the provisions of this section as computed by the formula in Appendix A. 
(2)  [Repealed]. 
(3)  [Repealed]. 
(4)  "Average annual salary" as used in computing survivorship benefits shall mean the average annual salary received by the deceased member for the five highest-salaried years of his employment by the board of education, excluding, however, that portion in excess of $4,800. 
(5)  Upon the remarriage of a widow entitled to benefits under paragraph (1) of this section, the monthly payments to or on account of such person shall cease. When a child entitled to benefits reaches the age of eighteen, or marries before reaching the age of eighteen, or is adopted by anyone except his step-parent, grandparent, aunt or uncle, payments to or on account of such child shall cease. 
(6)  In each case where monthly survivorship benefits are payable under this section, the amount thereof corresponding to the deceased members' average annual salary shall be determined by the retirement board by use of the formula contained in Appendix A, and such determination based upon the formula shall be final and conclusive. 
(7)  No person shall be entitled to receive simultaneous benefits under paragraphs (2) and (3). 
(8)  In cases where it appears to the retirement board that the circumstances so warrant, the board may direct that payments of survivorship benefits under this section shall be made to parties other than the nominal beneficiaries to be applied to the benefit of such beneficiaries, and any such direction shall be final and conclusive. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 13; Special Laws 1961, Act No. 238, §§ 4—8)  
Sec. 173. - Pensioners under repealed acts declared members of custodians' and engineers' fund. 
On the effective date of this act [article] [17] all persons, members of or receiving benefits as pensioners from the custodians' and engineers' retirement fund which is repealed by the express provisions of this act [article] shall become and be members of the custodians' and engineers' fund created by this act [article] and all assets and rights belonging to this fund shall be transferred to the retirement fund created by this act [article]. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 14) 
Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, from which this Article is derived, became effective upon passage June 29, 1959. 
 
Sec. 174. - Appendix A, computation of survivorship benefits; repeals. 
APPENDIX A 
FORMULA FOR DETERMINING 
SURVIVORSHIP BENEFITS 
The Survivorship Benefit Base shall be derived from the average monthly salary as follows: Of the average monthly salary up to $400.00, add 55% of the first $110.00 to 25% of the remainder. The sum shall be the Survivorship Benefit Base. 
Three-fourths of the Survivorship Benefit Base shall be the monthly benefit paid to: 
(1)  A surviving widow; 
(2)  Each surviving dependent child. 
Total benefits shall be raised to the next highest multiple of ten cents. 
The maximum monthly benefit to families shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00). Total monthly family benefits shall be reduced to the greater of (1) one and one-half (1½) times the Survivorship Benefit Base, or (2) 80 percent (80%) of the average monthly wage from which the Survivorship Benefit Base was determined. 
The following special acts are hereby repealed: 
(1)  Number 366 of the special acts of 1911 
(2)  Number 223 of the special acts of 1925 
(3)  Number 358 of the special acts of 1941 
(4)  Number 551 of the special acts of 1941 
(5)  Number 324 of the special acts of 1947 
(6)  Number 500 of the special acts of 1949; 
and any other acts inconsistent with the provisions of this act. 
(Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518, § 14; Special Laws 1961, Act 238, § 9) 
Note— For effect of these repeals, see note at beginning of this Article.  
Sec. 174.1. - Cost of living adjustments. 
Effective July 1, 1971, the monthly amounts payable to members who retired prior to January 1, 1968 and the monthly benefits payable to the qualified survivors of members who died prior to January 1, 1968 shall be increased by cost of living adjustments which will approximately reflect the percentage increase in the federal consumer price index between the calendar year when the payments commenced in each case and the calendar year 1968. 
The amount of increase in each case will be determined by multiplying the monthly payment by the appropriate percentage of increase set forth in the following table: 
Year Payment 
Commenced 	Percentage of Increase 
 1968 	0.0 
 1967 	4.2 
 1966 	7.2 
 1965 	10.3 
 1964 	12.1 
 1963 	13.6 
 1962 	15.0 
 1961 	16.3 
 1960 	17.8 
 1959 	19.4 
 1958 	20.4 
 1957 	23.7 
 1956 	28.0 
 1955 	29.9 
 1954 	29.5 
 1953 	30.0 
 1952 	31.1 
 1951 	37.8 
 1950 	44.6 
 1949 	46.0 
 
(Ord. of 11-9-70) 
Editor's note— The ordinance of Nov. 9, 1970, amended Special Laws 1959, Act No. 518 by adding § 15 thereto. Said section is included herein as § 174.1 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 175. - Survivorship benefits—Generally. 
(1)  On and after July 1, 1969 upon the death of a male or widowed female member who has participated in the retirement fund for a period of not less than six (6) months or who had been retired by reason of age and service, or by reason of disability, there shall be paid to or on account of his or her surviving child or children under eighteen (18) years of age, and in the case of a male member, to his qualified widow, monthly benefits consistent with the following table: 
_____
MONTHLY BENEFIT 
Average 
annual 
pay 	Widow only 	Widow and one child 	Widow and two or more children 	One child 	Two children 	Three or 
more 
children 
$1,800 	$100 	$150 	$150 	$53 	$106 	$150 
 2,400 	 100 	 162 	 200 	 62 	 124 	 186 
 3,000 	 100 	 172 	 244 	 72 	 144 	 216 
 3,600 	 100 	 181 	 262 	 81 	 162 	 243 
 4,200 	 100 	 190 	 270 	 90 	 180 	 270 
 4,800 	 100 	 200 	 280 	100 	 200 	 280 
 5,400 	 105 	 210 	 290 	105 	 210 	 290 
 6,000 	 110 	 220 	 300 	110 	 220 	 300 
 
_____
Any such widow, on her remarriage, shall receive only such benefits as are payable to her children alone. 
(2)  "Average annual pay," as used in computing survivorship benefits shall mean the average annual rate of pay received by the deceased member for the final five (5) years of his service of employment by the city, or the duration of such service or employment if less than five (5) years, subject to a maximum of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) for each average annual pay. 
(3)  On or after January 1, 1969, upon the death of a male or widowed female who has completed ten (10) years of continuous service for the city or who has qualified for a disability annuity or a retirement benefit by reason of age and service, a minimum monthly benefit will be paid to his qualified survivors if greater than the amount determined from the benefit table above. Said minimum monthly benefit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the monthly annuity to which the member would have been entitled if he had been permanently disabled on the date of his death, or fifty percent (50%) of the amount of his actual monthly annuity in the case of a member who has been receiving retirement or disability benefits from the fund. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69) 
Editor's note— The ordinance from which §§ 175 and 176 are derived enacted Dec. 1, and approved Dec. 8, 1969, was enacted as adding §§ 13A and 13B of Special Act 518 of 1959, from which Art. X is derived, hence codification in this manner was at the discretion of the editors.  
Sec. 176. - Same—Withdrawal of contribution; application of provisions. 
On the death of any retired custodian or engineer, his designated beneficiary may on written request to the retirement board, withdraw the total of all contributions made by him, without interest, less the total amount paid to him during his retirement. If no such request is made within ten (10) years, such contributions shall revert to the fund. In the event that a deceased member is survived by a qualified widow or child or children under the age of eighteen (18), the benefits provided for in section 175 shall be paid in lieu of such withdrawal of contribution. 
The provisions of sections 175 and 176 shall apply to those members of the Custodians' and Engineers' Retirement Fund (established under Special Act No. 518, Article X of the Special Laws of the City of New Haven) not covered by the agreement between the New Haven Board of Education and New Haven Board of Education Employees Local 287, American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO, as approved in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Employees Relations Act of the State of Connecticut, and shall become effective upon passage. 
(Ord. of 12-1-69; Ord. of 4-6-70) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 175. The ordinance enacted April 6, 1970, approved April 15, 1970, and enacted May 5, 1970, amended § 176 by revising the parenthetical material and adding the word "not" before "covered".  
Secs. 177—179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RETIREMENT OF POLICE AND FIRE PERSONNEL  
DIVISION 1. - ORIGINAL POLICE AND FIRE RETIREMENT FUNDS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Division 1, §§ 180—193 contains the provisions of the 1899 charter, Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, §§ 66—69 and §§ 71, 72, as amended, as well as pension provisions clearly applicable to the system there established. Section 70 of said charter was repealed by Special Laws 1929, Act No. 435, § 4, and is therefore not included. Special Laws, 1921, Act No. 376, which also dealt with police and fire pensions failed to gain approval at a required referendum, and has also been omitted from this compilation. This division is applicable only to firemen and policemen employed before December 31, 1957; for provisions concerning pensions for those employed subsequent to that date, see division 2 of this article §§ 200—214. 
Subsequently this division was designated "Police and Fire Plan No. 1" and div. 2 was designated "Police and Fire Plan No. 2." The plans were merged into a single new pension plan and fund known as the "Policemen's & Firemen's Pension Fund" by an ordinance adopted May 29, 1990. 
 
Sec. 180. - Policemen and firemen's relief funds—established. 
There shall hereafter be a fund for the policemen and a fund for the firemen of said city, known as the Policemen's Relief Fund and the Firemen's Relief Fund, to which shall belong: 
(1)  All moneys and securities included in the fund now existing in each department. 
(2)  All bequests and donations from public or private sources to either department on account of services rendered, or for the purposes for which the fund is established. 
(3)  Five (5) percentum of all fees collected on account of licenses issued to sell spirituous or intoxicating liquors within the city of New Haven until the Policemen's Relief Fund amounts to the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), and the Firemen's Relief Fund amounts to the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). When the funds of these departments equal the sums above named, no more fees from licenses to sell spirituous or intoxicating liquors within the city of New Haven shall be paid into said funds, but shall be paid into the city treasury to be used for ordinary expenses, except the funds at any time shall fall below the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in the Policemen's Relief Fund, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.) in the Firemen's Relief Fund, then the fees, to the amount of five percentum, collected on account of licenses to sell spirituous or intoxicating liquors within the city of New Haven, shall be paid into said fund until the amounts above named are reached, and the fee shall then cease to be paid, and revert to the city treasury. 
(4)  All moneys or property presented to any member of either department on account of special services, except such as may, by special vote of the board of commissioners of such department, and with the approval of the mayor, be retained by such member. 
(5)  Assessments on the salaries of members of the police department at the rate of two and one-half (2½) percent for the calendar year 1958, three (3) percent for the calendar year 1959, three and one-half (3½) percent for the calendar year 1960, four (4) percent for the calendar year 1961 and four percent per annum thereafter, payable monthly or quarterly as the trustees of such fund may determine. 
(6)  Such monthly assessments on the salaries of the members of the fire department, not exceeding two and one-half (2½) percent for the calendar year 1958, three (3) percent for the calendar year 1959, three and one-half (3½) percent for the calendar year 1960, four (4) per cent for the calendar year 1961, and four (4) percent per annum thereafter, as the trustees of such fund may determine. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 66; Special Laws 1901, Act No. 217, § 1; Special Laws 1957, Act No. 406) 
Editor's note— Section 180 above differs from § 252 of the 1952 Revised Charter in the following respects: (1) Said § 252 does not contain the provisions set out in subsection (3) above; (2) Section 252 contains a subsection (f) concerning estimates by the board of finance which does not appear in § 186 above; (3) The provisions of Special Laws 1957, Act No. 406, amending subsections (5) and (6) have been incorporated into § 186 above.  
Sec. 181. - Same—Official designations; police fund to include lost, confiscated property. 
Said funds shall be respectively known as the "Policemen's Relief Fund" and "The Firemen's Relief Fund," and the former shall also include all lost, abandoned, unclaimed, or stolen moneys in charge of the police department, and all moneys arising from the sale of lost, abandoned, unclaimed, or stolen property in charge of said department, now made available for the purpose by the statute laws of the state. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 67) 
Editor's note— Section 181 above is the same as § 253 of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 182. - Same—Administration; officers of funds; signing of orders. 
The boards of commissioners of such departments shall respectively be boards of trustees of said funds, and may invest and reinvest the same as the laws relating to trust funds may permit. The mayor shall be president of each of said boards, the city treasurer shall be its treasurer, and the clerk of the department its clerk. All orders on said funds shall be signed by the clerk and countersigned by the president. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 68) 
Editor's note— Section 182 above is the same as § 254 of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 183. - Retirement of police, fire personnel for job-connected disability. 
The board of police commissioners, with the affirmative vote of four commissioners and with the mayor's approval, and the board of fire commissioners, with the affirmative vote of three commissioners and with the mayor's approval, may permanently retire any member of the department who, while in the actual performance of duty and by reason of the performance of such duty, and without fault and misconduct on his part, shall have become permanently disabled, physically or mentally, so as to be entirely unfitted to perform such duties; and either of said boards may cause to be paid from the fund of said department to said member during his lifetime and in monthly installments, unless said vote is annulled by four of said police commissioners or three of said fire commissioners, as the case may be, a sum not greater than one-half nor less than one-fourth of his previous compensation; provided however, that in the cases mentioned in this section, such medical examiners as said board may appoint shall certify in writing that such disability exists, and in their opinion from such cause. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 69) 
Editor's note— The provisions of § 183 above are not included in the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 184. - Retirement of firemen after twenty-five years of service or reaching age of sixty-eight. 
Said board of fire commissioners shall permanently retire any member or employee of the fire department on his or her written request when such member or employee has performed twenty-five years of service in the department. Said board of fire commissioners shall permanently retire any member or employee of the fire department, except the chief thereof, when such member or employee shall reach the age of sixty-eight years, or is of the age of sixty-eight years or over. Said board of fire commissioners may at any time upon a certificate of the medical examiners of the fire department showing that such member is permanently disabled, physically or mentally, so as to be unfit for duty, retire said member from service and place him on the pension list. All persons retired and placed on the pension list under this section shall be awarded an annual pension during his life-time of a sum not less than one-half of the full salary or compensation of such member so retired, payable in monthly installments, irrespective of whether he was retired prior to the passage of this amendment or subsequent thereto. Each pension granted under this section shall be for the natural life of the pensioner and shall not be revoked, repealed nor diminished, provided no member having the right to retire on pension at the time this act [article] shall take effect shall be deprived of such right by reason of his remaining a member of said department or of any provisions of this act [article]. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 487, § 69; Special Laws 1917, Act No. 449, § 15; Special Laws 1927, Act No. 356; Special Laws, 1929, Act No. 435, §§ 2, 3; Special Laws 1931, Act No. 391; Special Laws 1941, Act No. 465) 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1941, Act No. 465, amended § 117 of the 1928 charter revision by adding the provisions which appear as § 184 above. Said § 117 was originally derived from § 69 of the 1899 charter so the editors have treated said 1941 act as an amendment to § 69. Section 184 above is the same as § 255 of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 185. - Retirement of policemen, after twenty-five years of service or reaching age sixty-five. 
Said board of police commissioners shall permanently retire any member or employee of the police department on his or her written request when such member or employee has performed twenty-five years of service in the department. Said board of police commissioners shall permanently retire any member or employee of the police department, except the chief thereof, when such member or employee reaches the age of sixty-five, or is of the age of sixty-five or over. Said board of police commissioners may at anytime upon a certificate of the medical examiners of the police department showing that such member is permanently disabled, physically or mentally, so as to be unfit for duty, retire said member from service and place him on the pension list. All persons retired and placed on the pension list under this section shall be awarded an annual pension during his lifetime of a sum not less than one-half of the full salary or compensation of such member so retired, payable in monthly installments, irrespective of whether he was retired prior to the passage of this amendment or subsequent thereto. Each pension granted under this section shall be for the natural life of the pensioner and shall not be revoked, repealed or diminished, provided no member having the right to retire on pension at the time this act takes effect shall be deprived of such right by reason of his remaining a member of said department or of any provisions of this act. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 69; Special Laws 1937, Act No. 185; Special Laws 1941, Act No. 433; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 217, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 185 above is the same as § 256 of the 1952 Revised Charter. Section 1 of Act No. 217, Special Laws, 1967, amended "Number 433 of the special acts of 1941, being section 256 of the charter of the city of New Haven, revision 1951," to read as set out, effective July 1, 1968. Formerly the mandatory retirement age was sixty-eight.  
Sec. 186. - Retirement of disabled police, fire personnel. 
Any regularly appointed officer or member of either the police or the fire departments of the city of New Haven who shall have served continuously therein for a period of at least ten years, and while still in the service of either department shall become totally and permanently, physically or mentally, disabled, and incapacitated for further service, may, with the affirmative vote of four commissioners of the police department, together with the mayor's approval, or with the affirmative vote of three commissioners of the fire department, together with the mayor's approval, be placed on the retirement list, and shall during the period of such incapacity be entitled to and awarded an annual pension to be paid in monthly installments during his disability of a sum not less than one-half of the full salary or compensation of such member so retired; provided such medical examiners as either board may appoint shall certify in writing that the disability as claimed by such member does in fact exist, and that in their opinion it appears to be of a permanent nature and does totally incapacitate the member from further service in the department. Either the board of police commissioners or the board of fire commissioners may, from time to time, appoint medical examiners to determine whether or not such member of the department to be retired under the provisions of this act continues totally and permanently disabled and incapacitated for further duties, and such member shall be requested to submit himself to any medical examination requested by the board of commissioners of the department of which he was a member. In the event that either the board of police commissioners or the board of fire commissioners shall, upon competent medical evidence, conclude that the disability for which a member is receiving pension no longer exists, it shall order a discontinuance of the payment of benefits as provided herein, and shall restore such member to active duty in the department with which he was connected at the time of his retirement on account of disability. The provisions of this act shall be effective so as to cover all persons who were members of either department as of January 1, 1940. 
(Special Laws 1941, Act No. 393) 
Editor's note— Section 186 above is the same as § 257 of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 187. - Payment to widows, children of policemen, firemen. 
Upon the death of any member of the police or fire department, who shall have served continuously as a regular member of such department for at least ten years and who shall have actually contributed to said relief fund, the widow of such member shall receive, until her death or remarriage, out of said fund of such department, a monthly sum equal to one-fourth of the compensation received by such member at the time of his death, if in active service, or a monthly sum equal to one-half of the pension received by such member at the time of his death, if retired. Subject to the same conditions as to term of service and contributions to the relief fund, such sums shall likewise be so paid to the widow of any member of the police department who died subsequent to the first day of May, 1901, or of any member of the fire department who died subsequent to the first day of September, 1916. Such sums shall likewise be so paid to the widow of any member of either of such departments, including supernumeraries in the police department and substitutes in the fire department, who shall have been killed while in the actual performance of duty, or shall have died from the proximate effects of any injury received while in the actual discharge of such duty, irrespective of the length of service of such member at the time of his death or failure to contribute to said relief fund, provided such death shall have occurred on or after the first day of May, 1901. In any of the above cases, upon the death of such widow before or after remarriage, leaving a child or children of such deceased member, under the age of sixteen years, the board of police commissioners, with the affirmative vote of four commissioners and with the mayor's approval, and the board of fire commissioners, with the affirmative vote of three commissioners and with the mayor's approval, may cause to be paid monthly, to the legally appointed guardian of such child or children, for his or their use and benefit, a sum or sums not exceeding in total the amount hereinbefore provided to be received by such widow, and may, from time to time, apportion such sums between such children as it may deem best; provided, as each such child shall arrive at the age of sixteen years, the payments to such child shall cease. No such payments or pension shall be allowed or paid to such widow or children so long or for such period as such widow or children shall receive or be entitled to receive compensation under the provisions of the general status relating to workmen's compensation. The term "widow," as used in this section, shall be limited to (1) the surviving wife of such member who was married to him prior to his retirement from such department, if retired, and who was living with him at the time of his death or, if not so living with him, was absent by reason of his fault or (2) the surviving wife of such member who married him subsequent to his retirement from such department, if retired, and lived with him continuously thereafter until the time of his death but not less than five years or, if not so living with him at the time of his death, was absent by reason of his fault. The term "child" or "children," as used in this section, shall be limited in meaning to the child or children, born, before or after the death of such member, to such member and his wife to whom he was married prior to his retirement from such department, if retired. The widows or children affected by the provisions of this act shall only be entitled to any payments or pension from and after the time when this act shall take effect. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 69; Special Laws 1929, Act No. 435, § 3; Special Laws 1931, Act No. 391; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 129) 
Editor's note— Section 187 above is the same as § 258 of the 1952 Revised Charter. The term "widow" was redefined by Act No. 129, Special Law, 1967.  
Sec. 188. - Duties of clerk in police, fire departments concerning funds. 
The clerk in each department shall record all of the doings of the board of trustees, and all of the doings of the board of commissioners in relation to the fund of his department, and shall record the vote of each member on each question connected therewith. An itemized report of the condition of each fund and of all receipts and disbursements shall be submitted to the mayor on or before the fifteenth day of February, 1900, and annually thereafter, for the preceding fiscal year. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 72) 
Editor's note— Section 188 above is the same as § 259 of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 189. - Retired policemen, firemen subject to order of commissioner, re-examination. 
All members on the retired lists in either department shall be subject to the orders of the board of commissioners of such department, which may at any time require any member to be re-examined, and in case he shall be reported capable of performing duty, may, by the affirmative vote of four of said police commissioners and with the mayor's approval, or of three of said fire commissioners, as the case may be, and with the mayor's approval, restore him to service in said department. 
(Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, § 71) 
Editor's note— The provisions of § 189 above are not contained in the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 190. - 1955 increase in police pensions, benefits. 
(a)  The board of police commissioners of the city of New Haven, as trustees of the Policemen's Relief Fund of said city, is directed to increase the pensions of members of the police department of said city retired prior to December 31, 1946, by twenty dollars per month. 
(b)  Said board shall also adjust the pensions of widows of former members of said department, which widows were receiving pensions on December 31, 1946, or whose husbands were receiving pensions on said date, by ten dollars per month. 
(Special Laws 1955, Act No. 647, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions contained in §§ 190—193 were enacted subsequent to the 1952 Revised Charter, and therefore are not included therein.  
Sec. 191. - 1955 increase in fire pensions, benefits. 
(a)  The board of fire commissioners of the city of New Haven, as trustees of the Firemen's Relief Fund of said city, is directed to increase the pensions of members of the fire department of said city retired prior to December 31, 1946, by twenty dollars per month. 
(b)  Said board shall also adjust the pensions of widows of former members of said department, which widows were receiving pensions on December 31, 1946, or whose husbands were receiving pensions on said date, by ten dollars per month. 
(Special Laws 1955, Act No. 647, § 2) 
Note— See note following § 190.  
Sec. 192. - 1957 increase in police pensions, benefits. 
(a)  The board of police commissioners, as trustees of the policemen's relief fund of the city of New Haven, are directed to adjust the pensions of members of the police department who retired prior to December 31, 1946, by increasing said pensions twenty-five dollars ($25.00) monthly. 
(b)  The pensions of widows of any retired member, regardless of their date of retirement, shall be adjusted so that the minimum pension shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 390, § 1) 
Note— See note following § 165.  
Sec. 193. - 1957 increase in fire pensions, benefits. 
(a)  The board of fire commissioners, as trustees of the firemen's relief fund of the city of New Haven, are directed to adjust the pensions of members of the fire department who retired prior to December 31, 1946, by increasing said pensions twenty-five dollars ($25.00) monthly. 
(b)  The pensions of widows of any retired member, regardless of their date of retirement, shall be adjusted so that the minimum pension shall not be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 390, § 2) 
Note— See note following § 165.  
Sec. 194. - Voluntary retirement of police, fire personnel after twenty-five years service. 
When any regularly appointed officer, member or employee of either the police or fire department who has served more than twenty-five (25) years shall make written application requesting retirement from his department, the board of police commissioners for the police department or the board of fire commissioners for the fire department shall order immediate retirement of such applicant from his department, and such applicant shall be entitled to receive from the pension fund a yearly amount equal to one-half (½) of the yearly compensation received by such regularly appointed officer, member or employee; in addition thereto said regularly appointed officer, member or employee who has served more than twenty-five (25) years in his department shall receive an additional two per cent (2%) of his basic salary at the time of his retirement for each year over and above the twenty-five (25) years of service, but in no event shall his pension exceed seventy per cent (70%) of his basic salary at the time of his retirement. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 529, § 1) 
Editor's note— At the specific request of the city, for purposes of classification, former Divs. 3—5, §§ 215—223 of this article have been redesignated §§ 199—199.3 as herein set out. The provisions of §§ 194, 195 (formerly Div. 3, §§ 215, 216) are derived from Special Laws 1957, Act No. 529, approved May 28, 1957. The provisions of §§ 196—198 (formerly Div. 4, §§ 217—219) are derived from Act No. 265, Special Laws 1963. The provisions of §§ 199, 199.1 (formerly Div. 5, §§ 220, 221) are derived from Special Laws 1965, Act No. 61, approved May 24, 1965 and effective April 1, 1966. The provisions of § 199.2 (formerly Div. 5, § 222) are derived from Special Laws 1967, Act No. 141. The provisions of § 199.3 (formerly Div. 5, § 223) are derived from Special Laws 1969, Act No. 164.  
Sec. 195. - "Widows" construed as including "widowers." 
The provisions providing for payment of certain sums of monies to widows and child or children of widows shall likewise be paid to widowers and child or children of widowers. The term "widower," as used in this section, shall be limited in its meaning to the surviving husband of such member, who shall have been married to her prior to her retirement from such department, if retired, and who was living with her at the time of her death, or, if not so living with her, was absent by reason of her fault. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act 529, § 2) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 196. - Police department members; monthly increase; minimum per annum. 
The board of police commissioners, as trustees of the policemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to adjust the pensions of members of the police department who retired prior to July 1, 1957, by increasing said pensions ten dollars ($10.00) monthly. The minimum pension paid to retired members shall not be less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per annum. The minimum pension paid to the widows of retired members of the police department shall not be less than twelve hundred dollars ($1,200.00) per annum. 
(Special Laws 1963, Act No. 265, § 1) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 197. - Fire department members; monthly increase; minimum per annum. 
The board of fire commissioners, as trustees of the firemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to adjust the pensions of members of the fire department who retired prior to July 1, 1957, by increasing said pensions ten dollars ($10.00) monthly. The minimum pension paid to retired members shall not be less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per annum. The minimum pension paid to the widows of retired members of the fire department shall not be less than twelve hundred ($1,200.00) dollars per annum. 
(Special Laws 1963, Act No. 265, § 2) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 198. - Inapplicability of provisions to designated members of police and fire department. 
Nothing in this act [sections 196 through 198] shall be construed to increase the pension of any policeman or fireman retired prior to the effective date of this act from the service of the City of New Haven whose pension is in a greater amount than fifty per cent (50%) of the salaries paid as of July 1, 1957. 
(Special Laws of 1963, Act No. 265, § 3) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 199. - Police department members; monthly increase; minimum per annum. 
The board of police commissioners, as trustees of the policemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pensions of each retired male member of the police department whose pension, on the date of passage of this act [sections 199 through 199.3], is less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) by fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month, provided no such pension as so increased shall exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per annum. Said board shall so increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the police department whose pension, on said date, is less than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) by ten dollars ($10.00) per month, provided no such pension as so increased shall exceed fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum. 
(Special Laws 1965, Act No. 61, § 1) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 199.1. - Fire department members; monthly increase; minimum per annum. 
The board of fire commissioners, as trustees of the firemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pensions of each retired male member of the fire department whose pension, on the date of passage of this act [sections 199 through 199.3] is less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) by fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month, provided no such pension as so increased shall exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per annum. Said board shall so increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the fire department whose pension, on said date, is less than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) by ten dollars ($10.00) per month, provided no such pension as so increased shall exceed fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum. 
(Special Laws 1965, Act No. 61, § 2) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 199.2. - 1967 pension adjustments for retired police and fire department members and widows of retired members. 
The board of police commissioners as trustees of the policemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven and the board of fire commissioners as trustees of the firemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven shall: 
(1)  Effective January 1, 1968, increase by twenty dollars ($20.00) monthly the pension of each retired male member of the police or fire department, as the case may be, who on said date is receiving a pension in an amount less than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) annually, increase by ten dollars ($10.00) monthly the pension of each such retired male member who on said date is receiving a pension in an amount equal to or in excess of twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) annually, and increase by five dollars ($5.00) monthly the pension of each widow of a retired member of either of said departments who is receiving a pension of less than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) annually; 
(2)  Effective July 1, 1968, increase by twenty dollars ($20.00) monthly the pension of each retired male member of either of said departments and increase by five dollars ($5.00) monthly the pension of each widow of a retired member; 
(3)  Effective July 1, 1969, increase by twenty dollars ($20.00) monthly the pension of each retired male member of either of said departments and increase by five dollars ($5.00) monthly the pension of each widow of a retired member, provided no pension as increased under the provisions of this act [sections 199 through 199.3] shall exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per annum for a retired member of either department or fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per annum for a widow of a retired member. 
(Special Laws 1967, Act No. 141) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 199.3. - 1970 pension adjustments for retired male police and fire department members and widows. 
(a)  The board of police commissioners, as trustees of the policemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pensions of each retired male member of the police department whose pension, on October 1, 1970, is less than thirty-two hundred dollars ($3,200.00) to thirty-two hundred dollars ($3,200.00). Said board shall so increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the police department whose pension, on said date, is less than sixteen hundred dollars ($1,600.00) to sixteen hundred dollars ($1,600.00). 
(b)  The board of fire commissioners, as trustees of the firemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pensions of each retired male member of the fire department whose pension on October 1, 1970, is less than thirty-two hundred dollars ($3,200.00) to thirty-two hundred dollars ($3,200.00). Said board shall so increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the fire department whose pension, on said date, is less than sixteen hundred dollars ($1,600.00) to sixteen hundred dollars ($1,600.00). 
(Special Laws 1969, Act No. 164) 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
Sec. 199.4. - 1978 pension adjustments for retired police and fire department members and widows. 
(a)  The board of police commissioners, as trustees of the policemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven are directed to increase the pension paid to each retired member of the police department whose pension, on October 1, 1978 is less than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per year by an amount up to but not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00), provided such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). 
Said board shall increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the police department by the amount of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year. 
(b)  The board of fire commissioners, as trustees of the firemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pension paid to each retired member of the fire department whose pension on October 1, 1978 is less than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per year by an amount up to but not exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00), provided such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). 
Said board shall increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the fire department by the amount of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year. 
(Ord. of 7-2-79)  
Sec. 199.5. - 1982 pension adjustments for retired police and fire members and widows. 
(a)  The board of police commissioners, as trustees of the policemen's relief fund to the City of New Haven are directed to increase the pension paid to each retired member of the police department whose pension on July 1, 1982, is less than seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) per year by an amount not to exceed eight hundred forty dollars ($840.00). Such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) per year. 
(b)  The board of fire commissioners, as trustee of the firemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, is directed to increase the pension paid to each retired member of the fire department whose pension on July 1, 1982, is less than seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) per year by an amount not to exceed eight hundred forty dollars ($840.00). Such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) per year. 
(c)  The police and fire commissioners shall also increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the police or fire department by an amount of eight hundred forty dollars ($840.00). 
(Amd. of 4-5-82, effective 9-1-82)  
Sec. 199.6. - 1988 pension adjustments for retired police and fire members and widows. 
(a)  The board of police commissioners, as trustees of the policemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven are directed to increase the pension paid to each retired member of the police department whose pension on December 31, 1987 is less than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year, by an amount not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year. Such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year. 
(b)  The board of fire commissioners, as trustees of the firemen's relief fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pension paid to each retired member of the fire department whose pension on December 31, 1987 is less than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year by an amount not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year. Such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year. 
(c)  The police and fire commissioners, respectively, shall also increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of the police or fire department by an amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year. Such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year. 
Further, the board of the policemen and firemen's pension fund, as trustees of this retirement fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pension paid to each widow of a retired member of this fund whose pension on December 31, 1987 is less than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year by an amount not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year. 
All of the above increases are to [be] effective as of January 1, 1988. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84, effective 1-1-85; Amd. of 3-7-88, § 1, effective 1-1-88)  
DIVISION 2. - PENSION FUND FOR POLICEMEN AND FIREMEN EMPLOYED AFTER DECEMBER 31, 1957[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Division 2, §§ 200—208 is derived from Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, which was entitled "An Act Establishing A Pension Fund For New Haven Policemen And Firemen Employed After December 31, 1957." For pension provisions applicable to personnel employed before said date, see div. 1, §§ 180—199 of this article. 
Subsequently this division was designated "Police and Fire Plan No. 2," and div. 1 was designated "Police and Fire Plan No. 1." The plans were merged into a single new pension plan and fund known as the "Policemen's & Firemen's Pension Fund" by an ordinance adopted May 29, 1990. 
 
Sec. 200. - Pensions established; payment of assessments. 
Effective as of midnight December 31, 1957, all persons thereafter appointed to the police and fire departments of the city of New Haven shall belong to the policemen's and firemen's pension fund. Assessments on the salaries of the members of the police and fire departments shall be at the rate of five per cent (5%) per annum, payable as the trustees of such fund may determine. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, § 1)  
Sec. 201. - Administration by pension board; membership of board. 
The management and administration of the pension plan are hereby vested in a pension board, which shall consist of seven (7) members: Two (2) members of the board of police commissioners, two (2) members of the board of fire commissioners, two (2) employee representatives, one from each department appointed by vote of the membership of each department, and the mayor, who shall be president of the said board. Vacancies to the board shall be filled by the mayor with the exception of the employee members, which shall be filled by vote of the membership of the respective department in which the vacancy occurred. The term of each commissioner shall be for two (2) years. 
The pension board shall be trustees of said fund and may invest and reinvest the principal and income of said fund in bonds and other investments which at the time of purchase constitute legal investments as the laws relating to trust funds may permit. The city treasurer shall be its treasurer and the clerk of said fund shall be appointed by the board. All orders on said fund shall be signed by the clerk and countersigned by the president. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, §§ 2, 3)  
Sec. 202. - Estimates of expenses, reports by board. 
The pension board shall submit annually to the mayor, prior to the first of September, a schedule of its estimated expenses necessary to carry out the purpose of the fund and the mayor shall include said estimate in the estimates to be submitted to the board of aldermen in accordance with charter requirements relative to annual estimates and appropriations for the city of New Haven. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act 531, § 4; Amd. of 7-6-93; Amd. of 9-23-98)  
Sec. 203. - Persons eligible for retirement. 
(a)  Any member of the fire department shall be eligible for retirement from active service and for a retirement allowance who shall have attained the age of fifty-five (55) and shall have completed prior to retirement thirty (30) years of continuous service in the employment of the fire department. Any member of the police department shall be eligible for retirement from active service and for a retirement allowance who shall have attained the age of forty-eight (48) and shall have completed prior to retirement twenty-five (25) years of continuous service in the employment of the police department. Veterans of the U.S. armed forces shall be granted credit toward the computation of their years of service to be eligible for city retirement pension for up to four (4) years served in active duty in the U.S. armed forces. 
(b)  Any member who shall have attained the age of sixty-five (65) shall be retired on the day following attainment of such age. 
(c)  Any member shall be eligible for retirement from active service who shall have completed at least ten (10) years of continuous service, upon a certificate of the medical examiners appointed by the board showing that such member is permanently disabled, physically or mentally, so as to be unfit for duty. 
(d)  If such disability is shown to the satisfaction of the board to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment by the city as defined by the workmen's compensation act, a member of the fund shall be eligible for retirement irrespective of the duration of his employment, but any amount payable to him under the workmen's compensation act shall be deducted from the allowance hereinafter provided, except that in the case of a fireman no such deduction shall be made after the effective date of his disability retirement. The board may, from time to time, appoint medical examiners to determine whether or not such member of the department so retired under the provisions of this act [division] continues totally and permanently disabled and incapacitated for further duties, and if the board, upon competent medical evidence, concludes that the disability for which a member is receiving pension no longer exists, it shall order a discontinuance of the payment of benefits as provided herein and shall restore such member to active duty in the department with which he was connected at the time of his retirement on account of disability. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, § 5; Special Acts 1967, Act No. 218, § 1; Amd. of 11-20-75; Amd. of 12-17-90, § 7) 
Editor's note— Section I of Act No. 218, Special Laws 1967, amended subsection (a) of § 5 of Act No. 531 of Special Laws 1957, herein codified as § 203(a) to read as set out, effective July 1, 1968. Formerly, members were eligible for retirement when they attained the age of fifty-five years having completed thirty years of continuous service in the employment of the police or fire department.  
Sec. 204. - Payment, amount of benefits. 
After retirement, in accordance with the provisions of this act, each member of the fire department shall receive in lieu of any other compensation from the city an annual allowance, payable monthly during his lifetime and terminating at his death, in an amount equal to one and two-thirds (1 2/3 ) per cent of his average annual rate of pay during the ten (10) years immediately preceding his retirement for each full year of service, and each member of the police department shall receive in lieu of any other compensation from the city an annual allowance, payable monthly during his lifetime and terminating at his death, in an amount equal to two (2) per cent of his average annual rate of pay during the ten (10) years immediately preceding his retirement for each full year of service, provided such allowance for permanent and total disability arising out of and in the course of employment as defined in the workmen's compensation act shall not be less than one-half (½) of the member's annual rate of pay at the time of disability. The word pay" shall be deemed to mean wages or salary, including increases or decreases thereof, payments on account of overtime worked, and the value of maintenance, if any. Credit for service shall be determined by the time actually worked as a full-time employee except that credit for a full year of service shall be given where absences within the year due to disability and leave of absence do not exceed ninety (90) days. The board of the policemen and firemen's pension fund, as trustees of this retirement fund of the City of New Haven, are directed to increase the pension paid to each retired member of this fund whose pension on December 31, 1987 is less than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year by an amount [not] to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00). Such increase shall not cause such annual pension to be more than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) per year. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, § 6; Special Laws 1967, Act No. 218, § 2; Amd. of 11-20-75; Amd. of 3-7-88, §§ 2, 3)  
Sec. 205. - Payments to widows, surviving children. 
Upon the death of any member of the police or fire department who shall have served continuously as a regular member for such department for at least ten years and who shall have contributed regularly to this fund, the widow of such member shall receive, until her death or remarriage, a monthly sum equal to one-fourth of the compensation received by such member at the time of his death, if in active service, or a monthly sum equal to one-half of the pension received by such member at the time of his death, if retired. Upon the death of such widow before or after remarriage, leaving a child or children of such deceased member, under the age of sixteen years, the pension board may cause to be paid to the legally appointed guardian of such child or children, for his or their use and benefit, a sum or sums not exceeding in total the amount hereinbefore provided to be received by such widow, and may from time to time apportion such sum between such children as it may deem best; provided, as each such child shall arrive at the age of sixteen years, the payments to such child shall cease. No such payments or pension shall be allowed or paid to such widow or children so long or for such period as such widow or children shall receive or be entitled to receive compensation under the provisions of the general statutes relating to workmen's compensation. The term "widow," as used in this section, shall be limited in its meaning to the surviving wife of such member, who shall have been married to him prior to his retirement from such department, if retired, and who was living with him at the time of his death, or, if not so living with him, was absent by reason of his fault. The term "child" or "children" shall mean child or children born before or after the death of such member, to such member and his wife to whom he was married prior to his retirement from such department, if retired. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, § 7)  
Sec. 206. - Payments to widows of policemen, firemen killed in line of duty. 
There shall be paid to a widow, as designated in section 7 of this act [section 205 of this compilation], of any member of either the police department or the fire department, including supernumeraries in the police department and substitutes in the fire department, who shall be killed while in the actual performance of duty or shall die from the proximate effects of any injuries received while in the actual discharge of such duty, irrespective of the length of service of such member at the time of his death or failure to contribute to the fund established by this act [division], a weekly compensation equal to the difference between the maximum weekly compensation to which a widow of any deceased member is entitled and received under the provisions of the general statutes relating to workmen's compensation, and the weekly earnings of her deceased husband at the time of his death as aforesaid. Such weekly compensation shall be paid to a widow as aforesaid for so long a period as she shall be entitled to and shall receive a weekly compensation under the provisions of the general statutes relating to workmen's compensation. The benefits provided for under this section shall be deemed to be benefits in addition to any otherwise granted. This section shall not be interpreted as affecting in any way the pension provision of this act [division] with respect to policemen and firemen, and the benefits provided in this section shall be paid by appropriation from the general funds of the city of New Haven. After the benefits under workmen's compensation have been exhausted a widow may continue to receive benefits as provided for under section 7 of this act [section 205 of this compilation]. The benefits of this section shall be deemed waived by the widow if the widow or her representative or the representative of the estate of her deceased husband shall bring any action for money damages for the death of her husband against the city of New Haven or against any fellow employee of her late husband whom the city of New Haven must indemnify by law. In the event that any money damages are recovered by suit, settlement or otherwise by a widow, as designated in said section 7 [section 205 of this compilation], or by her representative or by the representative of the estate of her deceased husband, for the death of her deceased husband, the city of New Haven shall be entitled to reimbursement from said money damages for any benefits it shall have paid under this section to said widow. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, § 8)  
Sec. 207. - Effect of resignation, death before receiving benefits. 
If a member of the fund shall terminate his service with the city before retirement, the total amount of his contributions shall be repaid to him, unless he is a policeman who qualifies for a vested benefit. After July 1, 1975, pension rights for members of the police department shall become vested after twenty (20) years of continuous service, conditioned upon the member leaving his contributions in the pension fund. Such deferred vested pension shall become payable on the date when such member would have first become eligible for retirement if he had remained in service, namely, upon his attainment of age forty-eight (48) or upon his completion of twenty-five (25) years of continuous service, if later. The amount of such vested pension shall be equal to two (2) per cent of his average annual rate of pay for his final ten (10) years of service for each full year of his actual service as a policeman. If a member shall die before retirement from active service and prior to completion of ten years of continuous service, the total amount of his contribution shall be paid to the beneficiary designated by him. If no designated beneficiary shall survive the member, said amount may be paid, in the discretion of the board, to the surviving widow, in equal shares to the member's surviving parents or parent or, if there be no surviving parent, in equal shares to the member's surviving brothers and sisters; if said amount is not so paid, it shall be paid to the member's executor or administrator. If a member shall die after retirement from active service and before he shall receive payments on account of his retirement allowance at least equal to the total amount of his contributions to the date of retirement, the difference between said payments and said contributions shall be paid to the beneficiary designated by him. If no designated beneficiary shall survive the member, said amount shall be paid as hereinbefore provided. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, § 9; Amd. of 3-18-75)  
Sec. 208. - Authority of board to make rules, employ assistance. 
The pension board shall have the power to make reasonable rules and regulations for carrying out the provisions of this act [division] and may employ such assistance as is necessary for the purpose. Such cost shall be borne by the city in its annual appropriation. 
(Special Laws 1957, Act No. 531, § 10)  
Sec. 209. - Benefits and conditions for certain employees of department of fire service excluded from membership in or representation by Local 825. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Number 531 of the Special Acts of 1957 and any amendment thereto to the contrary, the following benefits and conditions shall be established for all employees of the department of fire service who are excluded from membership in or representation by Local 825, International Association of Fire Fighters, AFL-CIO, and who were appointed to the fire department on or after January 1, 1958 and who are members of the Policemen's and Firemen's Pension Fund, established by said Special Act Number 531, and for the survivors of such employees: 
(a)  Each fire department member of said policemen's and firemen's pension fund who has completed twenty-five or more years of continuous service with the fire department, and who is forty-six (46) years of age or older, upon his written application to the pension board, shall be entitled to retirement for superannuation on an annual pension to be paid in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Each such member who is retired on super annuation under subsection (a) of this section, shall receive from said pension fund an annual pension, payable monthly, in an amount equal to two (2) per cent of his average total annual earnings of his five (5) highest years of earnings during the ten (10) years immediately preceding his retirement for each full year of service, up to a maximum of seventy (70) per cent of his average total annual earnings of such five (5) highest years of earnings. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall take effect on July 1, 1969. 
(d)  Each such member of said pension fund who has completed five (5) or more years of continuous service with the fire department upon a certificate of the medical examiners appointed by said pension board showing that such member is permanently disabled, physically or mentally, so as to be unfit for duty, as the result of causes which are not related to his employment with the fire department, shall be entitled to retirement on an annual pension to be paid in accordance with the provisions of subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Each such member who is retired on nonservice connected disability under subsection (d) of this section, shall receive from said pension fund an annual pension, payable monthly, in an amount equal to fifty (50) per cent of his average total annual earnings of his five (5) highest years of earnings during the ten (10) years or less immediately preceding his retirement. 
(f)  The term "child" or "children" as it is used in this section and in said Special Act Number 531 and all amendments thereto, shall mean the child or children born, before or after the death of a fire department member of said pension fund, to such member and his wife to whom he was married prior to his death, if an active member at the time of his death, and/or the child or children who was or were legally adopted by such member and such wife prior to the date of his death, and prior to the date of his retirement, if retired. 
(g)  Benefits which are payable from said pension fund on account of or to each child of a member of said pension fund, in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and the aforesaid Special Act Number 531 and amendments thereto, shall be paid on account of or to each such child until he or she reaches eighteen (18) years of age, except that such benefits shall be paid on account of or to such child, regardless of age, if such child is physically or mentally disabled to the extent that he or she is unable to secure gainful employment, subject to certification of the existence of such disability by the medical examiners appointed by the pension board. 
(h)  The survivors of each such member of said pension fund who has completed five (5) or more years of continuous service with the fire department shall receive nonservice connected survivor benefits as follows: 
(1)  If such member, while in active service, dies as the result of causes which are not related to his employment with the fire department, his widow, if she has no children for whom benefits are payable, shall receive, until her death or remarriage out of said pension fund an annual sum payable monthly, equal to twenty-five (25) per cent of the basic annual salary rate which he is receiving at the time of his death. If such member is survived by a widow and one child for whom benefits are payable in accordance with subsections (f) and (g) of this section, such widow shall receive, until her death or remarriage, out of said pension fund an annual sum, payable monthly, equal to thirty-five (35) per cent of the basic annual salary rate, which he is receiving at the time of his death. If such member is survived by a widow and two or more children for whom benefits are payable in accordance with subsections (f) and (g) of this section, such widow shall receive, until her death or her remarriage, out of said pension fund an annual sum, payable monthly, equal to forty-five (45) per cent of the basic annual salary rate which he is receiving at the time of his death. 
(2)  If such member, while retired, dies as the result of causes which are not related to his employment with the fire department, his widow, if she has no children for whom benefits are payable, shall receive, until her death or remarriage, out of said pension fund an annual sum, payable monthly, equal to fifty (50) per cent of the pension which he is receiving at the time of his death. If such member is survived by a widow and one child for whom benefits are payable in accordance with subsections (f) and (g) of this section, such widow shall receive, until her death or remarriage, out of said pension fund an annual sum, payable monthly, equal to seventy (70) per cent of the pension which he is receiving at the time of his death. If such member is survived by a widow and two or more children for whom benefits are payable in accordance with subsections (f) and (g) of this section, such widow shall receive, until her death or remarriage, out of said pension fund an annual sum, payable monthly, equal to ninety (90) per cent of the pension which he is receiving at the time of his death. 
(3)  In any of the above cases, upon the death of such a widow, before or after remarriage, the pension board may cause to be paid monthly, to the legally appointed guardian of the child or children of such widow for whom or to whom benefits are payable in accordance with subsections (f) and (g) of this section, for the use and benefit of such child or children, a sum or sums not exceeding in total the amount hereinbefore provided to be received by such widow, and may, from time to time, apportion such sums between such children as it may deem best, provided as each child reaches the age or the condition when he or she no longer qualifies for benefits in accordance with said subsections (f) and (g), the payment to or for such child shall cease. 
(i)  No benefits shall be paid from said pension fund under subsections (b) and (e) of this section which exceed one hundred (100) per cent of the employee's average total annual earnings of his highest five (5) years of earnings during the ten (10) years immediately preceding his retirement. No benefits shall be paid from said pension fund under subsection (h) of this section which exceed one hundred (100) per cent of the basic annual salary rate which such member is receiving at the time of his retirement or death, as the case may be. 
(j)  The provisions of subsections (d) through and including (i) of this section, shall take effect on June 1, 1968. 
(k)  Effective July 1, 1969, each active fire department member of said pension fund shall contribute to said pension fund six (6) per cent of his total annual earnings. 
(l)  When used in this section, the term "basic annual salary rate of each member of said pension fund" is that annual salary rate which is set forth for such member in the contract between the City of New Haven and Local 825, International Association of Fire Fighters, AFL-CIO, or if such member's basic annual salary is not set forth or controlled by such contract at the time of his death, the basic annual salary rate which he is actually receiving at the time of his death, shall be considered as his basic annual rate for purposes of this section. 
(m)  All provisions of said Special Act Number 531 and all amendments thereto which are not in conflict with the provisions of this section shall remain in full force and effect. 
(n)  This section shall become effective upon its passage. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Amd. of 9-29-76) 
Editor's note— An ordinance enacted Dec. 2, 1968, approved by the mayor on December 4, 1968, operative and in effect December 19, 1968, amended Special Act No. 531 of 1957 by adding thereto a new section designated "10", which the editors have codified as § 209 of this compilation.  
Sec. 210. - Vested rights of fire department personnel after ten or more years of continuous service. 
In the event of the discontinuance of employment, after ten or more years of continuous service, any member of the fire department shall retain full vested rights to receive a monthly pension commencing on the date when he would otherwise have completed twenty-five (25) years of continuous service, but not prior to his attainment of age forty-six (46), conditioned upon the member leaving his contributions in the pension fund. The amount of his pension will be determined by the regular formula, provided in section 209, as it may be amended from time to time, based on his years of continuous active service as a contributing member of the fund. The regular provisions for survivorship benefits, as contained in section 209, will apply to the vested pension, namely, fifty (50) per cent continuance to a widow alone, seventy (70) per cent to a widow and one child, and ninety (90) per cent to a widow and two (2) or more children, but such payments will be deferred if death occurs prior to the normal commencement date for the vested pension. No disability benefits are provided for vested members. "Continuous service," for the purposes of determining eligibility for vesting under this provision, shall mean uninterrupted service or employment, but absence from service or employment for any reason followed by reinstatement within one year thereafter shall not be considered as breaking the continuity of the service. The effective date of this vesting provision is July 1, 1976. 
(Amd. of 9-29-76)  
Secs. 211—224. - Reserved. 
Note— See editor's note following § 194.  
ARTICLE XII. - RETIREMENT OF TEACHERS  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 225. - Teachers credited for military service. 
Any member of the teachers' retirement association who served or is serving in the armed forces, who, immediately prior to such service, was employed in the public schools of the city of Hartford or the city of New Haven and who reenters such employment in such city upon discharge from the armed forces, shall be credited for retirement purposes with the period of such service. The board of education of such city shall pay to the annuity fund the amounts due from such member for such period. If any such member dies prior to the effective date of his retirement, or prior to the date on which the co-participant option becomes effective, as provided in section 10-167 of the general statutes, any amounts paid by the board of education of such city for the benefit of such member shall be used to finance death benefits to his survivors payable under section 10-168 of the 1967 supplement to the general statutes. Any board of education funds not used in the financing of survivorship benefits or retirement allowances shall be returned to the board of education of such city.  
Sec. 226. - Teachers re-entering teaching service after resignation or leave of absence—Payments to state retirement system by city required. 
In case a teacher who has taught in the public schools in the city of New Haven prior to September 1, 1943, and who has either resigned prior to said date or been granted a leave of absence prior to said date by the board of education and so recorded in the minutes of said board and which leave of absence existed on or after said date of September 1, 1943, but expired on or before September 2, 1947, and who has reentered or shall re-enter teaching in the said public schools of said city with the approval of said board of education in accordance with its rules and regulations, said city shall pay to the teachers' retirement board, as provided in chapter 78 of the general statutes, [20] a sum equal to the sum that would give such teacher a service credit for years of public school service rendered in said city prior to September 1, 1943, provided said teacher shall have made payments to the teachers' retirement system of said city up to the time of his resignation or leave of absence. 
(Special Laws 1949, Act No. 197, § 1; Special Laws 1951, Act No. 490, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 226 above is the same as § 251 of the 1952 Revised Charter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Note— Ch. 78 of the 1949 General Statutes appears as §§ 10-160—10-183 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Sec. 227. - Same—Amortization payment of city for. 
Any payments required to be made by the city of New Haven under section 1 hereof [section 226 of this compilation] shall be amortized with the net amount specified in section 3 of number 340 of the special acts of 1947 [section 242 of this compilation] at such times and in such amounts as the teachers' retirement board shall require; and section 4 of said act [section 243 of this compilation], including its provisions as to regular interest, shall apply to any difference between credits to the account of any teacher because of the provisions of section 1 hereof [section 226 of this compilation] and the total assessments paid by him to the teachers' retirement system of said city. 
(Special Laws 1949, Act No. 197, § 2)  
Sec. 228. - Same—Refund of personal payments to. 
Any teacher to whom this act [sections 226 through 228 of this compilation] applies and who shall have made personal payments to obtain service credit with the teachers' retirement board for years of public school service rendered in said city shall have said payments refunded to him with regular interest by said board. 
(Special Laws 1949, Act No. 197, § 3)  
Sec. 229. - Retirement of teachers in Westville district at time of consolidation. 
(1)  Any teacher who was employed by the Westville school district at the time of the consolidation of the Westville school district and the New Haven city school district of the city of New Haven and who was at that time a member of the state retirement association for teachers and entitled to retirement under the retirement system of the state, shall continue to be a member of said state association and upon payment of any assessment or dues which may be due and unpaid, shall become entitled to retirement under said state system with enjoyment of all benefits under said state system to the same extent as if said Westville school district had not been abolished. 
(2)  Any teacher who was employed by the Westville school district at the time of said consolidation and who was at that time a member in good standing of said state teachers' retirement association and who was not then entitled to be retired, and who is employed in the schools of the New Haven city school district of the city of New Haven, may elect, prior to July 14, 1923, to share in the benefits of the state teachers' association or the New Haven teachers' retirement fund, by a written notice to both the secretary of the teachers' retirement board and the secretary of the board of education of New Haven. 
(3)  Any teacher electing to share in the benefits of the New Haven teachers' retirement fund shall, on or before September 1, 1923, pay to the secretary of the board of education of the city of New Haven, such sum as will be necessary to equal the assessments he would have paid had he been a teacher in the New Haven school district of the city of New Haven, during the time he was teaching in the Westville school district, with six per centum interest thereon. 
(4)  Any teacher electing to continue as a member of the state teachers' retirement association shall, on or before September 1, 1923, pay to the Secretary of the teachers' retirement board the sum necessary for membership in the association. 
(5)  The secretaries of the respective boards are authorized to compute and adjust the payments necessary to carry out the provisions of this act [section]. 
(Special Laws 1923, Act No. 336, §§ 1—5) 
Editor's note— The Westville school district was consolidated into the city by Special Laws 1921, Act No. 436, § 5.  
Secs. 230—239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - 1947 ACT 
 
Sec. 240. - All teachers declared subject to Ch. 55 of general statutes, not subject to city teachers' retirement system. 
On and after September 1, 1947, all teachers employed in the city of New Haven and not then subject to the provisions of chapter 55 of the general statutes, [21] as amended, hereinafter called "said chapter", to which reference is hereby made for the meaning of words herein used which are defined in said chapter, shall become and be subject thereto with the same force and effect and with the same privileges and rights, except as provided in the second sentence in section 4 hereof [section 243 of this compilation], as if they had become subject thereto on the day they were first employed as teachers by said city, or on September 1, 1917, whichever day is later, and shall thereupon cease to be subject to the teachers' retirement system of said city. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 1) 
Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Note— Ch. 55 of the 1930 General Statutes as amended appears as §§ 10-160—10-183, Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Sec. 241. - City to continue existing payments under city system. 
Said city shall continue to be liable for the payment of annuities to all who are receiving annuities on September 1, 1947, pursuant to the teachers' retirement system of said city, and shall retain, as a source of such payments and as a trust fund to be invested in accordance with the laws relating to the investment of trust funds, such portion of the teachers' retirement fund established by number 507 of the special acts of 1943, as shall be determined by a qualified actuary to be necessary for such purpose. Said city may retain and use for general purposes any part of said portion that may remain after discharge of all annuities. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 2) 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, which was an amendment to the 1911 retirement act, has been incorporated into Division 3 of this Article. Section 241 above is the same as § 250 of the 1952 Revised Charter.  
Sec. 242. - Balance in city fund to be paid to state. 
Said city shall pay to the retirement board on September 1, 1947, any balance in said teachers' retirement fund over and above such portion retained as aforesaid, and shall pay to said board an amount equal to the total assessments, with regular interest thereon to September 1, 1947, that would have been paid by such teachers becoming subject to said chapter had they joined the retirement association on the day they were first employed as teachers by said city, or on September 1, 1917, whichever day is later, less such amount as shall have been paid to said board on September 1, 1947, as aforesaid, such net amount to be amortized in annual installments, including regular interest to the date of final payment and beginning on September 1, 1948. The number of such annual installments shall be determined by the teachers' retirement board. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 3)  
Sec. 243. - Retirement board ordered to credit accounts of transferred teachers. 
As of September 1, 1947, the retirement board shall credit the account of each teacher transferred hereby from the teachers' retirement system of said city to the retirement system provided for by said chapter, with the amount necessary to transfer him. Any difference between the amount so credited and the total assessments paid by him to said city, with regular interest thereon, shall be credited in reduction of the total remaining indebtedness to the retirement board by said city if and when such teacher dies or for any other reason withdraws from the retirement association. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 4)  
Sec. 244. - Interpretation of "amount contributed" by teachers. 
For all purposes of section 247g of the 1943 supplement to the general statutes, [22] the amount contributed by any teacher transferred hereby shall be deemed to be the sum of the retirement assessments paid by him to said city and the assessments paid by him as provided in said chapter, both with regular interest. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 5) 
Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Note— Section 247g of the 1943 Supplement to the General Statutes appears as § 10-176 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Sec. 245. - Transfer of records from city to state. 
All New Haven teaching, salary and retirement deduction records, including check registers and cancelled checks affecting teachers, shall be transferred by New Haven to the teachers' retirement board on or before September 1, 1947. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 8)  
Sec. 246. - Appropriation to carry out retirement act. 
The sum of four hundred sixty-nine thousand eight hundred forty-eight dollars is appropriated to carry out the provisions of this act. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 9)  
Sec. 247. - 1911 act repealed. 
Effective September 1, 1947, sections 1, 3 to 10, inclusive, and 13 of number 340 of the special acts of 1911, as amended, are repealed. 
(Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 7) 
Editor's note— The provisions of §§ 1, 3—10, and 13 of Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, have been included as §§ 260, 261—268 and 271 of this compilation. Sections 11 and 12, which have not been repealed, appear as §§ 269 and 270.  
Secs. 248—259. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - 1911 ACT[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Division 3, §§ 260—272 is derived from Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, as amended. Section 2 of that act was repealed by Special Laws 1927, Act No. 247, § 2, and is not included in this compilation. Sections 1, 3—10 and 13, which appear as §§ 260, 261—268 and 271 were repealed by Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 7, which is codified herein as § 247. Though repealed, these 1911 provisions are included at the request of the city since the 1947 act makes frequent reference to them, and because the city remains liable for certain payments under the 1911 act as specified in § 241 of this compilation. 
 
Sec. 260. - Fund established; divided into two parts. 
There shall be a fund to be known as the "Teachers' Retirement Fund" for the benefit of the teachers of the public day schools of the city of New Haven. Said fund shall consist of two parts: First, the permanent fund, and second, the operating or general fund. The permanent fund shall consist of all assets of the teachers' retirement fund now in the custody of the sinking fund commission as trustee, or its authorized agent, with all additions made to the permanent fund annually, which additions shall be so made by transfer of such unexpended balances as may be in the general fund as of August thirty-first each year, provided there shall always be retained in said fund as of said day a balance not less than twenty-five thousand dollars: 
(1)  All interest accruals of the permanent fund shall be a part of the general fund. 
(2)  All appropriations, gifts or bequests made to the teachers' retirement fund from public or private sources for the purposes for which said retirement fund is established shall be a part of said general fund. 
(3)  For the years beginning January 1, 1944, and January 1, 1945, the city of New Haven shall make an appropriation of, and shall pay into the general fund, a sum equivalent to two and one-half per cent of the actuarial deficit of the teachers' retirement fund as established in the supplementary actuarial report dated April 17, 1943, plus an amount equal to the difference between a yield of two and one-half per cent on the permanent fund as of August 31, 1942, and its actual earned income if less than two and one-half per cent, plus fifteen hundred dollars for the operating expenses of the general fund. Annually thereafter, for a period of thirty years, the city shall appropriate and shall pay into the general fund such proportional part of the actuarial deficit existing in May of each such year as will, by certification of a qualified actuary, amortize such actuarial deficit of the teachers' retirement fund within the years then remaining of said thirty-year period. For the purpose of estimating the actuarial deficit, a triennial survey of said fund shall be made by a qualified actuary, appointed for the purpose of recalculating the required annual amortization payment. Said annual payment shall be certified to by the actuary in May each year for inclusion in the annual budget of the board of education. The actuary shall be paid from the general fund. 
(4)  For the years beginning January 1, 1944, and January 1, 1945, the city shall make an appropriation of and shall pay into the general fund a sum equivalent to not less than one-half the amount of net salary savings of the members of said fund as estimated and appropriated by the board of finance and the board of aldermen each year in the city budget, which estimates and appropriations shall be based on the actual experience of the immediately preceding five years. "Net salary savings", as used in this section, shall mean the net savings on any part of the appropriated salary of any teacher not paid to such teacher by reason of resignation, illness or absence, or for any other reason. 
(5)  Beginning January 1, 1944, an assessment of five per cent of the annual salaries of all teachers, which assessment shall, during the school year, be retained from the salaries of such teachers in equal monthly amounts; provided the amount deducted from any salary shall not exceed one hundred and twenty dollars in any year. 
(6)  In any year in which the general fund is insufficient to meet the disbursements therefrom provided for in this act [division], a transfer shall be made to the general fund from the permanent fund of an amount necessary to make good such deficiency. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 1; Special Laws 1927, Act No. 247, § 1; Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 1)  
Sec. 261. - Administration of fund. 
(1)  The city treasurer shall be treasurer of said fund, except as hereinafter provided. The board of education and the sinking fund commission of the city of New Haven shall be trustees of said fund, and the sinking fund commission shall have charge of the investment of the money of said fund and the custody of its securities and the handling of its assets, and may invest and reinvest the same in accordance with the laws relating to the investment of trust funds. The trustees may, at any time, designate an incorporated bank or trust company doing business in the city of New Haven to be, for such period as the trustees may deem to be wise, the financial agent of said trustees. Said trustees shall transmit a written certificate of such designation to the city clerk, and, when the board of finance shall have approved such designation and the bank or trust company so designated shall have signified to the city clerk in writing its acceptance thereof, such bank or trust company shall be, until otherwise ordered by the trustees, the receiving and disbursing agent of said trustees, and the trustees may confide to said bank or trust company the custody and possession of all moneys and securities, or of such of them as the trustees may deem wise, held for and on account of said trustees. For the services so to be performed, such compensation as is reasonable may be allowed and approved by the trustees to the bank or trust company so designated and may be a charge against the income of the permanent fund without specific appropriation therefor. The trustees shall, in the month of September in each year, and oftener if they deem it advisable, inspect and examine the securities and funds in the custody and possession of its treasurer or of any bank or trust company so designated. Upon the designation by said trustees of such financial agent, and when such financial agent shall have qualified as such as herein provided, the treasurer of the city of New Haven shall, for the time being, cease to be treasurer of said fund and his powers and duties as treasurer of said fund shall be suspended, and such powers and duties shall be revived only during intervals when there shall be no designated and qualified financial agent of the trustees, as herein provided. 
(2)  All annuities payable under the provisions of this act shall be paid from the general fund as defined in section one [section 260 of this compilation] of this act. All orders on said fund shall be signed by the secretary or, in case of his absence or incapacity, by the assistant secretary, and counter-signed by a member of the finance committee of the board of education of said city. 
(3)  The trustees of the retirement fund shall have power, in their discretion, to authorize the expenditure from the general fund of such a sum as it may deem necessary for clerical and other expenses incident to the administration of said fund, payment therefrom to be made on vouchers audited and approved by the board of finance of the city of New Haven in the manner prescribed by section forty-two of the charter of said city. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 3; Special Laws 1927, Act No. 247, §§ 4—7; Special Laws 1931, Act No. 231, § 1; Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 2) 
Editor's note— Section 42 of the 1899 charter, Special Laws 1899, Act No. 467, is identical with § 60 of the 1952 Revised Charter and has been omitted from this compilation.  
Sec. 262. - Membership of board of retirement. 
Two members of the board of education, to be chosen annually by said board at its organization meeting, one member of the board of aldermen, to be elected by the board of aldermen, the treasurer of the city of New Haven and three teachers chosen by the teachers of the public schools of New Haven who are subject to this act [division] shall constitute a board of retirement. The members of said board representing the teachers shall be first chosen on or before January 15, 1944, by said teachers for one year, and thereafter for two years; the first election for the selection of said members shall be conducted by said board of education, and each subsequent election shall be conducted by a committee appointed by the board of retirement, under such rules and regulations as said committee shall determine. Said committee shall have power to conduct special elections to fill any vacancy occurring in the teachers' representation on said board. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 4; Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 3)  
Sec. 263. - Teachers eligible for retirement. 
(1)  Upon a majority vote of the board of retirement and a majority vote of the board of education, any teacher who has taught in public day schools for a period of thirty years, of which period the last twenty years shall have been in said public day schools of the New Haven city school district, shall be placed on the retired list. 
(2)  Any teacher of the public day schools of the New Haven city school district who has reached the age of sixty years or over, and who has taught for a period of not less than thirty years, of which period the last twenty years shall have been in the public day schools of the New Haven city school district, shall be placed on the retired list, upon thirty days' notice to said board of retirement, given by said teacher, stating his or her desire to be placed on said retired list. If said application shall be approved by a majority vote of said board of retirement and a like vote of said board of education, the applicant shall be placed on the retired list. 
(3)  Any teacher who has taught in the public day schools of the New Haven city school district for a period of forty years previous to the date when this act [division] becomes operative shall, upon recommendation by a majority vote of the board of retirement and a majority vote of the board of education, be placed upon the retired list. 
No teacher shall be prevented from obtaining the benefits awarded under this section, by reason of his or her military or naval service during the last world war, or by reason of any future military or naval service for the United States of America. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 5; Special Laws 1927, Act No. 247, § 8; Special Laws 1941, Act No. 227)  
Sec. 264. - Retirement for disability. 
(1)  The board of retirement shall annually appoint three physicians or surgeons of the city of New Haven, of at least ten years active practice, who shall be known as the board of examiners, who shall serve without pay, and who shall, upon request of the board of education or the board of retirement, make such examinations as may be called for under the terms of this section and report their finding, in writing, to the board making such request. 
(2)  On the recommendation of a majority vote of said board of retirement, said board of education shall have power, by a majority vote of all of its members, to place on the disability list for the remainder of his or her life, or any part thereof, any teacher of the public day schools of the New Haven city school district who is found by said board of examiners to be mentally or physically incapacitated for the performance of duty, and who has been engaged in the work of teaching for a period of at least fifteen years, the last ten of which shall have been in the public day schools of the New Haven city school district. In no case shall a teacher be placed on the disability list until said board of examiners shall have filed a report, in writing, within thirty days from the date of examination, to the effect that said teacher has refused to submit to an examination or, after examination, if found by the board of examiners to be physically or mentally unfitted for further service in the day schools of New Haven. 
(3)  Any teacher of the public day schools of the New Haven city school district who has been engaged in teaching for a period of at least fifteen years, the last ten of which shall have been in said public day schools of the New Haven city school district, shall have the right to apply to the board of retirement to be placed on the disability list on the ground that he or she is mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty as a teacher. Any applicant for retirement on said ground of disability shall submit to a proper medical examination by said board of examiners before his or her application shall be considered. The board of education may, by a majority vote, upon recommendation by a majority vote of said board of retirement, place said teacher on the disability list. 
(4)  Nothing in this act [division] shall be construed as prohibiting the board of retirement from recommending, by a majority vote, to the board of education that the disability of a teacher retired under this section shall be declared ended. Said board of education may, by a majority vote, on such recommendation of said board of retirement, declare ended the disability of a teacher retired under the terms of this section, and upon delivery to said teacher of a written offer of reappointment to a position as a teacher equal in remuneration to the one previously held by said teacher, the payment of the annuity of such teacher under this disability clause shall be discontinued. 
(5)  Nothing in this act [Division] shall be construed as prohibiting a teacher who has been placed on the disability list from applying, once each year, to be reinstated to active duty as a teacher. On recommendation by a majority vote of the board of retirement, after an examination of said applicant by the board of examiners, the board of education may, by a majority vote, restore said teacher to active duty, and the disability annuity shall cease on the day that said teacher resumes his or her work as a teacher. 
(6)  In no case, however, shall the disability provided for in subsections (2) and (3) of this section be declared ended or finished until an examination has been made by said board of examiners or the teacher in question has refused to be so examined, and said board of examiners shall have certified, by a majority vote, either to said teacher's refusal to be examined, or that, after such examination, said teacher is found to be physically and mentally fitted for further service in the public day schools of the New Haven city school district. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to ordinary cases of temporary disability. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 6)  
Sec. 265. - Amount of annuities. 
(1)  The annuity paid to any teacher regularly placed on the retired list for the remainder of his or her life shall be one-half of his or her average annual salary for the five years last previous to the date of his or her retirement; provided such annuity shall be not less than eight hundred nor more than twelve hundred dollars per annum. Such annuity shall be payable to such teacher in monthly installments during the school year. The provisions of this section shall apply both to teachers on said retired list and to teachers to be placed on said retired list. 
(2)  Any teacher regularly placed on the disability list shall receive an annuity the amount of which shall be one-thirtieth part of the total annuity provided for in subdivision (1) of this section, for each year of service of said teacher, not exceding thirty years. 
(3)  No annuity shall be paid under the provisions of this act [Division], except as provided in subdivision (3) of section five [section 243(3) of this compilation], unless the retiring teacher shall have first paid into the retirement fund such sum or sums as shall make his or her total payments equal to the amount of the annuity paid for the first year; but should any retiring teacher be unable to pay the full amount of said sum before receiving an annuity, the board of trustees shall, in paying the annuity of such teacher, withhold, from each monthly payment, twenty per centum thereof until the full amount hereinbefore provided for shall have been so contributed to the fund. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 7; Special Laws 1927, Act No. 247, §§ 9, 10)  
Sec. 266. - Refunds for dismissal, resignation, death. 
Teachers who are dismissed from school employment shall have refunded to them, without interest as to contributions made before January 1, 1944, but with interest at two per cent per annum as to contributions or assessments made on or after said day, the total amounts which they have contributed to said retirement fund. Any teacher terminating school employment by resignation shall have refunded all assessments, with interest at two per cent per annum, paid on or after January 1, 1944. Any member of said fund who shall die while in service of the department or while on leave of absence or before receiving the first installment benefit under the terms of this act [Division] shall have refunded to his estate, or to such person as shall have been nominated by written designation, executed and filed prior to death, with the secretary of the board of education, all assessments paid, with interest at two per cent per annum, on or after January 1, 1944. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 8; Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 4)  
Sec. 267. - Definition of "teachers," "public day schools," "majority." 
The term "teacher" as used in this act [Division] shall include all teachers, the superintendent of schools, and the members of the supervising staff regularly appointed and employed in the public day schools of the city of New Haven by the board of education, whether on leave of absence or in service, prior to September 1, 1943. The public day schools of the city shall be deemed to be all public day schools maintained wholly or in part by the city of New Haven. The term "majority" shall mean a majority of the entire membership of the board referred to. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 9; Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 5) 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 5, amended section 9 of the 1911 teacher's retirement act to read as set out in § 267 above. Previously, said § 9 had provided that nothing in the act should be construed as preventing the board of education from discontinuing employment, nor as creating any right to receive the annuity until placed on the retired or disability list, and further provided that the acceptance of employment should be considered as subject to the act and authorizing deductions from salary pursuant thereto.  
Sec. 268. - Definition of "teachers," "public day schools," "majority." 
The term "teacher" as used in this act [Division] shall include all teachers regularly appointed and employed in the public day schools, by the board of education, including the superintendent of schools and the members of the supervising staff. The public day schools of the New Haven city school district shall be deemed to be all public day schools maintained wholly or in part by the New Haven city school district. The term "majority" shall mean a majority of the entire membership of the board referred to. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 10) 
Editor's note— Section 268 above is derived from § 10 of Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340. Apparently, said section has been superseded by the enactment of Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 5, which appears as § 267 of this compilation, but it has been included herein because never expressly repealed.  
Sec. 269. - Interest in 1911 retirement fund declared non-assignable, exempt from levy. 
Any pledge, mortgage sale, assignment, or transfer of, or of any right, claim, or interest in, said retirement fund or in any annuity granted under the provisions of this act [Division] shall be void and said retirement fund and all said annuities shall be exempt from attachment, levy, and sale, and from all legal process, at law or in equity, to sequester the same by or in behalf of any creditor of any person having an interest in said fund or entitled to any such annuity. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 11)  
Sec. 270. - Teachers employed after 1943 subject to state retirement system. 
On and after September 1, 1943, all new employments of teachers of the public day schools of the city of New Haven shall be made subject to the provisions of the state teacher's retirement act. Beginning September 1, 1947, the city of New Haven shall be subject to the provisions of the state teacher's retirement act as to teachers transferred from the teachers' retirement system of said city to the retirement system provided by said act and shall be exempt from the provisions of said act as to all who are receiving annuities on said day pursuant to the teachers' retirement system of said city; and any money due to said city under the provisions of section 1042 of the general statutes [24] shall be paid into the portion then remaining of the teachers' retirement fund established by number 507 of the special acts of 1943. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 12; Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, § 6; Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 6) 
Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Special Laws 1947, Act No. 340, § 6, effective September 1, 1947, amended Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 12, as previously amended, to read as set out in § 270 above. Section 270 above is the same as § 249 of the 1952 Revised Charter. Special Laws 1943, Act No. 507, which is referred to in the last sentence above, was an amendment to the 1911 act, and its provisions have been incorporated into this division. 
State Law reference— Section 1042 of the 1930 general statutes, as amended, appears as § 10-181 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Sec. 271. - Annual reports required. 
In the month of September, 1912, and annually thereafter during the month of September, the board of retirement shall file an annual report, showing the financial condition of the teachers' retirement fund, with the board of aldermen, which report shall be printed in the city year book of the city of New Haven. 
(Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, § 13)  
Sec. 272. - Applicability of 1911 teachers' retirement act. 
The provisions of an act amending the charter of the city of New Haven and establishing a teachers' retirement fund, approved July 18, 1911, [25] shall apply to all teachers of the public day schools of the city of New Haven. 
(Special Laws 1925, Act No. 468, § 5) 
Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note— The act referred to in this section is Special Laws 1911, Act No. 340, which comprises this division, §§ 260—272. 
 
ARTICLE XIII. - SELF INSURANCE[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Article XIII contains the provisions of Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, §§ 1—12, as amended. These provisions do not appear in the 1952 Revised Charter. 
 
Sec. 273. - Fund established; purposes, management. 
(1)  There shall be established in the city of New Haven a reserve fund for the city's self-insurance plan, the purpose of which shall be to equitably provide for the payment of claims against the city arising out of its compensation and public liability. 
(2)  Said fund shall be managed and controlled by the mayor and the controller of said city, subject to the conditions imposed by this article or the city ordinances. 
(3)  The treasurer of said city shall be the treasurer of said fund and shall receive no additional compensation for his duties other than the salary paid by said city to its treasurer. 
(4)  The clerk of said fund shall be designated by the controller. 
(Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, §§ 1—4; Amd. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 274. - Treasurer's bond. 
The controller shall require the treasurer of said fund to furnish a suitable surety bond in an amount to be determined by the controller, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his official duties as such treasurer. The premium for such bond shall be paid by said city. 
(Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, § 5; Amd. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 275. - Investment of resources. 
The resources of said fund may only be invested in certificates of deposit with either national or state banks located in the City of New Haven or any other city within this state, cash deposits with mutual savings banks located in the city of New Haven or any other city in this state, obligations of the City of New Haven, of the State of Connecticut and of the United States of America. 
(Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, § 6)  
Sec. 276. - Assets included in fund. 
Said fund shall consist of all moneys that may, from time to time, be appropriated thereto and paid into it by the board of aldermen of said city, and there shall be added to said fund accumulations as follows: From the estimated receipts and disbursements as appropriated in the annual budget of said city: 
(a)  The unexpended balance of the appropriation for compensation awards; 
(b)  The unexpended balance of the appropriation for public liability awards; 
(c)  The unexpended balance which may be appropriated for reserve or stop-loss purposes and, in addition, any costs collected by the city of New Haven in actions relating to its public liability or compensation duties wherein said city is a defendant and all funds paid into the city in third party responsibility cases for injury to employees of the city to whom the city has paid compensation allowances, hospitalization charges or medical and incidental disbursements for disability arising out of and in the course of their employment, and 
(d)  Interest or income or accrual thereon upon deposits, investments or other proper uses of said fund. 
(Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, § 7; Amd. 7-6-93)  
Sec. 277. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 23, 1998, provided for the deletion of § 277, Reports by treasurer, derived from Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, § 8, as amended July 6, 1993.  
Sec. 278. - Payments permitted. 
Said fund shall be used pursuant to section 279 hereinafter for the payment of any judgment, compromise, adjustment, award, or settlement under a voluntary agreement of compensation, including but not limited to workers' compensation agreements, that may be entered into between the city of New Haven and a claimant which is based upon a claim causing compensable injury and which arose in and is chargeable to a year preceding the year of withdrawal; any judgment, compromise, adjustment, award, or settlement that may be entered into between the city of New Haven and a claimant which is based upon the city's public liability responsibility and under a claim which arose and is chargeable to a year preceding the withdrawal; the payment of compensation or public liability claims within the current year aggregating in damages an amount greater than remains in the general fund appropriations for such purposes; or for legal services, when such services shall be provided by persons other than the corporation counsel and his assistants and when such services shall be obtained pursuant to the charter and ordinances, and expert witness services engaged by the city upon the recommendation of the corporation counsel which the litigation settlement committee may deem an emergency or a necessity involved in the efficient and expeditious carrying out of the city's self-insurance plan. 
(Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, § 9; Special Laws 1937, Act No. 149; Amd. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 279. - Budget adoption; procedure for payment. 
An annual budget shall be prepared and adopted for the self-insurance fund in accord with and as required by the ordinances for other special revenue funds. Amendments to such budget as adopted may be made during the year upon recommendation of the mayor and approval of the board of aldermen. When the mayor or board of aldermen, acting pursuant to and in accord with this article and the charter or ordinances, shall approve the use of the fund or any portion thereof for any purpose for which said fund may be used under the provisions of this article, the clerk shall notify the controller to prepare an order pursuant to such vote and said clerk shall send to the treasurer of said fund a certified copy of such vote and notify the treasurer to deposit into the funds of the city treasury such funds as have been called for by such vote. 
The treasurer of said reserve fund shall honor no order drawn on him except pursuant to the provisions hereof. A certified copy of all resolutions providing for disbursements from the reserve fund shall be filed with the controller of the city of New Haven by the clerk of said fund. 
(Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, §§ 10, 11; Amd. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 280. - Authority of mayor to contract to implement article. 
The mayor, upon approval of the board of aldermen, may enter into any contract incidental to or necessary for the carrying out of the purposes of this article and under its plan of self-insurance. 
(Special Laws 1935, Act No. 331, § 12; Amd. of 7-6-93)  
Secs. 281—289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - TRAFFIC 
 
Sec. 290. - Appeals from orders of traffic authority in New Haven. 
Any provision of section 2530 of the general statutes [27] to the contrary notwithstanding, any person aggrieved by any order, rule or regulation made by any traffic authority under the provisions of chapter 112 of the general statutes, [28] relating to the establishment of through streets, the making of safety zones, the establishment of parking restrictions or the location of loading and unloading zones in the city of New Haven, or by the performance of any act pursuant to the provisions of said chapter relating to traffic regulation in said city, may appeal to the court of common pleas for New Haven county, which appeal shall be returnable to said court on the next return day or the next but one following the date of the action of tile traffic authority appealed from. Upon such hearing, such court shall determine whether the order, rule or regulation appealed from is reasonable, and shall thereupon sustain or revoke such order, rule or regulation. 
(Special Laws 1955, Act No. 546) 
Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Note— Section 2530 of the 1949 General Statutes as amended appears as § 14-313 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 

--- (28) --- 
Note— Ch. 112 of the 1949 General Statutes as amended appears as §§ 14-297—14-317 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
APPENDIX Table of Special Laws[1] 
Year 	Act No. 	Sec. 	Subject 	This Comp. 	Reason Omitted 
1899 	208 	1—8 	Permanent pavements 		Superseded by 1952 Charter 
	211 	1—11 	Sinking fund 		Abolished per 1952 § 67 
	467 	1 	Territorial limits 		Superseded 1952 § 2 
		2 	Incorporation 		Superseded 1952 § 1 
		3 	Wards 		Superseded 1921 Act No. 342 
		4 	Elections 		Superseded 1952 § 4 
		5 	Corrected lists 		Superseded § 9-171 Gen. Stats. 
		6 	Elections for certain offices 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		7 	Election of aldermen 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		8 	Election of councilmen 		Repealed 1901 Act No. 461, § 5 
		9 	Plurality to elect 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		10 	Mayor 		Superseded 1952 §§ 6, 9, 11 
		11 	Mayor's duties 		Superseded 1952 § 8 
		12 		§ 20 	
		13 		§ 21 	
		14 		§ 22 	
		15 	Corporation counsel 		Superseded 1952 § 13 
		16 	Counsel's duties 		Superseded 1952 § 14 
		17 		§ 23 	
		18 	Ass't counsel 		Superseded 1952 § 15 
		19 	Controller 		Superseded 1952 § 16 
		20—23 	Controller's duties 		Superseded 1952 § 17 
		24 	Controller's duties 		Superseded 1952 § 18 
		25 	Claims 		Superseded 1952 § 19 
		26 	Controller's bond 		Superseded 1952 § 20 
		27 	Audits 		Superseded 1952 § 21 
		28 	Treasurer 		Superseded 1952 § 22 
1899 	467 	29 	Depository 		Superseded 1952 § 23 
		30 	Paying orders 		Superseded 1952 § 24 
		31 	Collections 		Superseded 1952 § 26 
		32 	Delinquent taxes 		Superseded 1952 § 27 
		33 	Depositing receipts 		Superseded 1952 § 28 
		34 	Collector's bond 		Superseded 1952 § 28 
		35 	City clerk 		Superseded 1952 § 29 
		36 	Ass't. city clerk 		Repealed Ord. of 12-5-38 
		37 	Weights and measures 		Superseded 1952 § 37 
		38 	City sheriff 		Superseded 1952 § 30 
		39 	Mayor's secretary 		Superseded 1952 § 12 
		40 	Salaries 		Superseded 1952 § 296 
		41 	Board of finance 		Superseded 1952 § 58 
		42 	Board of finance 		Superseded 1952 § 60 
		43 	Board of finance appointments 		Superseded 1952 § 59 
		44 	Estimates 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
		45 	Borrowing 		Superseded 1952 § 65 
		46 	Police dept. created 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
		47 	Police duties 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
		48 	Police, Fire Commissions 		Superseded 1952 § 111 
		49 	Mayor to be police, fire commissioner 		Superseded 1952 § 111, 8(f) 
		50 	Police compensation 		Superseded 1952 § 112 
		51 	Police reserve 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
		52 	Polling places 		Superseded 1952 § 160 
		53 	Lamp inspection 		Obsolete 
		54 	Fire dept. created 		Superseded 1952 § 118 
		55 	Fire dept. duties 		Superseded 1952 §§ 118—120 
1899 	467 	56 	Fire commissioners 		Superseded 1952§ 120 
		57 	Fire marshal 		Superseded 1952 § 121 
		58 	Fire alarms 		Obsolete 
		59 	Duties of police, fire commissioners 		Superseded 1952 § 122 
		60 	Police, fire chiefs 		Superseded 1952 § 123 
		61 		59 	
		62 	Ords. declared effective 		Superseded 1952 § 125 
		63 	Police, fire commissioners 		Superseded 1952 § 126 
		64 	Police fire appointments 		Superseded 1952 § 127 
		65 	Removal of police, fire personnel 		Superseded 1952 § 128 
		66—68 		180—182 	
		69 		183—185, 187 	
		70 	Police, fire retirement 		Repealed 1929 Act No. 435, § 4 
		71 		189 	
		72 		188 	
		73 	Public works dept. 		Superseded 1952 § 82 
		74 	Public works director 		Superseded 1952 § 88 
		75 	Public works appointments 		Superseded 1952 § 90 
		76 	Public works bureaus 		Superseded 1952 § 91 
		77 	Public works clerical assistance 		Superseded 1952 § 104 
		78 	Public works projects 		Superseded 1952 §§ 92, 93 
		79 	Notice of public works 		Superseded 1952 § 94 
		80 	Bureau of compensation 		Superseded 1952 § 95 
		81 	Accepting layouts; assessments 		Superseded 1952 § 96 
		82 	Streets, sidewalks 		Superseded 1952 § 99 
		83 	Assessment liens 		Superseded 1952 § 100 
1899 	467 	84 	Joint ownership of assessed property 		Superseded 1952 § 101 
		85 	Appeals from assessments 		Superseded 1952 § 102 
		86 	Park department 		Superseded 1952 § 130 
		87 	Park commission 		Superseded 1952 § 131 
		88 	Park commission duties 		Superseded 1952 § 134 
		89 	Parks tax exempt 		Superseded 1952 § 136 
		90 	Park property 		Superseded 1952 §§ 134, 137 
		91 	Park employees 		Superseded 1952 § 135 
		92 	Park appropriations 		Superseded 1952 § 138 
		93 	Department of Health 		Superseded 1952 § 144 
		94 	Board of Health 		Superseded 1952 §§ 146—148 
		95 	Health officer 		Superseded 1952 § 147 
		96 	Health rules 		Superseded 1952 § 150 
		97 	Health emergencies 		Superseded 1952 § 149 
		98 	Library 		Superseded 1952 § 151 
		99 	Library 		Superseded 1952 § 151 
		100 	Library directors 		Superseded 1952 §§ 151, 155 
		101 	Library employees 		Superseded 1952 § 151 
		102 	Library finance 		Superseded 1952 §§ 152—154 
		103 	Use of library 		Superseded 1952 § 155 
		104 	Department of education 		Superseded 1952 § 185 
		105 	Board of education 		Superseded 1952 §§ 185—186 
		106 	School personnel 		Superseded 1952 §§ 189, 193 
		107 	Superintendent of school 		Superseded 1952 § 189 
		108 	School funds 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
		109 	School budgets 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
1899 	467 	110 	School appropriations 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
		111 	Authority of board of education 		Repealed 1931 Act No. 491, § 2 
		112 	Reports of board of education 		Superseded 1952 § 187 
		113 	School districts 		Superseded 1952 § 185 
		114 	School property 		Superseded 1952 § 192 
		115 	Transfer of assets to Board of Education 		Not prospective 
		116 	Westville, South school districts 		Obsolete 
		117 	Civil service board 		Superseded 1952 § 201 
		118 	Duties of civil service board 		Superseded 1952 § 202 
		119 	Appointment, removal under civil service 		Superseded 1952 § 204 
		120 	Unlawful appointments 		Superseded 1952 § 205 
		121 	Civil service penalty 		Superseded 1952 § 206 
		122 	President, secretary of Civil Service Board 		Superseded 1952 § 207 
		123 	Duties of civil service secretary 		Superseded 1952 § 207 
		124 	Notice of civil service examinations 		Superseded 1952 § 207(e) 
		125 	Aldermen 		Superseded 1952 § 38 
		126 	Appointments by aldermen 		Superseded 1952 § 39 
		128 	Quorum, etc., for aldermen 		Superseded 1952 § 41 
		129 	Ordinance procedure 		Superseded 1952 § 42 
		130 	Appointments to be by voice vote 		Superseded 1952 § 44 
		131 	Authority to subpoena, compel testimony 		Superseded 1952 § 45 
		132 	Improvements, excavations 		Superseded 1952 § 46 
		133 	Drainage, sewage 		Superseded 1952 § 47 
1899 	467 	134 	Railroad bridges 		Superseded 1952 § 48 
		135 	Eminent domain 		Superseded 1952 § 49 
		136 	Street sprinkling 		Obsolete 
		137 	Power of aldermen 		Superseded 1952 § 50 
		138 	Ordinance enforcement 		Superseded 1952 § 55 
		139—143 	Removal of officers 		Superseded 1952 §§ 233—243 
		144 	Self-incrimination 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959, P.A. No. 28 
		145 	Term of officers 		Superseded 1952 § 175 
		146 	Qualifications for officers 		Superseded 1952 § 176 
		147 	Nominations 		Superseded 1952 § 177 
		148 	Departmental estimates 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
		149 	Vacancies 		Superseded 1952 § 178 
		150 	Tax due date 		Superseded 1952 § 293 
		151 	Interest on liens 		Superseded 1952 § 293 
		152 	Oath 		Superseded 1952 § 179 
		153 	Officers dealing with city 		Superseded 1952 § 180 
		154 	Improvements prohibited unless funds appropriated 		Superseded 1952 § 63 
		155 	Officers bonds 		Superseded 1952 § 181 
		156 	Annual reports 		Superseded 1952 § 79 
		157 	Clerical assistance 		Obsolete 
		158 	Annual reports 		Obsolete 
		159 	Sinking fund treasurer, agent 		Superseded 1952 § 67 
		160 	Surrender of Books 		Superseded 1952 § 175 
1899 	467 	161 	Holding more than one office prohibited 		Obsolete 
		162 	Authority to accept gifts, trusts 		Superseded § 7-148 Gen. Stats. 
		163 	Accepting gratuities 		Obsolete 
		164—196 	City Court 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P.A. No. 28 
		197 	Arrest power 		Superseded 1952 § 109; § 6-49 Gen. Stats. 
		198 	General police powers 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
					Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. 
		199 	Repeals inconsistent city court acts 		No. 28 
		200 	Highways, paupers 		Obsolete 
		201 	Welfare 		Superseded 1952 § 105 
		202 	Welfare board 		Superseded 1952 §§ 107—108 
		203 	Welfare budgets 		Obsolete 
		204 	Springside farm 		Superseded 1952 § 106 
		205 	Welfare director 		Superseded 1952 § 106 
		206 	Welfare duties of town 		Superseded 1952 § 106 
		207 	Town Clerk 		Superseded 1952 §§ 31—33 
		208 	Vital statistics 		Superseded 1952 §§ 34—35 
		209 	Town elections 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		210 	Elections for particular offices 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		211 	Board of assessors 		Superseded 1952 § 86 
		212 	Board of relief 		Superseded 1952 § 68 
		213 	Removal of officers 		Superseded 1952 §§ 234—235 
		214 	Appointment of town officers 		Superseded 1952 §§ 31—33, 156—160 
		215 	Town assets 		Obsolete 
		216— 	Wards 		Superseded 1921 Act No. 342 
1901 	467 	218 			
		219 	Effect of charter on Town 		Obsolete 
		220 	Town meetings 		Obsolete 
		221 	Ordinances declaring effect 		Obsolete 
		222 	Vacancies 		Obsolete 
		223 	Westville, south districts Fairhaven East 		Obsolete 
		224 	1899 officers 		Obsolete 
		225 	Town deposit fund 		Obsolete 
		226 	General repeal 		Obsolete 
		227 	Effective date 		Obsolete 
	35 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 212 		Superseded 1952 § 68 
		2 	Effective date 		
	36 	— 	Amend 1899 Act No. 208, § 2 		Superseded 1952 Charter 
	37 	— 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 122 		Superseded 1952 § 207 
	98 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, §§ 55, 56, 60, 65 		Superseded 1952 §§ 118—120, 123 
		2 	Fire superintendent declared chief 		Not prospective 
	103 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, §§ 47, 49, 50, 52, 60, 65, 194, 195, 198 		Superseded 1952 §§ 109, 111, 112, 123, 128, 160, 161—171, 8(f); 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 117 		Superseded 1952 § 201 
		3 	Police superintendent declared chief 		Not prospective 
		4 	Effective date 		
	115 	— 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 203 		Obsolete 
	138 	1—2 	Park assessments 		Superseded 1952 § 138 
1901 	133 	3 	Park assessments 		Repealed 1915 Act No. 212 
		4 	Park land 		Superseded 1952 § 138 
		5 	General repeal 		
		6 	Effective date 		
	136 	1—7 	Paving commission 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
		8 	General repeal 		
		9 	Effective date 		
	137 	— 	Amend 1899 Act No. 211, § 1 		Superseded 1952 Charter 
	192 	— 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 44 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
	197 	1—2 	Westville cemetery 		Obsolete 
	216 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 51 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
		2 	Effective date 		
	217 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 66 	180 	
	236 	1—10 	1901 tax abatement 		Not prospective 
		11 	Effective date 		
	322 	— 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 94 		Superseded 1952 §§ 146—148 
	387 	1—9 	1901 appeals from Board of Relief 		Not prospective; superseded 1952 § 68 
		10 	Effective date 		
	407 	— 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 210 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
	425 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 73 		Superseded 1952 § 87 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 75 		Superseded 1952 § 90 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 201 		Superseded 1952 § 105 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 18 		Superseded 1952, § 15 
		5 	General repeal 		
		6 	Effective date 		
	461 	1—2 	Abolish common council 		Superseded 1952 §§ 38, 40 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 6 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
1901 	461 	4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 7 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		5 	Repeal 1899 Act No. 467, § 8 		
		6 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 10 		Superseded 1952 §§ 6, 9, 11 
		7 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 41 		Superseded 1952 § 58 
		8 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 87 		Superseded 1952, § 131 
		9 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 99 		Superseded 1952 § 151 
		10 	Assistant city clerk 		Superseded 1952 § 29 
		11 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 129 		Superseded 1952 § 42 
		12 	Declared public act 		
		13 	Effective date 		
	477 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 136 		Obsolete 
		2 	Effective date 		
	511 	1—6 	Hospital 		Repealed 1903 Act No. 445, § 1 
		7 	Sale of hospital 		Obsolete 
		8 	General repeal 		
		9 	Effective date 		
	527 	1 	Amend 1901 Act No. 136, § 1 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
		2 	Effective date 		
	535 	1—2 	Sale of land 		Not prospective 
	540 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 156 		Superseded 1952 § 79 
1903 	45 	1-10 	1903 tax abatement 		Not prospective 
		11 	Effective date 		
	90 		Amend 1899 Act No. 208 § 2 		Superseded 1952 Charter 
	335 	1—2 		111 	
	349 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 83 		Superseded 1952 § 100 
	426 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 37 		Superseded 1952 § 37 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 118 		Superseded 1952 § 202 
1903 	444 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 65 		Superseded 1952 § 128 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 41 		Superseded 1952 § 58 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 43 		Superseded 1952 § 59 
	445 	1 	Repeal 1901 Act No. 511, § 1—6, 9 		
		2 	Effective date 		
1905 	88 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 71 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		2 	General repeal 		
		3 	Effective date 		
	114 	1—2 	Sewer bonds 		Obsolete 
	128 	1-10 	1905 tax abatement 		Not prospective 
		11 	Effective date 		
	219 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 176 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
	242 		Releasing title to land 		Not prospective 
	247 	1—3 	School loan 		Obsolete 
	294 		Commission on public memorials 		Repealed 1913 Act No. 417, § 6 
	325 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 150 		Superseded 1952 § 293 
		2 	Effective date 		
	369 	1—4 	1904 indebtedness 		Obsolete 
	402 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 167, § 46 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 48 		Superseded 1952 § 111 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 49 		Superseded 1952 §§ 8(f), 111 
	408 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 99 		Superseded 1952 § 151 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 101 		Superseded 1952 § 151 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 102 		Superseded 1952 §§ 152—154 
	410 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 6 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
1905 	410 	2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 7 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		3—6 	Terms of 1906, 1907 officers 		Not prospective 
		7 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 15 		Superseded 1952 § 13 
		8 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 18 		Superseded 1952 § 15 
		9 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 36 		Repealed Ord. of 12-5-38 
		10 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 39 		Superseded 1952 § 12 
		11 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 41 		Superseded 1952 § 58 
		12 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 43 		Superseded 1952 § 59 
		13 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 48 		Superseded 1952 § 111 
		14 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 56 		Superseded 1952 § 120 
		15 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 73 		Superseded 1952 § 87 
		16 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 75 		Superseded 1952 § 90 
		17 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 76 		Superseded 1952, § 91 
		18 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 87 		Superseded 1952 § 131 
		19 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 93 		Superseded 1952 § 144 
		20 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 201 		Superseded 1952 § 105 
		21 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 209 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		22 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 210 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		23 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 211 		Superseded 1952 § 86 
		24 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 212 		Superseded 1952 § 68 
		25 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 165 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		26 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 167 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		27 	Effective date 		
	464 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 55 		Superseded 1952 §§ 118—120 
		2 	1905 ordinance valid 		Obsolete 
1905 	464 	3 	Effective date 		
1907 	83 	1—3 	Improvement bonds 		Obsolete 
	84 	1—2 	Loan authorized 		Obsolete 
	184 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 176 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A No. 28 
	185 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 159 		Superseded 1952 § 67 
		2 	Effective date 		
	186 	1 		24 	
		2 	Effective date 		
	221 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 47 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
	247 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 32 		Superseded 1952 § 27 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 44 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
	247 	3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 148 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 150 		Superseded 1952 § 293 
		5 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 203 		Obsolete 
		6 	1907 tax abatement 		Not prospective 
		7 	Effective date 		
	248 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 57 		Superseded 1952 § 121 
		2 	Effective date 		
	297 	1—2 	Hospital bonds 		Repealed 1911 Act No. 270 
	301 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 53 		Obsolete 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 37 		Superseded 1952 § 37 
		3 	1907 Sealer of weights and measures 		Not prospective 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 137 		Superseded 1952 § 50 
		5 	Amend 1901 Act No. 136, § 3 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
		6 	Amend 1901 Act No. 136, § 4 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
1907 	301 	7 	Amend 1901 Act No. 136, § 7 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
		8 	Amend 1899 Act No. 208, § 2 		Superseded 1952 Charter 
		9 	Street excavations 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
		10 	Street repairs 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
		11 	General repeal 		
		12 	Effective date 		
	392 	1—2 	Monument authorized 		Not prospective 
	396 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 122 		Superseded 1952 § 207 
		2 	1907 civil service secretary 		Not prospective 
		3 	Effective date 		
	412 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 40 		Superseded 1952 § 296 
		2 	Effective date 		
1909 	139 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 9 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		2 	Effective date 		
		1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 109 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 110 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
	171 	3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 111 		Repealed 1931 Act No. 491 § 2 
	186 	1 	1909 tax abatement 		Obsolete 
		2 	Effective date 		
	270 	1 	Paving commission 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 91 
		2 	General repeal 		
		3 	Effective date 		
	271 	1—2 	Bridge bonds 		Obsolete 
	284 	1 	Land exchange 		Not prospective 
	286 	1 	Amend 1901 Act No. 133, § 1 		Superseded 1952 § 138 
		2 	Amend 1901 Act No. 133, § 3 		Repealed 1915 Act No. 210 
		3 	Amend 1901 Act No. 133, § 4 		Superseded 1952 § 138 
1909 	286 	4 	Disposition of park revenue 		Superseded 1952 § 138 
		5 	General repeal 		
		6 	Effective date 		
	328 	1—2 	Pavement bonds 		Obsolete 
	357 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 117 		Superseded 1952 § 201 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 118 		Superseded 1952 § 202 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 119 		Superseded 1952 § 204 
	388 		Amend 1907 Act No. 392, § 1 		Not prospective 
	434 		Bureau of trees created 		Superseded 1952 § 91 
	451 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 171 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		2 	Construction of 1899 Act No. 467, § 40, as amended 1907 Act No. 412, § 1 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		3 	Effective date 		
	489 	1—4 	Garbage bonds 		Obsolete 
1911 	6 	1—2 	Land exchange 		Not prospective 
	164 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 209 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
	165 	1—7 	Transfer of alms house 		Obsolete 
		8 	General repeal 		
		9 	Effective date 		
	166 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 88 		Superseded 1952 § 134 
		2 	Effective date 		
	174 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 81 		Superseded 1952 § 96 
	179 	1 	1911 Tax abatement 		Obsolete 
		2 	Effective date 		
1911 	224 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 78 		Superseded 1952 §§ 92, 93 
		2 	General repeal 		
		3 	Effective date 		
	254 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 117 		Superseded 1952 § 201 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 211, § 5 		Superseded 1952 § 67 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 211, § 6 		Superseded 1952 § 67 
		4 	Effective date 		
	270 	1—2 	Hospital bonds 		Obsolete 
		3 	Repeal 1907 Act No. 297 		
	293 	1—2 	Street bonds 		Obsolete 
	340 	1 	Teachers retirement 	260 	
		2 	Teachers retirement 		Repealed 1927, Act No. 247, § 2 
		3-13 	Teachers retirement 	261—271 	
	366 	1—8 	Retirement of custodians and engineers 		Repealed 1925 Act No. 223, § 10 
	394 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 209 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
	433 	1—9 		35—43 	
		10 		45 	
		11 	General repeal 		
		12 	Effective date 		
	485 	1—2 	Fire Dept. bonds 		Obsolete 
	489 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 6 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 7 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 209 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 210 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		5 	Effective date 		
	497 	1—4 	Bonds authorized 		Obsolete 
1911 	497 	5 	Amend 1911 Act No. 293, § 1 		Obsolete 
	503 	1 	Building department 		Superseded 1952 § 140 
		2 	Building inspector 		Superseded 1952 § 141 
		3 	Appointment of inspector 		Superseded 1952 § 143 
		4 	Qualifications for inspector 		Superseded 1952 § 142 
		5 	Building dept. employee 		Superseded 1952 § 142 
		6 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 55 		Superseded 1952 §§ 118—120 
		7 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 57 		Superseded 1952 § 121 
		8 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 58 		Obsolete 
		9 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 95 		Superseded 1952 § 147 
		10 	General repeals 		
		11 	Effective date 		
	520 		Armory 		Not prospective 
	537 	1—2 	Sewer bonds 		Obsolete 
		3 	Effective date 		
1913 	59 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 209 		Superseded 1952 § 5; § 9-34 Gen. Stats. 
	64 	1—2 	Street bonds 		Obsolete 
		3 	Effective date 		
	71 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 126 		Superseded 1952 § 39 
	90 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 52 		Repealed 1915 Act No. 399, § 3 
	101 	1 	Building line comm. 	29 	
		2 	Effective date 		
	108 	1 	1913 tax abatement 		Obsolete 
		2 	Effective date 		
	142 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 120 		Superseded 1952 § 205 
	143 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 19 		Superseded 1952 § 16 
		2 	Effective date 		
1913 	159 	1, 2 	Procedure for amending 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
		3 	Procedure for amending Charter 		
		4, 5 	Charter 		Repealed 1917 Act No. 449, § 10 
	181 	1—8 	Improvement, school bonds 		Obsolete 
		9 	Amend 1911 Act No. 293, § 2 		Obsolete 
		10 	Amend 1911 Act No. 485, § 2 		Obsolete 
		11 	Effective date 		
1913 	243 	1—8 	Planning commission 		Superseded 1952 §§ 221—232 
	252 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 137 		Superseded 1952 § 50 
		2 	Effective date 		
	284 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 165 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 166 		Repealed 1935 Act No. 129, § 2 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 168 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 171 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		5 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 174 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		6 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 175 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		7 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 177 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		8 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 180 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		9 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 182 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
1918 	284 	10 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 188 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		11 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 191 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		12 	1913 judges terms 		Not prospective 
	375 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 84 		Superseded 1952 § 102 
		2 	Effective date 		
	402 	1 	When 1913 Act No. 159 effective 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
		2 	Effective date 		
	417 	1—4 	Art Commission 		Superseded 1952 §§ 88, 225 
		5 	Building regulations authorized 		Superseded 1952 § 51 
		6 	Repeal 1905 Act No. 294 		
1915 	207 		Regulating awnings, etc. 		Superseded 1952 § 50(d) 
	208 			44 	
	210 		Repeal 1901 Act No. 133, § 3 		
	212 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 132 		Superseded 1952 § 46 
	301 	1—7 	Tax committee 		Repealed 1954 Act No. 331 
		8 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 45 		
	307 	1 	Amend 1913 Act No. 159, § 2 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
		2 	Westville school district 		Superseded 1921 Act No. 436, § 5 
	399 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 52 		Superseded 1952 § 160 
		2 	Voting machines 		Superseded 1952 § 160 
		3 	Repeal 1913 Act No. 90 		
1917 	1 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 10 		Superseded 1952 §§ 6, 9, 11 
		2 	Payment to acting mayor 		Not prospective 
		3 	Effective date 		
	147 	1—3 	School bonds 		Obsolete 
1917 	245 		Part of Hamden annexed to school district 		Obsolete 
	347 	1—2 	Sale of armory 		Not prospective 
		3 	Effective date 		
	414 	1 	Children's buildings 		Superseded 1957 Act No. 207, §§ 1—4 
		2—3 	Children's building 		Repealed 1957 Act No. 207, § 4 
		4—6 	Children's building 		Superseded 1957 Act No. 207, §§ 1—4 
		7 	Effective date 		
	449 	1 	Veranda lines 		Superseded 1952 § 50(d) 
		2 	Removal of mayor 		Superseded 1952 § 10 
		3 	Registrars of voters 		Superseded 1952 § 50(x) 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 165 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		5 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 171 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		6 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 196 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		7 	Liability for icy sidewalks 		Repealed 1949 Act No. 452 
		8 	Amend 1913 Act No. 159, § 1 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
		9 	Amend 1913 Act No. 159, § 2 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
		10 	Repeal 1913 Act No. 159, § 3 		
		11 	Attesting town records 		Superseded 1952 § 33 
		12 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 187 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		13 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 216 		Superseded 1921 Act No. 342 
		14 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 51 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
	449 	15 	1899 Act No. 467, § 69 	184 	
1917 	449 	16 	Amend 1899 Act No. 208, § 2 		Superseded 1952 Charter 
		17 	Effective date 		
1918 	Gen. Stats. 	1129 		61 	
		1139 		62 	
		1145 		63 	
		1150 		64 	
		1215 		65 	
		1231 		66 	
		1238 		67 	
		1301 		68 	
1919 	45 	1 		113 	
		2 		114 	
		3 			
	121 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 171 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
	165 		Exchange of park land 		Not prospective 
1921 	173 		Amend 1917 Act No. 449, § 7 		Repealed 1949 Act No. 452 
	176 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 171 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
	181 		Amend 1917 Act No. 449, § 9 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
	294 		City Manager 		Not ratified 
	295 		Amend 1911 Act No. 489, § 1 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
	342 	1—33 	Establishing 33 wards 		Included as 1952 § 3 
	359 	1 	Amend 1909 Act No. 171, § 3 		Repealed 1931 Act No. 491, § 2 
		2 	Amend 1907 Act No. 242, § 2 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
	376 	1—4 	Police Retirement 		Failed at referendum 
1921 	436 	1—8 	Consolidating Westville school district 		Not prospective 
	478 	1, 3 			
		4, 5 	Zoning 		Repealed 1925 Act No. 490, § 11 
		2 	Zoning commission 		Superseded 1952 §§ 221, 223 
1923 P. A. 	Ch. 				
	106 			100 	
	9 			75 	
	132 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 129 		Superseded 1952 § 42 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 35 		Superseded 1952 § 29 
	132 	3 	Compilation of ords. 		Superseded 1952 § 43 
	142 		Sale of playground 		Not prospective 
	143 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 133 		Superseded 1952 § 47 
	144 		Water tower authorized 		Not prospective 
	169 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 218 		Superseded 1959 Act No. 138, § 1 
		2 	Fairmont, Morris Cove Associations 		Superseded 1959 Act No. 138, § 4 
	263 		Validating old building Code 		Obsolete 
	336 	1—5 		229 	
	395 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 6 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 7 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 209 		Superseded 1952 § 5; 9-34 Gen. Stats. 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 210 		Superseded 1952 § 5 
1925 	223 	1—9 	Retirement of custodians and engineers 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		10 	Repeal 1911 Act No. 366, §§ 1—8 		
	355 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 146 		Superseded 1952 § 176 
1925 	459 		Financial relations between city, school district 		Not prospective 
	468 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 104 		Superseded 1952 § 185 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 110 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
		3 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 44 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
		4 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 115 		Not prospective 
		5 		272 	
	490 	1—10 	Zoning 		Superseded 1952 §§ 221—232 
		11 	Repeal 1921, Act No. 478, §§ 1, 3, 4, 5 		
	500 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 90 		Superseded 1952 §§ 134, 137 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 135 		Superseded 1952 § 49 
1927 	23 	1 	Floating indebtedness 		Obsolete 
		2 		57 	
		3—6 	Floating indebtedness 		Obsolete 
	116 			75 	
	137 	1—3 	Assets of retirement fund 		Superseded 1959 Act No. 518 
	146 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 51 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
	247 	1 		260 	
		2 	Repeals 1911 Act No. 340, § 2 		
		3 			
		4—7 		261 	
		8 		263 	
		9—10 		265 	
		11 	Effective date 		
	267 	1 		117 	
		2—3 		118 	
1927 	267 	4 		110 	
	323 	1 		115 	
		2 		116 	
	356 			184 	
	404 	1—4 	Traffic commissions 		Superseded §§ 14-297—14-314 Gen. Stats. 
1929 P. A. 	Ch. 				
	23 	288 	Corrected list of voters 		Superseded § 9-171 Gen. Stats. 
	Ch. 				
	23 (part) 		Duties of registrars 		Superseded § 9-171 Gen. Stats. 
	Ch. 				
	280 	5 	Gas stations in city 		Repealed 1943 Act No. 153 
				117 	
1929 	266 	1 	Amend 1927 Act No. 209, § 1 		
		2 	Amend 1927 Act No. 209, § 2 		
				118 	
	392 		Sewer privileges 		Not prospective 
	435 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 51 		Superseded 1952 § 109 
		2 		184 	Superseded 1952 § 109 
		3 		184, 187 	
		4 	Repeal 1899 Act No. 467, § 70 		
	439 		Armory land 		Not prospective 
1931 	183 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 165 		Superseded 1952 §§ 161—171; 1959 P.A. No. 28 
		2 	Effect of inconsistent statutes 		Obsolete 
	214 	1 	Amend 1907 Act No. 185, § 1 		Superseded 1952 § 67 
	231 		Amend 1911 Act No. 340, § 3(1) 	261 	
1931 	249 	1 	Amend 1921 Act No. 342, § 16 		Included 1952 Charter, § 3 
1931 	249 	2 	Amend 1921 Act No. 324, § 17 		
		3 	Amend 1921 Act No. 342, § 29 		
	330 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 61 	59 	
	391 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 69; 1929; Act 184, No. 435, § 3 	184, 187 	
	449 	1—16 	City retirement 		Not approved by aldermen 
	469 	1 	Amend 1927 Act No. 23, § 1 		Obsolete 
		2 	1931 tax rate and refund 		Not prospective 
		3 	Effect on other acts 		Obsolete 
	491 	1 	Amend 1925 Act No. 468, § 2 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
		2 	Repeal 1921 Act No. 359, § 1 		
		3 	Amend 1921 Act No. 181 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
		4 	Amend 1913 Act No. 181 § 1 		Obsolete 
		5 	Amend 1911 Act No. 254, § 3 		Superseded 1952 § 67 
		6 	Effective date 		
1933 	23 	1—6 	Funding bonds 		Obsolete 
	24 	1 	Current deficits 57 		
	191 	1—3 	Purchase of bank stock 		Not prospective 
	252 	1 	Amend 1931 Act No. 491, § 1 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
		2 	Effective date 		Repealed 1935 Act No. 338, § 2 
		3 	General repeal 		
	278 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 95 		Superseded 1952 § 147 
	334 		Lease of lighthouse authorized 		Not prospective 
	349 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 61 	59 	
	373 		Amend 1911 Act No. 254, § 3 		Superseded 1952, § 67 
	439 		1932—1933 school finance 		Not prospective 
1935 	129 	1 	Acting city court judges 		Superseded 1952 § 162; 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		2 	Repeal 1899 Act No. 467, § 166 		
	330 	1—5 	Liability for sidewalks 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 531 
	331 	1—4 		273 	
		5—9 		274—278 	
		10—11 		279 	
		12 		280 	
	338 	1 	Amend 1933 Act No. 252 § 1 		Superseded 1952 § 190 
		2 	Repeal 1933 Act No. 252, § 2 		
	418 		Tenements in city 		Obsolete 
	516 	1—3 	Registrars of voter 		Superseded 1952 § 159 
	518 	18 	Junk yard permit validated 		Not prospective 
1936 	6 		Social security lists 		Obsolete 
1937 	149 		Amend 1935 Act No. 331, § 9 	278 	
	165 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 69 	185 	
	166 	1—16 	City retirement 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 397, § 18 
	198 		Amend 1921 Act No. 342 §§ 23, 24, 29 		Included 1952 Charter § 3 
	564 	1 	Add § 17 to 1937 Act No. 166 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 397, § 18 
		2 	Amend 1937 Act No. 166, § 3 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 397, § 18 
	576 	1 	Amend 1935 Act No. 331, § 4 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 531 
		4 	Amend 1935 Act No. 331, § 5 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 531 
		2 	Amend 1935 Act No. 331, § 1 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 531 
			Amend 1935 Act No. 331, § 3 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 531 
			Amend 1935 Act No. 331, § 4 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 531 
			Amend 1935 Act No. 331, § 5 		Repealed 1939 Act No. 531 
	82 		Amend 1911 Act No. 165, § 6 		Obsolete 
1939 	97 	1—3 		1 	
	397 	1—19 		130—148 	
	531 		Repeal 1935 Act No. 3330, 1937 Act No. 576 		
	551 		Amend 1917 Act No. 449, § 9 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
1941 	82 	1—3 	Trade school bonds 		Not prospective 
		4 	Use of park for trade school 		Not prospective 
	45 		City reimbursed for funeral 		Not prospective 
	123 		Liability for damage caused by police cars 		Superseded § 7-465 Gen. Stats. 
	133 			56 	
	227 		Amend 1911 Act No. 340, § 5(2) 263 		
	358 		Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 4 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
	360 	1 	Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 1 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		2 	Add sec. to 1925 Act No. 223 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
	380 	1—2 		110 	
	393 			186 	
	418 	1 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 15 	144 	
		2 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 19 	148 	
	433 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 69 	185 	
	439 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 44 		Superseded 1952, § 62 
	465 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 69 	184 	
	551 		Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 5 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
1943 	153 		Repeal 1929 P. A. Ch. 280 § 5 		
	251 	1—2 		55 	
1943 	343 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 52 		Superseded 1952 § 160 
	443 		Amend 1939 Act No. 551 		Superseded 1952 §§ 184, 291 
	498 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 102 		Superseded 1952 §§ 152—154 
	501 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 156 		
	507 	1 	Amend 1911 Act No. 340 § 1 	260 	
		2 	Amend 1911 Act No. 340, § 3 	261 	
		3 	Amend 1911 Act No. 340, § 4 	262 	
		4 	Amend 1911 Act No. 340 § 8 	266 	
		5 	Amend 1911 Act No. 340 § 9 	267 	
		6 	Amend 1911 Act No. 340 § 12 	270 	
	520 	1—4 		60 	
		5 	Effective date 		
1949 		27 	City reimbursed for funeral expenses 		Not prospective 
	117 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 12 	20 	
	297 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 137 		Superseded 1952 § 50 
	301 			2 	
	331 		Repeal 1915 Act No. 301 		
	337 	1—7 	Sewer assessments 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 138, § 5 
		8 	Effective date 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 138, § 5 
	341 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 217 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 138, § 5 
		2—11 	Sewers in 32nd ward 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 138, § 5 
		12 	Effective date 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 138, § 5 
	355 		Notice of injury validated 		No prospective 
	373 		Notice of injury validated 		No prospective 
1947 	248 		Add § 20 to 1939 Act No. 397 	149 	
	324 	1 	Amend 1925 Act No. 223 § 1 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
1947 	324 	2 	Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 3 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		3 	Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 4 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		4 	Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 5 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		5 	Participation in city retirement 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		6 	Effective date 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
	340 	1—5 		240—244 	
		6 		270 	
		7 		247 	
		8 		245 	
		9 		246 	
	495 		City reimbursed for funeral expenses 		Not prospective 
	518 		Sale of park land 		Not prospective 
1949 	197 	1—3 		226—228 	
	409 		Notice of injuries validated 		Not prospective 
	413 	1—2 	Judges salaries 		Superseded 1952 § 171 
	450 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 201 		Superseded 1952 § 105 
		2 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467 § 202 		Superseded 1952 §§ 107—108 
	452 		Repeal 1917 Act No. 449, § 7, 1921 Act No. 173 		
	460 		Compensation for injuries 		Not prospective 
	469 	1—3 	Work week for police 		Superseded 1952 § 117 
	500 	1 	Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 3 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		2 	Amend 1925 Act No. 223, § 4 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		3 	Amend 1947 Act No. 324, § 4 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
1949 	500 	4 	Effect of leaving employment 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
		5 	Death of retired personnel 		Repealed 1959 Act No. 518, § 14 
1950 (March) 	17 	1 	Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 	201 	Superseded 1952 § 105 
		2 	Department, board of Welfare 		Superseded 1925 §§ 105—108 
1951 	194 	1—2 	Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	279 	1 		225 	
		2 	Referendum required 		Approved at referendum 11-6-51 
	465 		Amend 1899 Act No. 467, § 44 		Superseded 1952 § 62 
	473 	1—10 		85—94 	
	11 		Referendum required 		Approved at referendum 9-10-51 
	490 	1 	Amend 1949 Act No. 197, § 1 	226 	
	604 		Judges salaries 		Superseded 1952 § 171 
1953 	131 	1 	Municipal court personnel 		Superseded 1959 P. A. No. 28 
		2 	Effective date 		
	474 	1—2 	Police pensions 		Failed at referendum 6-22-53 
	475 		Retirement of particular teacher 		Not prospective 
	484 		Judges salaries 		Superseded 1959 P. A. No. 28 
	618 		Sale of park lands 		Not prospective 
	624 	1—2 	Notice of injuries validated 		Not prospective 
1955 	8 	1 	Amend 1951 Act No. 473, § 2 	86 	
		2 	Amend 1951 Act No. 473, § 3 	87 	
		3 	Amend 1951 Act No. 473, § 4 	88 	
		4 	Amend 1951 Act No. 473, § 5(a)—(d) 	89 	
		5 	Amend 1951 Act No. 473, § 6 	90 	
		6 	Amend 1951 Act No. 473, § 10 	94 	
1955 	92 		Notice of injuries validated 		Not prospective 
	246 	1—2 	Sale of park lands 		Not prospective 
	282 		Regulation of truck traffic 		Repealed 1957 Act No. 324 
	439 		Amend 1952 by adding § 298 		Included 1952 charter 
	475 			58 	
	488 		Certain taxes abated 		Not prospective 
	495 		Amend 1952 § 8(c) 		Included 1952 charter 
	546 			290 	
	588 		Granting an easement 		Not prospective 
	647 	1 		190 	
		2 		191 	
1955 (Nov.) 	23 			112 	
1957 	207 	1—3 	Conveyance of children's buildings to state 		Not prospective 
		4 	Repeal 1917 Act No. 414, §§ 2, 3 		
	217 		Notice of injuries validated 		Not prospective 
	324 		Repeal 1955 Act No. 282 		
	390 	1 		192 	
		2 		193 	
		3 	Effective date 		
	391 		Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 8 	137 	
	406 		Amend 1901 Act No. 217, § 1(6) 	1(5), 180 	
	456 	1 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 5 	134 	
		2 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 6 	135 	
		3 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 7 	136 	
		4 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 9 	138 	
1957 	456 	5 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 10 	139 	
		6 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 15 	144 	
	529 	1 		194 	
		2 		195 	
	531 	1 		200 	
		2—3 		201 	
		4—10 		202—208 	
	582 		Transfer of park land 		Not prospective 
1957 (Sept) 	7 	12 	Amend 1957 Act No. 		Not prospective 
1959 	17 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	19 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	30 	1—2 	Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	71 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	138 	1—7 		3—9 	
		8 	General repeal 		
	149 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	206 		Quitclaiming covenant established by 1955 P. A. No. 559, § 2 		Not prospective 
	214 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	249 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	481 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	518 	1—8 		162—169 	
		9 		160 	
1959 	518 	10 		170 	
		11 		161 	
1959 	518 	12—14 		171—174 	
	553 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	575 	1 	Amend 1955 Act No. 8, § 2 	87 	
		2 	Amend 1955 Act No. 8, § 6 	94 	
1961 	114 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	121 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	122 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	238 	1 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, § 4 	165 	
		2 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, § 4 	165 	
		3 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, § 10 	170 	
		4 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, § 13(1) 	172 	
		5 	Repeal 1959 Act No. 518, §§ 13(2), 13(3) 	172 	
		6 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, § 13(4) 	172 	
		7 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, § 13(5) 	172 	
		8 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, § 13(6) 	172 	
		9 	Amend 1959 Act No. 518, App. A 	174 	
	326 	1 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 7 	136 	
		2 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 9 	138 	
		3 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 10 	139 	
		4 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 11 	140 	
		5 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 6 	135 	
		6 	Amend 1939 Act No. 397, § 15 	144 	
		7 	Act effective Jan. 1, 1961 		Not prospective 
		8 	Approval of aldermen required 		Not prospective 
1963 	144 		Sale of State Property 		Not prospective 
	265 	1—3 		196—198 	
	269 		Amendments etc. to New Haven Illuminating Co. 		Not prospective 
	389 	1 		131 	
		2 		138 	
		3 		139(1) 	
		4 		139(3) 	
		5 		139(4) 	
		6 		140 	
		7 		145 	
1965 	34 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	37 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	48 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	61 	1 	Minimum pensions for police department and widows of retired members 	199 	
		2 	Minimum pension for fire department and widows of retired members 	199.1 	
	106 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	111 		Authorizes appeal from statement of compensation 		Not prospective 
	245 		Authorization of bonds for capital improvements 		Not prospective 
	379 	1—21 	Amends 1939 Act No. 397 	130—149 	
1967 	9 		Reapportionment of city 		Repealed by Act No. 154, 1969 
	62 		Pension for former mayors 	159 	
	88 	1 	Powers of New Haven parking authority 	89(a), (c), (d) 	
		2, 3 		90, 91 	
	129 		Defining "widow" for pension purposes 	187 	
	141 		Minimum pensions to retired members of police and fire depts., etc. 	199.2 	
	163 		Dissolution of New Haven Real Estate Title Co. 		Not prospective 
	186 		New Haven Yacht Club, act amending incorporation act 		Not prospective 
	217 	1 	Amends § 256 of Charter and § 185 of this compilation 	185 	
	218 	1, 2 	Pension fund for policemen employed after Dec. 31, 1957 	203(a), 204 	
	261 		Establishment of community college in greater New Haven area 		Not prospective 
	273 		Notice of injury validated 		Not prospective 
	358 		Assistant registrars of voters authorized as absentee ballot counters 	25 	
	374 		Retirement credit 		Not prospective 
	419 		Designation of bridle path and hiking trail 		Not prospective 
	437 	1 	Assessment date, fiscal year and tax levy due dates 	10 	
		3 	Amends Charter sections 62, 63 		Included 1952 
		4 	Taxes, installment payments 	59.1 	charter 
1969 	15 	1, 2 	Amended Charter §§ 69, 70 		
	147 		Teachers' Retirement 	225 	
	164 	1, 2 	Pensions—retired policemen and firemen 	199.3 	
	191 		Park property use 		Not prospective 
	154 	1—4 	Reapportionment of wards, Charter §§ 3—3.3 		
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The following table shows Acts of the General Assembly from and including the 1899 Charter to the present, their subject, their disposition if included in the preceding compilation and the reason they were omitted if not included therein. Said table does not reflect acts concerning the New Haven harbor or harbor commission. 
 
TITLE III - CODE OF GENERAL ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances contained in the following Titles III, IV and V shall constitute and be designated the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut, and may be so cited.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and construction. 
The ordinances contained in Title III of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut shall be interpreted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  In the construction of the ordinances, words and phrases shall be construed according to the commonly approved usage of the language; and technical words and phrases, and such as have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood accordingly. 
(2)  And, or. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
(3)  Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things, and words importing the plural number may include the singular. 
(4)  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender may be applied to females, and to other persons as herein defined. 
(5)  Words purporting to give a joint authority to several persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of them. 
(6)  Whenever a title which denotes gender is applied to an individual the title shall suit the gender of the individual. 
(7)  Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(8)  The words "preceding", "following" and "succeeding", when used by way of reference to any section or sections, shall mean the section or sections next preceding, next following or next succeeding, unless some other section is expressly designated in such reference. 
(9)  Authority. Words purporting to give joint authority to several persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of them. 
(10)  City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
(11)  Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, or any action taken, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had, or such action taken, shall not be counted. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time as in current use in the city. 
(12)  General statutes. Reference to "the general statutes", "state law", "Connecticut General Statutes sect.", or any variation thereof shall be construed as referring to the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
(13)  Charter. The term "charter" or "city charter" shall mean the charter approved by the voters of the City of New Haven on November 3, 1992, or any subsequent amendments or revisions thereof. 
(14)  Code. Reference to "code" or "this code" shall refer to the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
(15)  Officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions or agencies. Whenever the title of an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency is given, it shall be construed to refer to an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency of the City of New Haven. 
(16)  Month, year. The words "month" or "year" shall mean a calendar month or calendar year. 
(17)  Number. Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things, and words importing the plural number may include the singular. 
(18)  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past or present. 
(19)  Owner. The word "owner" shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the property to which reference is made. 
(20)  Person. The words "person" and "another" may extend and be applied to communities, companies, corporations, public or private, limited liability companies, societies and associations. 
(Ord. No. 1389, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface or italic type, and the chapter, article and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, subsection, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles or a substantive portion of any such section, subsection, chapter, article or division, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, subsections, chapters, articles or divisions, including the catchlines or headings, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Ord. No. 1389, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect them, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut, is hereby amended to read as follows: _______." The new provisions should then be set out in full as desired. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code, is to be added, the following language should be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows: _______." The new section should then be set out in full as desired. 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following with the intent to misrepresent or commit a fraud with reference to any ordinance(s) in the Code: 
(1)  Add or delete any portion(s) of any ordinance(s); 
(2)  Insert or delete any page(s) of the code; or 
(3)  Alter or tamper with the code in any way. 
(b)  Any violation of the above subsection shall result in a fine up to the maximum fine allowable under state statutes or this Code. Each act shall be regarded as a separate violation.  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
Every person who shall violate any provision of this Code, now or hereafter in force, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by Conn. General Statutes section 7-148(c)(10)(A) or this Code, except where a different fine or penalty is expressly prescribed. 
(Code 1928, § 607; Ord. No. 1389, 9-19-05) 
Charter reference— Authority to prescribe penalty for violations of ordinances, § §§ 49, 50.  
Sec. 1-9. - Other punitive action not in lieu of penalties. 
No payment of expenses incurred, and no revocation of license, or removal from office, shall excuse any person from liability to the penalty prescribed for the breach of any provision of this Code or other ordinance. 
(Code 1928, § 609)  
Sec. 1-10. - Code not to extend liability of city. 
No provision of this Code shall be construed to render the city liable to any person for any breach of said provision, or for any injury to person or property any further than such liability is expressly provided in this Code, or in the state statutes as each is amended from time to time. 
(Code 1928, § 610)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1391, adopted Sept. 19, 2005, substantially amended and reorganized the provisions of former chapter 2. The editor has renumbered the provisions of former Ch. 2 in order to incorporate the provisions of Ord. No. 1391. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Office hours of officials. 
Unless otherwise provided, all city officials shall keep their respective office(s) open for the convenience of the public and/or to conduct regular business for at least seven (7) consecutive hours on every day except weekends and public holidays. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-1 amends and supersedes former § 2-1 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 606; Ord. of 8-7-50.  
Sec. 2-2. - Destruction of records. 
Any person who fraudulently abstracts, conceals, destroys, mutilates or alters any record, map or file belonging to the city, or is in the charge or custody of any city committee, board or officer shall be guilty of an offense, and shall be fined up to the maximum authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-2 amends and supersedes former § 2-3 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 70.  
Sec. 2-3. - Regional council of governments. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes sections 4-124i—4-124p, New Haven is a member of the regional council of governments, and the mayor as the city's representative is authorized to exercise any and all of the powers, duties and functions as are set forth in the state statutes as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-3 amends and supersedes former § 2-23 which derived from Ord. of 6-3-68, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 7-5-83, § 2.  
Sec. 2-4. - Community Action Agency. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes sections 17b-885 to 17b-895, as amended from time to time, the Community Action Agency of New Haven, Inc. has been formed as a private nonprofit corporation, and is authorized to perform agency functions and otherwise operate in accordance with said statutes as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-4 amends and supersedes former §§ 2-133, 2-134 which derived from 6-13-77; Ord. of 8-1-77; Ord. of 5-30-78.  
Secs. 2-5—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ALDERMEN 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Office of Legislative Services. 
There shall be an Office of Legislative Services with full time professional and secretarial staff to provide assistance to the board of aldermen. This office shall keep an annual journal of the board's actions and proceedings, and be responsible for printing and distributing a bound and indexed copy of the same to each member of the board of aldermen, city department heads, and all other appropriate persons, within four (4) weeks after the last board meeting of the year. A reasonable number of copies of said journal shall be kept in the city clerk's office. The city clerk shall certify under his/her hand one (1) copy to be a true record of the board of aldermen's actions and proceedings, which will be considered as the official journal. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-31 amends and supersedes the former provisions of §§ 2-2, 2-9, 2-10 which derived from the Code of 1928, §§ 68 and 72.  
Sec. 2-32. - Meetings of aldermen. 
(a)  The board of aldermen shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Mondays of every month from September through May except when such Monday is a holiday. If the day is a holiday, the board shall meet on the next business day thereafter. The mayor or the president of the board of aldermen may call a meeting on any other day if either person deems it expedient. 
(b)  No agency, authority, board, committee or commission of the city or its subdivisions regulated by the city code or charter shall meet at the same time as a regularly scheduled meeting of the board of aldermen unless it receives special dispensation from the president of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-32 amends and supersedes former § 2-4 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 63; Ord. of 3-22-82; Ord. of 8-2-93; Ord. of 8-14-02)  
Sec. 2-33. - Notice of meetings to aldermen. 
(a)  When the mayor, president of the board of aldermen, or a majority of aldermen as designated by petition, deems it proper to call a special board meeting, a sheriff or any other proper officer may be ordered to notify the board members of such meeting. 
The notice shall be effectuated in the following ways: 
(1)  If each board member receives personal notice; or 
(2)  If an attested copy of the order is left at each member's usual place of residence at least six (6) hours prior to the prescribed time of the meeting; or 
(3)  If the order is published in one (1) daily newspaper of general circulation in the city at least twelve (12) hours before the meeting. 
(b)  The city clerk shall record the order. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-33 amends and supersedes former section 2-5 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 65; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-34. - Contents of petitions to aldermen. 
Every petitioner shall provide his/her full name and complete address on all petitions brought to the board of aldermen. 
Editor's note— § 2-34 amends and supersedes former § 2-8 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 73.  
Sec. 2-35. - Compensation for aldermen. 
Each alderman, except the board president, shall be compensated in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each year of the term for which he/she is elected. The president of the board of aldermen shall be compensated in the amount of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) for each year of said term. These amounts shall be paid in monthly installments, and are payable on or before the last day of each month of such service. 
Editor's note— § 2-35 amends and supersedes former § 2-34 which derived from Ord. of 9-6-88.  
Sec. 2-36. - Duty of employees to answer questions by aldermen. 
It shall be the duty of any department of the city government, or of the heads of such departments, of whom an inquiry shall be made by the board of aldermen, to answer the same in writing three (3) business days prior to the next regular meeting of said board. If the department employee or head of such department fails to provide the information requested in a timely manner as described above, the immediate supervisor or superior of said employee or department head shall appear in person before said board. 
(Code 1928, § 66; Ord. of 5-15-89, §§ 1, 2) 
Note— Formerly numbered as 2-6.  
Sec. 2-37. - Approval of contracts on behalf of the board of aldermen. 
Execution of any contract on behalf of the board of aldermen shall require approval of at least two (2) members of the leadership of the board of aldermen. 
Leadership is defined herein as the President, President Pro Tempore, the Majority Leader, Deputy Majority Leader, the Minority Leader, and the Chair and Vice Chair of the Black and Hispanic Caucus. 
At the beginning of the term or as needed leadership shall develop a list of attorneys with special expertise in various areas of law to be available to address any needs that may arise for which outside counsel has been deemed necessary in order for the board of aldermen to perform its duties. 
( Ord. No. 1675, 4-16-12 )  
Secs. 2-38—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY OFFICERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-61—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Duty to draw orders, keep books of claims against city, § 2-128. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Qualifications. 
Pursuant to city charter section 33 as amended from time to time, there shall be a Town and City Clerk in the City of New Haven. Such clerk, otherwise referred to as the city clerk, shall have all the powers and duties conferred or imposed by law on city and/or town and/or municipal clerks. Such person shall act as clerk of the board of aldermen and all of its committees, and shall have such other powers and duties as are prescribed in the charter as amended from time to time. The city clerk shall reside in said city during his/her term of office. 
For purposes of this Code the city clerk may also be referred to as the city-town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-82. - City clerk, official duties. 
The city clerk shall execute the following duties: 
(1)  Certify and maintain a copy of the annual official journal of the actions and proceedings of the board of aldermen and its committees; 
(2)  Record the orders of special board of aldermen meetings; 
(3)  Maintain copies of the latest city charter, ordinances, resolutions and orders of the board of aldermen and their revisions; 
(4)  Maintain a record of all elected officers and appointments made by the mayor and/or the board of aldermen; and 
(5)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes sect. 9-15a as amended from time to time, serve on the board of admission of electors with the registrars of voters. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— Similar provisions to § 2-82 were found in former Code §§ 2-5, 2-9, 2-11. These former sections derived from the Code of 1928, §§ 65, 72, 612; Ord. of 11-10-75; Ord. of 8-2-93. 
Cross reference— Board for admission of electors, § 2-346.  
Sec. 2-83. - Records of contracts. 
The city clerk shall keep a copy of all contracts entered into by the city, and its boards, commissions, departments and offices. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-83 amends and supersedes former § 2-41 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 462.  
Sec. 2-84. - Statutory notice of claims required. 
No claim for damages against the city shall be approved for payment without due notice given as required by the state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-84 renumbers former § 2-43 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 71; Ord. of 4-7-93. 
State Law reference— Notice of claims for damages due to action of mobs, § 7-108 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); notice of claim for damages due to defective roads or bridges, § 13a-149 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); notice of claim for negligence of employees, §§ 7-308, 7-465 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 2-85. - Duties of clerk, corporation counsel in all cases of notices of claims. 
The city clerk shall receive all notices of claims against the city, and maintain them as written records for public inspection. Upon receipt of such a claim, the city clerk shall transmit it immediately to the corporation counsel for investigation of all relevant circumstances, and examination of any legal questions. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-85 amends and supersedes former § 2-44 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 15; Ord. of 4-7-93. 
Cross reference— Duties of city clerk and corporation counsel regarding notice of claims, § 2-156  
Sec. 2-86. - Duties of clerk, public works department when claim arises from defective streets, sidewalks, bridges. 
Upon receipt of a notice of claim for damages arising from any alleged defect in any street, sidewalk or bridge, the city clerk shall timely notify the department of public works, corporation counsel and any other appropriate city authority. Upon receipt of other types of claims, the city clerk shall notify the appropriate department(s) of the claim in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-86 amends and supersedes former § 2-45 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 14. 
Cross reference— Duties of city clerk, corporation counsel, engineer and chief of police when claim arises from defective streets, sidewalks and bridges, § 2-157.  
Sec. 2-87. - Municipal liability for ice and snow on public sidewalks. 
(a)  The City of New Haven hereby adopts the provisions of Conn. General Statutes sect. 7-163a as amended from time to time, captioned "Municipal liability for ice and snow on public sidewalks." 
(b)  The City of New Haven shall not be liable to any person injured in person or property caused by ice and snow on a public sidewalk, unless the city owns or is in possession and control of the land abutting such sidewalk, other than land that is used as a highway or street. However, the city shall be liable for its affirmative acts regarding such sidewalk. 
(c)  [Responsibility of owner; time limitation re action for damages.] 
(1)  The owner or person in possession and control of land abutting a public sidewalk shall have the same duty of care with respect to the presence of ice or snow on such sidewalk abutting his/her property as the municipality had prior to the effective date of this section [Nov. 21, 1981], and shall be liable to persons injured in person or property where a breach of said duty is the proximate cause of said injury. 
(2)  An action to recover personal and/or property damages caused by ice or snow on a public sidewalk must be brought against a person who owns or is in possession and control of land abutting such sidewalk within two (2) years from the date of injury. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-87 amends and supersedes former § 2-50 which derived from Ord. of 10-26-81, § 1.  
Sec. 2-88. - Duties of city clerk, corporation counsel when assessment appealed. 
When there is an appeal from any assessment or apportionment of damages or benefits, the city clerk shall immediately notify the city's collector, controller and corporation counsel. 
The corporation counsel shall secure a speedy determination of such appeal, and immediately notify the city clerk of any withdrawal of appeal, or the final judgment of the Superior Court in the case. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-88 along with section 2-160 amends and supersedes former § 2-67 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 43. 
Cross reference— Duties of city clerk, corporation counsel when assessment appealed, § 2-160. 
State Law reference— Appeals from municipal assessments, § 7-142 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); appeals from appraisal of damages, § 7-143 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); correction of assessments on review, § 7-145 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 2-89. - Notice of elected officials. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 9-320 as amended from time to time, the city clerk shall return a statement to the Secretary of State of the name, post office address and term of all those elected in a municipal election within ten (10) days after the election. The violation of this ordinance shall constitute an offense, and subject the violator to a fine up to the maximum authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-90. - Records and copies. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-23 as amended from time to time, the city clerk shall keep the records of the city including all votes of the city, and copies of all deeds and other instruments which he/she has recorded and attested. A certificate by said clerk or assistant city clerk of these recordings shall be conclusive evidence that the record was properly recorded. The city clerk or his/her legally qualified assistant shall affix the seal to all certified copies of record without charge. These records shall be entered by transcription, photographic, micrographic, electronic imaging, or any other process recognized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-91. - City to pay expenses; reports required; bond. 
Pursuant to the city charter section 34 as amended from time to time, the city shall pay the expenses of the office of city clerk, including the staff's salaries as determined by the budget. During the first week of every month the city clerk shall make a report to the mayor of all receipts deposited into the city treasury for the previous month. On or before the fifteenth day of January the city clerk shall annually submit to the mayor an accounting of the office's actions during the preceding fiscal year. The report shall contain a statement of all moneys received and expended in said year. The city clerk shall be bonded in an amount set by the controller. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-92. - Index. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-25 as amended from time to time, the city clerk shall, within five (5) days after receipt of an instrument for record, enter the names of all the grantors in a grantor index and all the grantees in a grantee index, in alphabetical order, and cross-indexed as to the party first identified as grantor or grantee on the instrument, the nature of the instrument, the date of its receipt as endorsed upon the recorded instrument, and thereafter, when available for entry, the book and page of such instrument, or other suitable indication of its location, approved by the public records administrator. If such instrument is an assignment of mortgage, collateral assignment of mortgage, subordination of mortgage or other transfer of an interest in a mortgage, the mortgagor shall be deemed an additional grantor for purposes of this section. If such instrument is a grant or assignment of a mortgage to a party designated in the mortgage or assignment as the nominee for another, such nominee shall be deemed to be the grantee of such mortgage or assignment. For purposes of this section, if such instrument affects real property, the index shall include a reference to the location of such property if contained in such instrument. Such general index shall be a permanent public record. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-93. - Release or assignment of mortgage or lien; digitized images. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-29 as amended from time to time, when the city clerk has recorded any instrument that he/she knows to be a release, partial release or assignment of a mortgage or lien recorded on the records of the city, the city clerk shall make a notation on the first page where such mortgage or lien is recorded, stating the book and page where such release, partial release or assignment is recorded. If the land records are not maintained in a paper form, the city clerk shall make the notation on the digitized image of the first page of such mortgage or lien in a form or manner approved by the public records administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-94. - Assistant city clerks; notice to secretary of the state of appointment, vacancy. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-19 as amended from time to time, the city clerk may appoint assistant city clerks, who, having taken the oath provided for city clerks, shall, in his/her absence or inability, have all of the city clerk's powers and duties. Within ten (10) days after a city clerk appoints an assistant city clerk, the city clerk shall file a notice of such appointment with the Secretary of the State, indicating the name and address of the person appointed, the date and method of such appointment, and the law under which the appointment was made. Within ten (10) days after a vacancy occurs in the office of assistant city clerk, the city clerk shall notify the Secretary of the State of such vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-95. - Fees. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-34a as amended from time to time, the city clerk shall be authorized to collect fees as established by state statutes in connection with recording documents as well as in the performance of other lawfully designated duties. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-96. - Payment of damages against city for public improvements. 
When any assessment of damages against the city, for any public improvement, is due and payable to any person or persons, a bill for the amount of damages assessed to each, in excess of the benefits assessed to the same person for the same public improvement, shall be presented to the city clerk, and having been, by the city clerk, compared with the order of assessment and certified to be correct, shall be passed and paid in the same manner as other bills. 
(Code 1928, § 3) 
Note— Formerly numbered as 2-66.  
Secs. 2-97—2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CONTROLLER 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Controller, appointment. 
(a)  There shall be a city controller who is appointed in accordance with the city charter as amended from time to time, and serves as the director of the department of finance. Whenever the controller is absent or incapable of acting, a deputy controller shall be appointed, who shall exercise all powers and duties that the appointing authority designates to him/her. 
(b)  The city controller or deputy controller shall exercise all powers, duties and authority as provided by law, including but not limited to the city charter, municipal ordinances and state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-122. - Notice to controller. 
The corporation counsel shall give notice to the controller of all sums that he/she or his/her assistants collect, and the controller shall enter the same in the city accounts. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-122 amends and supersedes former § 2-16 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 18.  
Sec. 2-123. - Records kept by the controller. 
The controller shall keep an account of all city departments, and such other accounts as directed by the city ordinances. The controller shall keep appropriate records pertaining to hours of work provided by city employees in accordance with current labor regulations and agreements. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-123 amends and supersedes former § 2-22 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 4; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-124. - Contents of bills against the city. 
Whenever possible, all bills against the city shall contain the items and their respective dates. Otherwise, the controller shall not approve them. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-124 amends and supersedes former § 2-36 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 1; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-125. - Offsetting amounts due against obligations. 
(a)  In case any person to whom a claim is due and payable shall be indebted to the city, the controller shall withhold the order for payment of such claim until such indebtedness is satisfied. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other city ordinance or regulation: 
(1)  The city controller shall not authorize the issuance of any payment to any person, business, partnership, firm or corporation for services, goods, or other purposes, unless and until the city assessor has certified to him/her that said person or entity has filed its list of all taxable personal property that is located in the city. In making this determination, the assessor shall use the city's most recent grand list. 
(2)  Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to payments from payroll accounts, annuities from any pension or retirement account, or any other payment when the delaying or holding thereof is contrary to state or federal laws or regulations. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to any property that is located outside the City of New Haven. 
(4)  Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to any portion of property located in the City of New Haven for less than the period of time mandated by state law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-125 amends and supersedes former § 2-37 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 9; Ord. of 4-6-87, § 2; Ord. of 8-2-93)  
Sec. 2-126. - Preferences in paying claims when funds inadequate. 
When the controller finds that there is insufficient money to pay all the bills duly allowed, he/she shall determine the order of priority of payments, giving preference to the payroll of the city's regular officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-126 amends and supersedes former § 2-38 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 10; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-127. - Authorization, records of obligations under seal. 
The board of aldermen must pass an order or resolution in due form before any bond, deed or other contract under seal can be issued in the name and on behalf of the city. The mayor shall cause the controller to keep a record of all such instruments. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-127 amends and supersedes former § 2-39 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 461. 
Charter reference— Authority of aldermen to prescribe manner and form of making contracts with the city, § 49(a).  
Sec. 2-128. - Duty to draw orders, keep books of claims against city. 
Pursuant to city charter section 24 as amended from time to time, the controller and city clerk shall draw orders on the treasurer to pay claimants the approved amount of their claims in accordance with applicable laws. These payments shall be recorded as required by the city charter. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-128 amends and supersedes former § 2-42 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 11; Ord. of 4-7-93.  
Sec. 2-129. - Duties of controller re public works records. 
(a)  Records of department. The controller shall keep the records of the proceedings and transactions pertaining to the public works department, and shall carefully file and preserve all books and papers connected with or transmitted to said department for execution. 
(b)  Records of contract awarded by department. The controller shall keep a contract book indicating the contracts awarded by the public works department, and their nature, amount and the recipient's identity. 
(c)  Amount of expenditure. The controller shall keep a set of books entered as a journal and ledger account of the moneys expended for all appropriate matters connected with the public works department. 
(d)  Bill-books. The controller shall keep a bill-book containing all approved bills pertaining to the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-129 amends and supersedes former § 2-59 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 681.  
Sec. 2-130. - Procedure for collecting due assessments. 
When there is any assessment or apportionment of item(s), including but not limited to taxes, damages, interest or penalties, the assessor shall transmit an accounting of the same to the controller noting the date payable. The controller shall record the same, and charge the collector with the duty to collect the amount due and payable. The collector shall proceed to collect the aforesaid amounts. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-130 amends and supersedes former § 2-63 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 44.  
Secs. 2-131—2-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CORPORATION COUNSEL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1391, adopted Sept. 19, 2005, repealed the following former provisions relating to the corporation counsel or legal services: 
Section 	Subject 	History 
2-12 	Representation before General Assembly 	Code 1928, § 598 
2-17—2-21.1 	Legal aid bureau 	Code 1928, § 600; Ord. of 5-4-42; Ord. of 6-6-66 
2-82 (part) 	Notice to corp. counsel when employee returns to work 	Code 1928, § 19 
 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Corporation counsel—Appointment. 
The mayor shall appoint a corporation counsel who shall be the chief legal advisor of and attorney for the City of New Haven, and of all of its officers and departments in matters relating to their official duties. The corporation counsel shall be subject to the mayor's authority, and serve a term coterminous with the mayor that appointed him/her. The term "corporation counsel" shall include his/her designee(s). 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-152. - Duty to keep docket, settle claims. 
(a)  The corporation counsel shall keep a docket of all causes to which the city may be a party, and shall deliver it and all other appropriate papers pertaining to his/her office to his/her successor. 
(b)  Upon obtaining the mayor's written consent, and the litigation settlement committee's approval, the corporation counsel shall have the authority to settle, adjust or compromise any appeal, action or suit brought by or against the city, or to which the city is a party. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-152 amends and supersedes former § 2-13 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 597; Ord. of 6-6-32; Ord. of 4-2-34; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-153. - Certification of claims reduced to judgment. 
When a judge or court issues a final judgment against the city, the corporation counsel shall certify the claim's accuracy before it is transmitted to the controller. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-153 amends and supersedes former § 2-14 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 2.  
Sec. 2-154. - Corporation counsel—Compensation. 
In addition to the salary allowed by law, the corporation counsel shall be entitled to reasonable traveling costs and other necessary expenses that are incurred in the proper discharge of his/her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-154 amends and supersedes former § 2-15 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 598.  
Sec. 2-155. - Corporation counsel—Disposition of funds collected by. 
The corporation counsel shall transfer all sums that he/she and his/her assistants collect to the city treasurer, and notify the controller of these payments. The treasurer shall provide the corporation counsel with receipts for such payments, and the controller shall enter the same in the city accounts. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-155 along with section 2-122 amends and supersedes former § 2-16 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 18. 
Cross reference— Notice to controller, § 2-122.  
Sec. 2-156. - Duties of city clerk and corporation counsel regarding notice of claims. 
Upon receipt of a notice of claim, the city clerk shall immediately transmit it to the corporation counsel. He/she shall examine such claim, and investigate all the circumstances and any legal questions arising from it. The corporation counsel shall keep a written record or memorandum of the facts and results thus ascertained. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-156 along with § 2-85 amends and supersedes former § 2-44 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 15; Ord. of 4-7-93. 
Cross reference— Duties of clerk, corporation counsel in all cases of notices of claims, § 2-85.  
Sec. 2-157. - Duties of city clerk, corporation counsel, engineer and chief of police when claim arises from defective streets, sidewalks and bridges. 
Upon receipt of a notice of claim for damages arising from any alleged defect in any street, sidewalk or bridge, the city clerk shall immediately furnish the corporation counsel with a copy of it. The corporation counsel shall investigate the claim, and require the city engineer, department of public works, chief of police and/or any other relevant city department or official to cooperate and respond to said request within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-157 along with § 2-86 amends and supersedes former § 2-45 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 14. 
Cross reference— Duties of clerk, public works department when claim arises from defective streets, sidewalks, bridges, § 2-86.  
Sec. 2-158. - Approval of claims for damages. 
No claim for personal or property damages against the city shall be considered without consultation with the corporation counsel, nor shall any such claim be approved and paid except in accord with the requirements of the state statutes, city charter and ordinances, as amended from time to time, and with procedures adopted by the corporation counsel to effectuate said requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-158 amends and supersedes former § 2-46 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 16; Ord. of 4-7-93.  
Sec. 2-159. - Corporation counsel—Collection of claims. 
The corporation counsel shall take all necessary actions to collect all sums due and owing from any third party that is liable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-159 amends and supersedes former § 2-48 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 599.  
Sec. 2-160. - Duties of city clerk, corporation counsel when assessment appealed. 
The corporation counsel shall exercise reasonable efforts to secure a speedy determination of appeals concerning an assessment or apportionment of damages or benefits, and notify the city clerk of any withdrawal of appeal, or final judgment of the appropriate court in the case. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-160 along with § 2-88 amends and supersedes former § 2-67 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 43. 
Cross reference— Duties of city clerk, corporation counsel when assessment appealed, § 2-88.  
Sec. 2-161. - Corporation counsel—Written employment contract forms, employment contract list. 
(a)  The corporation counsel shall approve all written employment contract forms executed by the mayor on behalf of any municipal department, authority, board, commission, bureau or office, or by the president of the board of aldermen on behalf of the board or aldermen. 
(b)  The office of the corporation counsel shall maintain a current list of all employment contracts pertaining to short term and part time municipal employees indicating thereon the following information: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Residence; 
(3)  Beginning and ending date of contract; 
(4)  Rate of compensation; and 
(5)  Total maximum amount of compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-161 partially amends and supersedes former § 2-149 which derived from Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-162. - Legal services contracts. 
No city official, employee or agency (except the board of education for contracts not exceeding one (1) year) shall engage any individual or firm to provide legal services to or on behalf of the city, nor shall any city funds be spent or obligated for such purpose, without prior aldermanic approval. The corporation counsel shall submit requests for such approval (other than those originating with the board of aldermen) to the president of said board on behalf of the originating agency, official or employee. All requests for such approval shall be accompanied by a draft of the contract to which the request pertains. Approval by said board shall be required unless approved by at least two (2) members of aldermanic leadership, which for these purposes shall be its president, majority leader and minority leader. A copy of each legal services contract executed on behalf of the city shall be filed promptly with the controller, city clerk and corporation counsel. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-162 amends and supersedes former § 2-182 which derived from the Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 3-15-99.  
Sec. 2-163. - Corporation counsel—Service contracts, living wage. 
The corporation counsel shall approve the form and correctness of the language used in all service contracts pertaining to the city's living wage program, and incorporate the provisions of the pertinent article as those provisions apply to such contracts. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-163 amends and supersedes former § 2-226 which derived from Ord. of 4-24-97.  
Sec. 2-164. - Corporation counsel—Annual report to the board of aldermen. 
The corporation counsel shall submit an annual report on the operations of the office for the previous fiscal year. The report shall be submitted to an official or office designated by the mayor on or before a date that he/she specifies. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Cross reference— Annual reports required by the board of aldermen, § 3-61.  
Secs. 2-165—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TAX COLLECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Tax collector. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 12-130 and the city charter as they are amended from time to time, there shall be a tax collector in the City of New Haven, who shall have full powers and duties as state and local laws and regulations impose on him/her. This official shall be bonded. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-192. - Tax collector, powers and duties. 
The tax collector shall have powers and duties including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Receive and collect all taxes, assessments, and except where otherwise provided by charter or ordinance, all license fees owed to the city from all persons liable to pay the same as authorized by city charter section 30 as amended from time to time; 
(2)  Sign certificates of tax liens if assessments are not paid when they are due and owing; 
(3)  Sign certificates of the release and discharge of tax liens; 
(4)  Enforce payment of all taxes and assessments through the execution of tax warrants as provided by Conn. General Statutes sections 12-162—12-163 as either or both are amended from time to time; 
(5)  Notify the city's corporation counsel, or outside counsel when appropriate, to proceed to take legal steps as may be necessary to enforce payment of delinquent taxes or assessments, and to protect liens of same. The tax collector may need to obtain authorization to use outside counsel from the board of aldermen based on factors including the amount in controversy, and duration of such services; 
(6)  Provide each person from whom taxes are due with a bill containing the assessment amount, and an attachment with a statement of the year and amount of delinquent taxes, if any, as provided by Conn. General Statutes section 12-130 as amended from time to time; 
(7)  Refer tax deferrals with his/her recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 12-174 as amended from time to time; and 
(8)  Continue any tax lien upon any item of real estate by making out a certificate pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 12-175 as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-192 amends and supersedes former §§ 2-64, 65 which derived from the Code of 1928, §§ 45—47.  
Sec. 2-193. - Tax collector, daily deposits. 
Pursuant to city charter section 32 as amended from time to time, the tax collector shall deposit all moneys that he/she collects during each twenty-four (24) hour period with the city treasurer before 3:00 p.m. of each business day. The treasurer shall give a receipt for such deposit to the tax collector, who in turn files it with the controller. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Secs. 2-194—2-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY DEPARTMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-221—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ENGINEERING 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Department of engineering established. 
The department of engineering is hereby established as a functional unit of city government, and said department shall be under the charge of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-242. - Department of engineering—Books, records required. 
The department of engineering shall keep appropriate records pertaining to engineering. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-243. - Duties of city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer shall serve as the city's technical advisor on matters concerning infrastructure improvements, roads, sidewalks, bridges, public facilities, public spaces, lighting, flood protection, drainage and other technical issues as deemed appropriate. 
(b)  The city engineer shall execute the duties imposed upon him/her by the city charter and other provisions of this Code as they are amended from time to time, and obey all proper orders that he/she receives from the mayor, the board of aldermen and any of its committees. 
(c)  The city engineer shall prepare all maps, surveys and plans in connection with litigation in which the city is a party when requested to do so by the mayor or corporation counsel. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-243 amends and supersedes former § 2-60 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 683.  
Sec. 2-244. - City engineer to prepare maps and charts, and provide information concerning property affected by public improvements. 
The city engineer shall maintain all maps pertinent to public rights of way and property owned by the city, except in cases where property is taken by tax foreclosure, or purchased for the purpose of resale or disposition not for private use. Such maps are to be used in connection with proposed public improvement developments. Where rights of way or property lines are in question, the city may cause survey(s) to be prepared to validate property street line divisions before such public improvements are made. If adjacent property is benefited or damaged by public improvements, the city engineer shall cause a map to be prepared identifying frontage, dimension and area of the affected property. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-244 amends and supersedes former § 2-61 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 42  
Sec. 2-245. - City engineer—Structural safety evaluations of bridges and other public infrastructure facilities. 
The city engineer shall maintain a list of city owned bridges, and periodically evaluate their structural conditions, and assess their safety for public use. Weight limits and the closing of unsafe structures will be based on the city engineer's structural evaluations. If asked to evaluate other structures, such as buildings, tunnels or other physical improvements on public property, or within the public right-of-way, the city engineer shall render an opinion dealing with its structural integrity, advise the appropriate public entity of such condition, and recommend any emergency measures to safeguard the situation. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Secs. 2-246—2-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Harbor and wharves, Ch. 15; abatement of nuisances by director of public works, § 18-20; sewers, Ch. 25; streets, sidewalks and public ways, Ch. 27. 
 
Sec. 2-271. - Department of public works established. 
The department of public works is hereby created as a functional unit of city government, and said department shall be under the charge of the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-272. - Department of public works—Books, records required. 
The department of public works shall keep appropriate records pertaining to any issues involving the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, curbs and paving of public property under its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-272 amends and supersedes former § 2-51 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 676.  
Sec. 2-273. - Fiscal responsibility. 
The director of public works shall remain fiscally responsible, and provide appropriate accounting records for funds in compliance with practices as prescribed by the controller. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-273 amends and supersedes former § 2-52 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 675.  
Sec. 2-274. - Same—Payment of receipts. 
All payments received by the department of public works for services rendered, or for permits issued in carrying out its responsibilities, shall be processed through the controller's office. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-274 amends and supersedes former § 2-53 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 679.  
Sec. 2-275. - Supervision of railroad maintenance. 
(a)  When railroads cross public intersections, or are in parallel conjunction with other public uses, the city shall comply with railroad charters, and regulations governing such work. 
(b)  Where bridges cross railroads the director of public works shall support and implement directives that the board of aldermen set forth pursuant to city charter section 47 as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-275 amends and supersedes former § 2-54 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 817.  
Sec. 2-276. - Authority over abandoned property. 
The department of public works shall be responsible for clearing the public right-of-way from abandoned property and for its disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-276 amends and supersedes former § 2-55 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 680. 
State Law reference— Authority of city over personal effects of ejected tenants when abandoned on sidewalks, § 47a-42 conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 2-277. - Record keeping. 
The department of public works shall keep copies of all notices emanating from or transmitted by it to parties in interest for encroachments upon streets, or laying sidewalks and setting curbs. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-277 along with § 2-129 amends and supersedes former § 2-59 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 681. 
Cross reference— Duties of controller re public works records, § 2-129.  
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-278. - Department of public safety communications established. 
The department of public safety communications is hereby established as a functional unit of city government and said department shall be under the charge of a department head appointed by the mayor. The department head shall report to the chief administrative officer who also has oversight of the police and fire departments. 
(Ord. No. 1608, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 2-279. - Department records. 
The department of public safety communications shall maintain appropriate and required records pertaining all city 911 calls and city emergency responses. 
(Ord. No. 1608, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 2-280. - Duties of the director of department of public safety communications. 
The director shall be responsible for all aspects of the department including development and enforcement of procedures, hiring and scheduling and training staff, budgeting, reporting, quality assurance and maintaining and upgrading communications and related equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1608, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 2-281. - Fiscal responsibility. 
The department of public safety communications shall prepare annual operating and capital budgets incorporating expenses previously budgeted in the communications-related portions of the police budget and the fire budget. The department of public safety communications shall be responsible for budgeting and administering emergency communications funds received from the state or federal governments for operational or capital purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1608, 11-16-09)  
Secs. 2-282—2-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CITY EMPLOYEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1391, adopted Sept. 19, 2005, repealed the following former provisions of ch. 2 relating to employees: 
Section 	Subject 	History 
2-73 	Eight-hour day for labor; weekly payment 	Code 1928, §§ 677, 678; Ord. of 11-8-28 
2-76 	Political activity prohibited 	Ord. of 4-1-46 
2-78 	Establishment of grievance machinery 	Ord. of 6-4-45, § 5 
2-79 	Authority of mayor to intervene in disputes 	Ord. of 6-4-45, § 7 
2-86 	Special pensions established 	Ord. of 1-13-61 
2-87 	Permanent, full-time employees defined, mandatory retirement age 	Ord. of 5-4-87; Ord. of 8-2-93 
 
Charter reference— Department of personnel and civil service, §§ 200—220. 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Employee associations. 
Conn. General Statutes sections 7-466 to 7-477 as amended from time to time shall control employees' rights to organize and other employee organizational issues. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-301 amends and supersedes former § 2-77 which derived from Ord. of 6-4-45, §§ 1—4, 6.  
Sec. 2-302. - Waiver of pensions by employees. 
(a)  Any person entitled to: 
(1)  A pension from any of the city's pension funds who is under the age of seventy and one-half (70½); or 
(2)  Spousal survivorship benefits on account of the death of an active member who would have been younger than age seventy and one-half (70½) when such survivorship benefits are to be paid may decline to accept all or any part of such pension/survivorship benefits by a waiver signed and filed with the mayor or his/her designee. Such waiver may be revoked in writing at any time but no payment of the waived pension/survivorship benefits shall be made covering the period such waiver was in effect. The waiver shall be deemed revoked when the retiree becomes seventy and one-half (70½) or when the member, on whose account survivorship benefits would have been paid, would have become age seventy and one-half (70½) if he or she had not died. 
(b)  Except as provided herein, no person who leaves employment with the city and receives a pension benefit from one (1) of the city's pension funds, either due to retirement, due to disability or due to achieving the requisite age and/or years of service to qualify for city pension benefits, shall be, after March 1, 2017 re-employed full-time by the city or the city board of education, whether paid from the general fund budget, grants or any special funds. As a condition of re-employment with the city as a full-time employee, any such retiree shall sign a waiver of pension, as described in subsection (a) above and, except as provided in said subsection, shall not revoke such waiver of pension during the period of his or her re-employment. A full-time employee shall be defined as an employee occupying a position for the city requiring said employee to perform services for twenty (20) or more hours each week for a period of six (6) months or more. In order to be compliant with section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, nothing herein shall be so construed so as to apply, to any rehired city retiree who is age seventy and one-half (70½) or older. 
(c)  The trustees or other authorized administrators of any of the city's pension funds are hereby authorized to amend their by-laws to include a provision therein in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1813 , §§ 1—3, 1-17-17) 
Editor's note— § 2-302 amends and supersedes former § 2-85 which derived from Ord. of 10-23-56, §§ 1, 2.  
Sec. 2-303. - Use of city vehicles by officers and employees. 
(a)  Except as provided for in regulations that the chief administrative officer submits to the board of aldermen and files with the city clerk, no city employee, officer or official shall use a city leased or owned vehicle for personal use. 
(b)  On July 1 and January 1 of each year, the chief administrative officer shall provide the board of aldermen with a list of all city- leased or owned vehicles, and all persons who have used them during each six (6) month period. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-303 amends and supersedes former § 2-88 which derived from Ord. of 7-2-79, §§ 1, 2.  
Sec. 2-304. - Limitation on temporary appointments. 
No person may serve in a temporary employment position with the city beyond one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-304 amends and supersedes former § 2-147 which derived fromOrd. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 5-7-84.  
Sec. 2-305. - Bond fund limitation. 
No municipal employee shall have his/her compensation paid from bond funds unless that employee's work is related solely to the bonded project from which said compensation is paid, and only then until completion of the employee's work related to the project. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-305 amends and supersedes former § 2-148 which derived from Ord. of 6-6-83.  
Sec. 2-306. - Board of education, personal services. 
Unless otherwise provided, no ordinance in this chapter shall supersede any law or regulation of the city charter, state statute or other applicable law pertaining to the procurement of personal services by the New Haven Board of Education. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-306 amends and supersedes former § 2-150 which derived from Ord. of 6-6-83.  
Sec. 2-307. - Leaves of absence for military duty. 
(a)  Leaves granted. Every employee of the city, excepting temporary employees, upon enlistment or receipt of an order directing him to report for service with the armed forces of the United States, the national guard, naval reserve or other unit, or upon entering upon civil emergency defense employment pursuant to requisition by the federal or state government or both, shall be given a leave of absence from the employ of the city during the period of such service or employment. 
(b)  Reinstatement. Every such employee of the city shall be reinstated to the position occupied by him upon entering any of said forms of service, and such position shall be available to such person immediately upon his release or return from service, providing that such position has not been abolished for good and sufficient cause, providing such employee shall have contracted no physical or mental disability which would incapacitate him from performing his usual duties in such position, and providing such employee shall resume such employment, or advise the commissioner in charge of the bureau or department in which he has been employed, of his intention to return to his position in the city service, in which event the commissioner shall allow such time for such employee to return as he may deem proper under the circumstances, but in any event not more than ninety days shall elapse between the time of release or return from such federal or state service or employment, or both, and resumption of city employment period. 
(c)  Investigation of disability before reinstatement. The mayor is hereby empowered to appoint a nonpartisan commission of three members, one of whom shall be a physician, to pass upon all questions of physical and/or mental disability which may arise out of the application of any employee to resume his former employment by the city after being granted a leave of absence under this section. 
(d)  Rights not affected. Absence from employment by the city under the provisions of this section shall not operate to deprive any employee of any benefit of civil service or the benefits under the provisions of any statute or ordinance now existing or hereafter enacted relating to sick leave, vacations, or any other or similar benefits, and such employee shall be deemed to have been in continuous employ of the city during such absence for such service. 
(e)  Controller to furnish copies of section. It shall be the duty of the controller of the city to deliver to any employee of the city granted a leave of absence under the terms of this section, a copy of said section, expressing the policy of the board of aldermen, together with a copy of the authority granting leave to the particular individual named therein. The controller is hereby directed, upon delivery of the copy of said section and authority granting leave of absence, to obtain from such employee, in the manner and form approved by the controller, a signed receipt showing that said employee has received and acknowledges receipt thereof. Such receipt shall be in duplicate, one copy of which shall be filed in a permanent file by the controller, and a duplicate filed with the civil service commission of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-3-41, §§ 1—5) 
Note— Formerly numbered as 2-75. 
State Law reference— Reinstatement of employees after military service, § 7-462 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); leaves of absence, compensation of reservists on training assignments, § 7-461 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 2-308. - Compensation to injured employees—Appropriation authorized. 
The board of finance shall make suitable provision and appropriation annually, for the payment of approved claims and awards against the city for compensation to its employees for injury arising out of and in course of employment or death resulting from injury so sustained, and for insurance premiums to cover such claims not otherwise provided for. 
(Code 1928, § 19) 
Note— Formerly numbered as section 2-80. 
Cross reference— Reimbursement of police for injuries, expenses, § 22-1; medical care for members of special constable unit injured on duty, §§ 22-1—22-8.  
Sec. 2-309. - Same—Duty of department heads to report claims; procedure. 
It shall be the duty of the head of each department to promptly obtain a statement, in triplicate, from the claimant, and give notice in triplicate on the forms provided by the controller, of all claims for such compensation, together with such other information as said forms may require. Said statements and notices shall be mailed or delivered to the office of the city clerk, who shall cause to be certified thereon the time and date received by him, and forthwith transmit two (2) copies of the same to the office of the corporation counsel, who shall, if necessary, cause said claim to be fully investigated. 
No compensation shall be paid, except in cases where an award has been made by the compensation commissioner, unless the corporation counsel or one of his assistants shall certify that in his opinion the claimant is entitled to compensation, and the rate thereof. 
(Code 1928, § 19) 
Note— Formerly numbered as § 2-81.  
Sec. 2-310. - Same—Notice to corporation counsel when employee resumes work. 
The head of the department in which the claimant was employed, shall promptly mail or deliver to the office of the corporation counsel notice of the return of the injured employee to work, if any time is lost, or the offer of suitable employment and the wage thereof and his failure or refusal, if any, to accept the same. 
(Code 1928, § 19) 
Note— Formerly numbered as 2-82.  
Sec. 2-311. - Same—Authority of clerk to execute agreements. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized to sign in behalf of the city all voluntary agreements affecting such claims, upon their approval by the corporation counsel or an assistant corporation counsel. 
(Code 1928, § 19) 
Note— Formerly numbered as 2-83.  
Sec. 2-312. - Same—Approval of bills, awards by corporation counsel; transmittal to controller. 
All bills, or awards, submitted to the city for payment, under any claims for such compensation, shall be submitted to the corporation counsel or either assistant corporation counsel for his approval and when so approved transmitted by him to the controller. A copy of the notice, of the statement of the claimant, of the report of the investigator and of the voluntary agreement shall be transmitted to the controller by the corporation counsel or either assistant. 
(Code 1928, § 19) 
Note— Formerly numbered as 2-84.  
Secs. 2-313—2-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1391, adopted Sept. 19, 2005, repealed former section 2-30 in its entirety which pertained to reports by commercial movers to the registrar of elections and derived from Ord. of 4-4-38. 
Charter reference— General election laws to be applied in city elections, § 8; officers to be elected, § 9; special elections on improvement bonds, §§ 68, 69. 
Cross reference— Loitering around polls prohibited, § 18-15. 
State Law reference— State elections laws, G.S. § 9-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-341. - Registrars of voters. 
(a)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 9-189a and notwithstanding city charter section 9 as each is amended from time to time, the registrars of voters shall be elected for a term of four (4) years from the first Wednesday following the first Monday of January succeeding their election. Each registrar shall reside in the city while in office. 
(b)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 9-192 as amended from time to time, each registrar of voters shall appoint a deputy registrar of voters immediately after his/her election. The deputy registrar will hold office during the registrar's pleasure. The registrars may fill any vacancy in said office at any time. 
(c)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 9-169 as amended from time to time, the registrars of voters shall keep separate lists of the electors residing in each district, and shall appoint a moderator for each district, and such other election officials as are required by law. Additionally, the registrars shall designate one of the moderators or any other elector of the city to be the head moderator for the purpose of declaring the results of elections in the entire city. 
(d)  The registrars shall comply with all other laws and regulations regarding their office duties. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-341 amends and supersedes former § 2-27 which derived from Ord. of 9-13-82, § 2, Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-342. - Checkers. 
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 9-234 as amended from time to time, each registrar shall appoint some suitable person to check the list of eligible voters in each district. Each such person, who is so appointed checker, shall check the name of each elector on such list when he/she offers his/her vote. No voting machine tender shall permit any vote to be cast upon the voting machine until the name has been so checked. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-343. - Moderator. 
(a)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 9-312 as amended from time to time, there shall be a head moderator who will be the presiding officer for the purposes of declaring the voting result of the entire city, and of making returns to the Secretary of State and the city clerk. The moderators in each voting district shall be assistant presiding officers, who shall make returns of their polls as required by law. 
(b)  The moderator of the poll at any city election or vote shall see that the official checkers shall have full and free opportunity to exercise their office, that every voter shall have convenient and unobstructed opportunity to vote, that a free passage to the voting booth shall be kept open, and that the polls and voting booths shall be kept free from noise and disturbance. 
(c)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statute section 9-230 as amended from time to time, when any disorder arises during an election, and the offender refuses to submit to the moderator's lawful authority, the moderator may order any officer with power to arrest to take the offender into custody, and if necessary, to remove him/her from such election until he/she conforms to order or, if need be, until such election is closed, and thereupon such officer shall have power to command all necessary assistance. 
(d)  All moderators shall comply with all other laws and regulations regarding their duties of office. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-343 amends and supersedes former § 2-29 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 468. 
State Law reference— Appointment, duties of challengers, § 9-232 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); authority of moderators to suppress disorder, compel obedience to orders, § 9-230 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 2-344. - Recording of returns. 
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 9-314 as amended from time to time, the head moderator shall transmit complete election results for each contested office to the Secretary of State or state police, and the city clerk after all elections. The return shall include a statement of the total number of names on the city's official check list, and the total number checked as having voted. The city clerk shall procure a copy of the certified returns from the head moderator and record the same in the city records. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-344 amends and supersedes former § 2-28 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 466.  
Sec. 2-345. - Hours of voting. 
Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 9-174 as amended from time to time, the polls shall remain open for voting from six o'clock (6:00) a.m. until eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. at all regular and special municipal elections held on a day other than the day of a regular or special state election. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-345 supersedes former § 2-31 which derived from Ord. of 8-1-66.  
Sec. 2-346. - Board for admission of electors. 
(a)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes sect. 9-15a as amended from time to time, there is hereby created a board for admission of electors (herein called the "board") which shall carry out the duties and responsibilities assigned to such board by the constitution and the laws of the State of Connecticut relating to the admission of persons to the privileges of electors, and to the erasure from the voting registry list of the names of those who have forfeited these privileges. 
(b)  The board shall consist of the city clerk and the registrars of voters in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Any board member who is unable to attend a session for admission of electors shall designate another elected officer to act on his/her behalf by filing a statement of such designation in writing in the office of the city clerk at any time prior to the opening of the session unless a deputy of the city clerk is available to serve in the absence of the city clerk, and unless the deputy registrar of voters is available to serve in the absence of the registrar of voters. 
(d)  The bare majority of the board members shall constitute a quorum. A deputy of the city clerk or a deputy registrar of voters, or any other elected officer designated in the manner described in subsection (c), shall be included as a member of the board for the purposes of establishing a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-346 along with § 2-82 amends and supersedes former § 2-32 which derived from Ord. of 11-10-75. 
Cross reference— Duty of city clerk to serve on the board of admission electors, § 2-82.  
Sec. 2-347. - Petition requirements. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-9 as amended from time to time, whenever the provisions of the state statutes or any special act provides that an action is to be initiated by petition from registered voters, and be voted on by the city's electorate, the city clerk shall prescribe or approve of the petition form. Each page of the petition shall contain a statement, signed under penalties of false statement, by the person who circulated it, setting forth: 
(1)  The circulator's name and address; 
(2)  That each person whose name appears on said page signed it in the presence of such circulator, that the circulator either knows each such signer, or that the signer satisfactorily identified himself/herself to the circulator; and 
(3)  That all the signatures on each page were obtained not earlier than six (6) months prior to the filing of said petition. 
(b)  Any page of a petition that does not contain such a statement by the circulator shall be invalid. Any circulator who makes a false statement in the aforesaid statement shall be subject to the penalty provided for false statement. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-348. - Advisory referendum established. 
(a)  Upon a written request by any person, and a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote by the full board of aldermen, said board may submit a non-binding referendum to the city's electorate at the next regular state or municipal election. 
(b)  [Petition papers; action of board:] 
(1)  Any city elector may apply to the city clerk for petition papers for an advisory, non-binding referendum on any question. The application shall contain a statement of the question for which the referendum is sought. The city clerk shall provide the elector with sufficient copies of petition papers within five (5) business days of such request for soliciting signatures. All petition papers shall contain the same statement of the referendum question, bear the city clerk's certificate showing the date that the petition papers were issued, and shall indicate the name and address of the person to whom they were issued. In order to bring the referendum question to the board of aldermen for consideration, the petition papers must be signed by eight (8) percent of the city's electorate. 
(2)  The petition papers must be filed with the city clerk within ninety (90) calendar days of their issuance date. The papers must be the same as those that were provided or approved by the city clerk, and must contain the circulator's name and address, a statement that the circulator either knows, or was given satisfactory evidence of each signer's identity, and all the signatures on each page must have been obtained no earlier than six (6) months before the filing of the petition. The circulator must be a registered voter in the city, and must sign and date each petition paper under penalties of false statement. 
(3)  The city clerk shall certify to each petition paper's validity, and refer it to the registrar of voters on the next business day after its return. The registrar of voters shall verify the signatures to be those of registered voters, endorse the findings, and return all petition papers to the clerk within ten (10) business days of such referral. On the next business day after a sufficient number of verified signatures have been returned to the city clerk, the clerk shall submit the petition papers to the board of aldermen for its consideration at its next regular meeting. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the petition papers, the board shall refer the referendum question to the appropriate aldermanic committee for a public hearing before the next regular board meeting. At the board meeting following the public hearing, the board by a majority vote of those present may submit the referendum question to the city's electorate as described in subsection (a) above. If the board of aldermen takes no action on the referendum within forty (40) days after the board receives it, the referendum question shall be deemed approved. 
(5)  If a petitioner pursues the procedures described in this section, and the number of verified signatures equals or exceeds twelve (12) percent of the city's electorate, the advisory, non-binding referendum question shall appear on the ballot of the next regular state or municipal election. 
(6)  The form of petition papers provided by the city clerk under this section shall be substantially in the following form: 
We, the undersigned electors of the City of New Haven, hereby demand the following question be placed before the voters of the city in an advisory, non-binding referendum at the next state or local election. 
Name 	Address (on the last voting list) 	Date 
_______ 	_______ 	_______ 
_______ 	_______ 	_______ 
 
(7)  The circulator shall attest to the signature of all signers at the bottom of each petition page as follows: 
State of Connecticut       ) 
County of New Haven       ) 	ss. New Haven 
 
_______, being duly sworn, deposes and says that he/she is the circulator of the petition papers of which this page is a part, and that each signature subscribed hereon was made in his/her presence, and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
(signed) _____ 
Subscribed and sworn to this _______ day of _______ 
_____
Notary Public 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-348 amends and supersedes former § 2-33 which derived from Ord. of 5-3-82, § 2.  
Sec. 2-349. - Binding referenda. 
Notwithstanding the ordinance pertaining to any advisory referendum, all binding referenda shall be governed by appropriate federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-350. - Primary petition forms. 
The registrars of voters shall comply with all applicable requirements concerning petition forms for candidacies for nomination to municipal office, or for election as members of town committees as expressed in Title 9 Chapter 153 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended from time to time, and all associated federal and state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-351. - Wards established. 
The 30-ward redistricting plan redistricting the wards of the City of New Haven in accordance with article III, section 3 et. seq. of the Charter of the City of New Haven, which plan is incorporated herein by reference, is hereby approved and adopted and that section 2-351 et. seq. of the Code of Ordinances be amended to reflect said plan which will take effect on January 1, 2013. 
WARD 1 
Ward 1 includes census blocks: 
090091401001005, 090091401001015, 090091401001016, 090093614011000, 090093614011001, 090093614011002, 090093614011003, 090093614013003, 090093614013007, 090093614022004, 090093614022005, 090093614022006, 090093614022007. 
WARD 2 
Ward 2 includes census blocks: 
090091407002000, 090091407002001, 090091407002002, 090091407002003, 090091407002004, 090091407003000, 090091407004000, 090091407004001, 090091407005000, 090091407005001, 090091407005002, 090091407005003, 090091407005004, 090091407005005, 090091416002005, 090091416002006, 090091416003010, 090093614012000, 090093614012001, 090093614012004, 090093614013001, 090093614013002, 090093614013005, 090093614013006, 090093614013008. 
WARD 3 
Ward 3 includes census blocks: 
090091403002003, 090091403002005, 090091403002006, 090091403002007, 090091403002008, 090091403002009, 090091403002010, 090091403002021, 090091403002022, 090091403002023, 090091403002026, 090091403002027, 090091406001000, 090091406001001, 090091406001002, 090091406001003, 090091406001004, 090091406001005, 090091406001006, 090091406002000, 090091406002001, 090091406002002, 090091406002003, 090091406002004, 090091406002005, 090091406003000, 090091406003008, 090091406004000, 090091406004001, 090091406004002, 090091406004003, 090091406004004, 090091406004005, 090091406004006, 090091408001010, 090091408001011, 090091408001012, 090091408001015, 090091408002006, 090091408002007, 090091408002008, 090091408003006, 090091408003007, 090091408003008, 090091408003009, 090091408003010, 090091408003011, 090091408003012, 090091408003013, 090091408003014, 090091408003015, 090091408003016. 
WARD 4 
Ward 4 includes census blocks: 
090091403001003, 090091403002039, 090091403002040, 090091405001000, 090091405001001, 090091405001002, 090091405001003, 090091405001004, 090091405001005, 090091405001006, 090091405001007, 090091405001010, 090091405002006, 090091405002007, 090091405002008, 090091405002009, 090091405002010, 090091405002011, 090091405003000, 090091405003001, 090091405003002, 090091405003003, 090091405003004, 090091405003005, 090091405003006, 090091405003007, 090091405003008, 090091405003009, 090091405003010, 090091405003011, 090091405003012, 090091405003013, 090091405003014, 090091405003015, 090091405003016, 090091405003017, 090091405003018, 090091406003001, 090091406003002, 090091406003003, 090091406003004, 090091406003005, 090091406003006, 090091406003007, 090091406005000, 090091406005001, 090091406005002, 090091406005003. 
WARD 5 
Ward 5 includes census blocks: 
090091403001001, 090091403001002, 090091403001004, 090091403001005, 090091403001006, 090091403001007, 090091404001000, 090091404001001, 090091404001002, 090091404001003, 090091404001004, 090091404001005, 090091404001006, 090091404001007, 090091404001008, 090091404001009, 090091404001010, 090091404001011, 090091404001012, 090091404001013, 090091404001014, 090091404001015, 090091404001016, 090091404001017, 090091404002000, 090091404002001, 090091404002002, 090091404002003, 090091405001008, 090091405001009, 090091405002000, 090091405002001, 090091405002002, 090091405002003, 090091405002004, 090091405002005, 090091405002012, 090091405002013, 090091405002014, 090091405002015. 
WARD 6 
Ward 6 includes census blocks: 
090091401001012, 090091401001029, 90091401001030, 090091401001031, 090091401001032, 090091401001037, 090091401001038, 090091401001039, 090091401001040, 090091401001041, 090091401001042, 090091401001043, 090091401001044, 090091401001045, 090091401001046, 090091402001000, 090091402001001, 090091402001002, 090091402001003, 090091402001004, 090091402001005, 090091402001006, 090091402001007, 090091402001008, 090091402001009, 090091402001010, 090091402001011, 090091402001012, 090091402001013, 090091402001014, 090091402001015, 090091402001016, 090091402001017, 090091402001018, 090091402001019, 090091402001020, 090091402001021, 090091402001022, 090091402001023, 090091402001024, 090091402001025, 090091402001026, 090091402001027, 090091402001028, 090091402001029, 090091402001030, 090091402001031, 090091402001032, 090091402001033, 090091402001034, 090091402001035, 090091402001036, 090091402001037, 090091402001038, 090091402001039, 090091402001040, 090091402001041, 090091402001042, 090091402001043, 090091403001000, 090091403002011, 090091403002012, 090091403002013, 090091403002014, 090091403002015, 090091403002016, 090091403002017, 090091403002018, 090091403002019, 090091403002020, 090091403002024, 090091403002025, 090091403002028, 090091403002029, 090091403002030, 090091403002031, 090091403002032, 090091403002033, 090091403002034, 090091403002035, 090091403002036, 090091403002037, 090091403002038, 090091404002004, 090091404002005, 090091404002006, 090091404002007, 090091404002008, 090091404002009, 090091404002010, 090091404002011, 090091404002012, 090091404002013, 090091404002014, 090091404002015, 090091404002016, 090091404002017, 090091404002018, 090091404002019, 090091404002020, 090091404002021, 090091404002022, 090091404002023, 090091422001030, 090091422001031, 090091422002009, 090091422002010, 090091422002012, 090091422002013, 090091422002014, 090091422002015, 090091422002018, 090091422002019, 090091422002020, 090091422002021. 
WARD 7 
Ward 7 includes census blocks: 
090091401001000, 090091401001001, 090091401001002, 090091401001003, 090091401001004, 090091401001006, 090091401001007, 090091401001008, 090091401001009, 090091401001010, 090091401001013, 090091401001014, 090091401001017, 090091401001018, 090091401001019, 090091401001020, 090091401001021, 090091401001022, 090091401001023, 090091401001024, 090091401001025, 090091401001026, 090091401001027, 090091401001028, 090091401001033, 090091401001034, 090091401001035, 090091403002000, 090091403002001, 090091403002002, 090091403002004, 090091407003002, 090091407003003, 090091420002000, 090091420002001, 090091420002002, 090091420002003, 090091420002004, 090091420002005, 090091420002006, 090091420002007, 090091420002008, 090091420002009, 090091420003002, 090091420003003, 090091420003004, 090091420003005, 090091420003008, 090091420003009, 090091420003010, 090091420003011, 090091421001005, 090091421001012, 090091421001013, 090091421001014, 090091421001015, 090093614011004, 090093614011005, 090093614011006, 090093614012002, 090093614012003, 090093614012005. 
WARD 8 
Ward 8 includes census blocks: 
090091401001011, 090091401001036, 090091421001016, 090091421001017, 090091421001018, 090091421001019, 090091421001020, 090091421001024, 090091421001025, 090091421001026, 090091421001028, 090091421001029, 090091422001000, 090091422001001, 090091422001002, 090091422001003, 090091422001004, 090091422001005, 090091422001006, 090091422001007, 090091422001008, 090091422001009, 090091422001010, 090091422001011, 090091422001012, 090091422001013, 090091422001014, 090091422001015, 090091422001016, 090091422001017, 090091422001018, 090091422001019, 090091422001020, 090091422001021, 090091422001022, 090091422001023, 090091422001024, 090091422001025, 090091422001026, 090091422001027, 090091422001028, 090091422001029, 090091422002000, 090091422002001, 090091422002002, 090091422002003, 090091422002004, 090091422002005, 090091422002006, 090091422002007, 090091422002008, 090091422002011, 090091422002016, 090091422002017, 090091423001001, 090091423001002, 090091423001003, 090091423001004, 090091423001005, 090091423001010, 090091423002021, 090091423002022, 090091423002023, 090091423002024, 090091423002025, 090091423002026, 090091423002027, 090091424003006, 090091424003007, 090091424003008, 090091424004011, 090091424004012, 090091427003000, 090091427003001, 090091427003005, 090091427003006, 090091427004000, 090091427004001, 090091427004009, 090091427004010, 090091427004011, 090091427004012, 090091427004021, 090091427004022. 
WARD 9 
Ward 9 includes census blocks: 
090091419002000, 090091419002001, 090091419002002, 090091419002003, 090091419002004, 090091419002005, 090091419002006, 090091419002007, 090091419002008, 090091419002009, 090091419003000, 090091419003002, 090091419003003, 090091419003004, 090091419003005, 090091419003006, 090091419003007, 090091420001000, 090091420001001, 090091421001000, 090091421001001, 090091421001002, 090091421001003, 090091421001004, 090091421001006, 090091421001007, 090091421001008, 090091421001009, 090091421001010, 090091421001011, 090091421001021, 090091421001022, 090091421001023, 090091421001027, 090091421001030, 090091424001014, 090091424001015, 090091424001020, 090091424001021, 090091424001022, 090091424001023, 090091424001028, 090091424001029, 090091424001030, 090091424003002, 090091424003003, 090091424003004, 090091424003005, 090091424004000, 090091424004002, 090091424004003, 090091424004004, 090091424004005, 090091424004006, 090091424004007, 090091424004008, 090091424004009, 090091424004010. 
WARD 10 
Ward 10 includes census blocks: 
090091419001000, 090091419003001, 090091419004000, 090091419004001, 090091419004002, 090091419004003, 090091419004004, 090091419004005, 090091419005000, 090091419005001, 090091419005002, 090091419005003, 090091419005004, 090091419005005, 090091419005007, 090091419005008, 090091419005009, 090091419005010, 090091419005011, 090091419005012, 090091419005013, 090091419005014, 090091419005015, 090091419005016, 090091419005017, 090091419005018, 090091424001000, 090091424001001, 090091424001002, 090091424001003, 090091424001004, 090091424001005, 090091424001006, 090091424001007, 090091424001008, 090091424001009, 090091424001010, 090091424001011, 090091424001012, 090091424001013, 090091424001016, 090091424001017, 090091424001018, 090091424001019, 090091425001000, 090091425001001, 090091425001002, 090091425001003, 090091425001004, 090091425001005, 090091425001006, 090091425001007, 090091425001008, 090091425001009, 090091425001010, 090091425001011, 090091425001012, 090091425001013, 090091425001014, 090091425001015, 090091425001016, 090091425001017, 090091425001018, 090091425001024, 090091425001025, 090091425001026, 090091425001027, 090091425002000, 090091425002001, 090091425002002, 090091425002003, 090091425002004, 090091425002008, 090091425002009, 090091425002010, 090091425003001, 090091425003002, 090091425003003, 090091425003004, 090091426014000, 090091426014001, 090091426014002, 090091426014003, 090091426014004, 090091426014005, 090091426014006, 090091426014007, 090091426014008, 090091426014009, 090091426014010, 090091426014011, 090091426014012, 090091426014013, 090091426014014, 090091426014015, 090091426014016, 090091426014020. 
WARD 11 
Ward 11 includes census blocks: 
090091426011007, 090091426011008, 090091426011009, 090091426031000, 090091426031001, 090091426032000, 090091426032003, 090091426032004, 090091426032005, 090091426032006, 090091426032007, 090091426032008, 090091426032009, 090091426041000, 090091426041001, 090091426041002, 090091426041008, 090091426041009. 
WARD 12 
Ward 12 includes census blocks: 
090091426011000, 090091426011001, 090091426011002, 090091426011003, 090091426011004, 090091426011005, 090091426011006, 090091426011010, 090091426012000, 090091426012001, 090091426012002, 090091426012003, 090091426012004, 090091426012005, 090091426012006, 090091426012007, 090091426012008, 090091426012009, 090091426012010, 090091426012011, 090091426012012, 090091426013000, 090091426014019, 090091426014021, 090091426014022, 090091426014023, 090091426014024, 090091426014026, 090091426014027, 090091426032001, 090091426032002. 
WARD 13 
Ward 13 includes census blocks: 
090091426014025, 090091426032010, 090091426032011, 090091426032012, 090091426032013, 090091426041003, 090091426041004, 090091426041005, 090091426041006, 090091426041007, 090091426041010, 090091426041011, 090091426041012, 090091426041013, 090091426041014, 090091426041015, 090091426041016, 090091426041017, 090091426041018, 090091426042000, 090091426042001, 090091426042002, 090091426042003, 090091426042004, 090091426042005, 090091426042006, 090091426042009, 090091426042010, 090091426042011, 090091426042012, 090091427001000, 090091427001001, 090091427001002, 090091427001003, 090091427001004, 090091427001008, 090091427004008, 090091427004025. 
WARD 14 
Ward 14 includes census blocks: 
090091423002000, 090091423002001, 090091423002002, 090091423002003, 090091423002004, 090091423002005, 090091423002006, 090091423002007, 090091423002008, 090091423002009, 090091423002010, 090091423002011, 090091423002012, 090091423002013, 090091423002014, 090091423002015, 090091423002016, 090091423002028, 090091425003009, 090091425003015, 090091425003016, 090091425003017, 090091425004000, 090091425004001, 090091425004002, 090091425004003, 090091425004004, 090091425004005, 090091425004006, 090091426042007, 090091426042008, 090091427004002, 090091427004003, 090091427004004, 090091427004005, 090091427004006, 090091427004007. 
WARD 15 
Ward 15 includes census blocks: 
090091424001024, 090091424001025, 090091424001026, 090091424001027, 090091424002000, 090091424002001, 090091424002002, 090091424002003, 090091424004001, 090091425001019, 090091425001020, 090091425001021, 090091425001022, 090091425001023, 090091425001028, 090091425001029, 090091425001030, 090091425001031, 090091425001032, 090091425001033, 090091425001034, 090091425001035, 090091425002005, 090091425002006, 090091425002007, 090091425002011, 090091425002012, 090091425002013, 090091425002014, 090091425003000, 090091425003005, 090091425003006, 090091425003007, 090091425003008, 090091425003010, 090091425003011, 090091425003012, 090091425003013, 090091425003014, 090091425005000, 090091425005001, 090091425005002, 090091425005003, 090091425005004, 090091425005005, 090091425005006, 090091426014017, 090091426014018. 
WARD 16 
Ward 16 includes census blocks: 
090091423001000, 090091423001006, 090091423001007, 090091423001008, 090091423001009, 090091423002017, 090091423002018, 090091423002019, 090091423002020, 090091423003000, 090091423003001, 090091423003002, 090091423003003, 090091423003004, 090091423003005, 090091423003006, 090091423004000, 090091423004001, 090091423004002, 090091423004003, 090091423004004, 090091423004005, 090091423004006, 090091423004007, 090091424003000, 090091424003001, 090091424003009, 090091424003010, 090091424003011, 090091424003012, 090091424003013, 090091424003014. 
WARD 17 
Ward 17 includes census blocks: 
090091427001005, 090091427001006, 090091427001007, 090091427001009, 090091427001010, 090091427001011, 090091427001012, 090091427001013, 090091427001014, 090091427001015, 090091427001016, 090091427001017, 090091427001018, 090091427001019, 090091427001020, 090091427001021, 090091427001022, 090091427001023, 090091427002000, 090091427002001, 090091427002002, 090091427002003, 090091427002004, 090091427002005, 090091427002006, 090091427002007, 090091427002008, 090091427002009, 090091427002010, 090091427002011, 090091427002012, 090091427002013, 090091427002014, 090091427002015, 090091427003002, 090091427003003, 090091427003004, 090091427003007, 090091427003008, 090091427003009, 090091427003010, 090091427003011, 090091427003012, 090091427003013, 090091427003014, 090091427003015, 090091427003016, 090091427003017, 090091427003018, 090091427003019, 090091427003020, 090091427003021, 090091427003022, 090091427003023, 090091427003024, 090091427003025, 090091427004013, 090091427004014, 090091427004015, 090091427004016, 090091427004017, 090091427004018, 090091427004019, 090091427004020, 090091427004023, 090091427004024, 090091427004026, 090091428001004, 090091428001005, 090091428001006, 090091428001008, 090091428001013, 090091428001014, 090091428001015, 090091428001016, 090091428002004, 090091428002005, 090099900000025, 090099900000026. 
WARD 18 
Ward 18 includes census blocks: 
090091428001000, 090091428001001, 090091428001002, 090091428001003, 090091428001007, 090091428001009, 090091428001010, 090091428001011, 090091428001012, 090091428002000, 090091428002001, 090091428002002, 090091428002006, 090091428002007, 090091428002008, 090091428002009, 090091428002010, 090091428002011, 090091428002012, 090091428002013, 090091428002014, 090091428002015, 090091428002016, 090091428002017, 090091428002018, 090091428003000, 090091428003001, 090091428003002, 090091428003003, 090091428003004, 090091428003005, 090091428003006, 090091428003007, 090091428003008, 090091428003009, 090091428003010, 090091428003011, 090091428003012, 090091428003013, 090091428003014, 090091428003015, 090091428003016, 090091428003017, 090091428003018, 090091428003019, 090091428003020, 090091428003021, 090091428003022, 090091428003024, 090091428004000, 090091428004001, 090091428004002, 090091428004003, 090091428004004, 090091428004005, 090091428004006, 090091428004007, 090091428004008, 090091428004010, 090091428004011, 090091428004012, 090091428004013, 090091428004014, 090091428004015, 090091428004016, 090091428004017, 090091428004018, 090091428004019, 090091428004020, 090091428004021, 090091428004022, 090091428004023, 090091428005000, 090091428005001, 090091428005002, 090091428005003, 090091428005004, 090091428005005, 090091428005006, 090091428005007, 090091428005008, 090091428005009, 090091428005010, 090091428005011. 
WARD 19 
Ward 19 includes census blocks: 
090091418001000, 090091418001001, 090091418001002, 090091418001003, 090091418001004, 090091418001005, 090091418001006, 090091418001007, 090091418001008, 090091418001009, 090091418001010, 090091418001011, 090091418001012, 090091418001013, 090091418001014, 090091418001015, 090091418001016, 090091418002003, 090091418003000, 090091418003001, 090091418003002, 090091418004000, 090091418004001, 090091418004002, 090091418004003, 090091418004004, 090091418004005, 090091418004006, 090091418004007, 090091418004008, 090091419001001, 090091419001002, 090091419001003, 090091419001004, 090091419005006. 
WARD 20 
Ward 20 includes census blocks: 
090091415001000, 090091415001001, 090091415001002, 090091415001003, 090091415001004, 090091415001005, 090091415001006, 090091415002000, 090091415002001, 090091415002002, 090091415002003, 090091415002004, 090091415003000, 090091415003001, 090091415003002, 090091415003003, 090091415003004, 090091415003005, 090091415003006, 090091415003007, 090091415003008, 090091415003009, 090091415003010, 090091415003011, 090091415004000, 090091415004001, 090091415004002, 090091415004003, 090091415004004, 090091415004005, 090091415004006, 090091415004007, 090091415004008, 090091415005000, 090091415005001, 090091415005002, 090091415005004, 090091415005005, 090091415005006, 090091415005007, 090091415007002. 
WARD 21 
Ward 21 includes census blocks: 
090091415005003, 090091415006000, 090091415006001, 090091415006002, 090091415006003, 090091415006004, 090091415006005, 090091415006006, 090091415006007, 090091415007003, 090091415007005, 090091415007006, 090091415007007, 090091415007008, 090091415007009, 090091416002003, 090091416002004, 090091416003004, 090091416003005, 090091416003006, 090091416003007, 090091416003008, 090091416003009, 090091416004002, 090091418002000, 090091418002001, 090091418002002, 090091418002004, 090091418003003, 090091418003004, 090091418003005, 090091419001005, 090091419001006, 090091419004006, 090091420003000, 090091420003001, 090093614021000. 
WARD 22 
Ward 22 includes census blocks: 
090091416001000, 090091416001001, 090091416001002, 090091416001003, 090091416001004, 090091416001005, 090091416002007, 090091416004000, 090091416004001, 090091416004003, 090091416004004, 090091416004005, 090091416004006, 090091416004007, 090091416004008, 090091416004009, 090091416004010, 090091416004011, 090091416004012, 090091416004013, 090091416004014, 090091420003006, 090091420003007, 090093614013000, 090093614013004, 090093614021001, 090093614021002, 090093614021003, 090093614021004, 090093614021005, 090093614021006, 090093614021007, 090093614021008, 090093614021009, 090093614021010, 090093614021011, 090093614021012, 090093614021013, 090093614022000, 090093614022001, 090093614022002, 090093614022003. 
WARD 23 
Ward 23 includes census blocks: 
090091407001000, 090091407001001, 090091407001002, 090091407001003, 090091407003001, 090091408001000, 090091408001001, 090091408001002, 090091408001003, 090091408001004, 090091408001005, 090091408001006, 090091408001007, 090091408001008, 090091408001009, 090091408001013, 090091408001014, 090091408001016, 090091408002000, 090091408002001, 090091408002009, 090091408002010, 090091408003000, 090091408003001, 090091408003002, 090091408003003, 090091408003004, 090091408003005, 090091408004000, 090091408004001, 090091408004002, 090091408004003, 090091408004004, 090091408004005, 090091408004006, 090091408004007. 
WARD 24 
Ward 24 includes census blocks: 
090091409001000, 090091409001001, 090091409001002, 090091409001003, 090091409001004, 090091409001005, 090091409002000, 090091409002001, 090091409002002, 090091409002003, 090091409002004, 090091409002005, 090091409002006, 090091409003000, 090091409003001, 090091409003002, 090091409003003, 090091409003004, 090091409003005, 090091409003006, 090091409003007, 090091409003008, 090091409003009, 090091409003010, 090091409003011, 090091409003012, 090091409003013, 090091409003014, 090091409003015, 090091409003016, 090091409004000, 090091409004001, 090091409004002, 090091409004003, 090091409004004, 090091409004005, 090091409004006, 090091409005005, 090091409005006, 090091409005007, 090091409005009, 090091409005010. 
WARD 25 
Ward 25 includes census blocks: 
090091409005000, 090091409005001, 090091409005002, 090091409005003, 090091409005004, 090091409005008, 090091410001000, 090091410001001, 090091410001002, 090091410001003, 090091410001004, 090091410001005, 090091410002000, 090091410002001, 090091410002002, 090091410002003, 090091410002004, 090091410002005, 090091410002006, 090091410002007, 090091410002008, 090091410002009, 090091410002010, 090091410002011, 090091410002012, 090091410002013, 090091410002014, 090091410002015, 090091410002016, 090091410002017, 090091410002020, 090091410002021, 090091410002022, 090091410002023, 090091410003000, 090091410003001, 090091410003002, 090091410003003, 090091410003004, 090091410003005, 090091410003006, 090091410003007, 090091410003008, 090091410003009, 090091410003010, 090091410003011, 090091410003012, 090091411001000, 090091413003003, 090091413003004, 090091413003007, 090091413003008. 
WARD 26 
Ward 26 includes census blocks: 
090091408002002, 090091408002003, 090091408002004, 090091408002005, 090091410002018, 090091410002019, 090091410002024, 090091410002025, 090091410002026, 090091410002027, 090091410002028, 090091410002029, 090091411001001, 090091411001002, 090091411001003, 090091411001004, 090091411001005, 090091411001006, 090091411001007, 090091411001008, 090091411001009, 090091411001010, 090091411001011, 090091411001012, 090091411001013, 090091411001014, 090091411001015, 090091411001016, 090091411001017, 090091411001018, 090091411001019, 090091411001020, 090091411002000, 090091411002001, 090091411002002, 090091411002003, 090091411002004, 090091411002005, 090091411002006, 090091411002007, 090091411002008, 090091411002009, 090091411002010, 090091411002011, 090091411002012, 090091411002013, 090091412003005, 090091412003006, 090091412003008, 090091412003009, 090091412004000, 090091412004001, 090091412004002, 090091412004003, 090091412004006, 090091412004007, 090091412004008, 090091412004009, 090091412004010, 090091412004014, 090091412004016. 
WARD 27 
Ward 27 includes census blocks: 
090091412002011, 090091412002012, 090091412003000, 090091412003001, 090091412003002, 090091412003003, 090091412003004, 090091412003007, 090091412003010, 090091412003011, 090091412003012, 090091412003013, 090091412004004, 090091412004005, 090091412004011, 090091412004012, 090091412004013, 090091412004015, 090091413002000, 090091413002001, 090091413002002, 090091413002003, 090091413002004, 090091413002005, 090091413002006, 090091413002007, 090091413002008, 090091413003000, 090091413003001, 090091413003002, 090091413003005, 090091413003006, 090091413004031, 090091414004003, 090091414004004. 
WARD 28 
Ward 28 includes census blocks: 
090091414001003, 090091414001011, 090091414001012, 090091414001013, 090091414001014, 090091414001015, 090091414002000, 090091414002001, 090091414002002, 090091414002003, 090091414002004, 090091414002009, 090091414002010, 090091414002011, 090091414002012, 090091414002013, 090091414002014, 090091414002015, 090091414002016, 090091414002017, 090091414002018, 090091414003000, 090091414003001, 090091414003002, 090091414003003, 090091414003004, 090091414003005, 090091416002000, 090091416002001, 090091416002002, 090091416003000, 090091416003001, 090091416003002, 090091416003003. 
WARD 29 
Ward 29 includes census blocks: 
090091413004018, 090091413004035, 090091413004037, 090091413004039, 090091414001000, 090091414001002, 090091414001004, 090091414001005, 090091414001006, 090091414001007, 090091414001008, 090091414001009, 090091414001010, 090091414002005, 090091414002006, 090091414002007, 090091414002008, 090091414004000, 090091414004001, 090091414004002, 090091414004005, 090091415002005, 090091415002006, 090091415002007, 090091415002008, 090091415007000, 090091415007001, 090091415007004. 
WARD 30 
Ward 30 includes census blocks: 
090091412001000, 090091412001001, 090091412001002, 090091412001003, 090091412001004, 090091412001005, 090091412001006, 090091412001007, 090091412001008, 090091412001009, 090091412001010, 090091412001011, 090091412001012, 090091412001013, 090091412001014, 090091412001015, 090091412002000, 090091412002001, 090091412002002, 090091412002003, 090091412002004, 090091412002005, 090091412002006, 090091412002007, 090091412002008, 090091412002009, 090091412002010, 090091412002013, 090091412002014, 090091413001000, 090091413001001, 090091413001002, 090091413001003, 090091413001004, 090091413001005, 090091413001006, 090091413001007, 090091413001008, 090091413001009, 090091413001010, 090091413001011, 090091413001012, 090091413001013, 090091413001014, 090091413001015, 090091413001016, 090091413001017, 090091413001018, 090091413001019, 090091413001020, 090091413001021, 090091413001022, 090091413004000, 090091413004001, 090091413004002, 090091413004003, 090091413004004, 090091413004005, 090091413004006, 090091413004007, 090091413004008, 090091413004009, 090091413004010, 090091413004011, 090091413004012, 090091413004013, 090091413004014, 090091413004015, 090091413004016, 090091413004017, 090091413004019, 090091413004020, 090091413004021, 090091413004022, 090091413004023, 090091413004024, 090091413004025, 090091413004026, 090091413004027, 090091413004028, 090091413004029, 090091413004030, 090091413004032, 090091413004033, 090091413004034, 090091413004036, 090091413004038, 090091413004040, 090091413004041, 090091414001001. 
(Ord. of 5-26-92; Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. No. 1676, 5-21-12 ) 
Note— Formerly numbered as § 2-35.  
Sec. 2-352. - Education districts, elected members of the board of education and student members of the board of education. 
(a)  Education districts . Pursuant to Article II, Section B of the Charter there are established two (2) education districts. Education District One shall include of Wards 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23, 24, 25 and 26. Education District Two shall include Wards 1, 2, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 19, 20, 21, 22, 27, 28, 29 and 30. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) non-voting student members of the board of education. The student members shall be elected by vote of all students enrolled in New Haven public high schools including only those charter high schools whose governing boards choose to participate in the election and notify the committee on student elections to the board of education on or before January first (1st) of their schools that will participate. 
For the first implementation of the student memberships, one (1) rising junior and one (1) rising senior will be elected in the week that includes the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in June 2015. The rising junior will serve a term from July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2017 and the rising senior will serve a term from July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2016. Thereafter, one (1) student will be elected during the first full week of April each year to serve a two-year term, such that the board of education shall include one (1) junior and one (1) senior high school student. 
After the first implementation, candidates eligible for the position of student member of the board of education shall be New Haven residents enrolled in New Haven public high schools in their sophomore year of high school. 
Board of education student member election committee . The election process for student member of the board of education shall be coordinated and administered by an election committee composed of seven (7) members: The chairs of the education committee and the youth services committees of the board of alders or their designees (2), two (2) community leaders in New Haven selected by the president of the board of alders, two (2) members of the new haven board of education or their designees and one (1) member of the mayor's staff chosen by the mayor. 
The election committee shall submit a written report to the board of alders assessing the first election process, including any recommendations for changes, no later than ninety (90) days after the 2015 election period. 
Filing of candidacies for student members of the board of education . A candidacy for election as a student member of the board of education may be filed by any New Haven resident enrolled in a New Haven public high school except charter schools in their sophomore year of high school. 
Any such candidacy shall be filed by filing with the election committee a petition signed by at least one hundred (100) students enrolled in New Haven public high schools including only those charter high schools whose governing boards choose to participate in the election and notify the committee on student elections to the board of education on or before January first (1st) of their schools that will participate, including signatures of students enrolled at no fewer than five (5) different schools, with at least fifty (50) signatures coming from schools other than the candidate's school. 
Time for filing of candidacies for student members of the board of education . Candidacies shall be filed with the election committee not later than four (4) o'clock p.m. on the twenty-eighth (28th) day preceding the election period for student members of the board of education. Said day and hour shall be specified on the petition forms. 
Petition form . Each petition for nomination shall be on a form prescribed and provided by the election committee. Such form shall provide lines for the signatures, schools, class years, dates of birth and the printing of the names of signators. A signator shall print their name on said line following the signing of the signator's name. Before issuing a petition form, the election committee shall, above the space provided for signatures, type or print the name and address of the candidate, the office sought for election and the election period thereof. The election committee shall give to any person requesting such form one (1) or more petition pages, suitable for duplication, as the election committee deems necessary. An original petition page may be duplicated by or on behalf of the candidate listed on the page and signatures may be obtained on such duplicates. The duplicates shall be filed in the same manner and shall be subject to the same requirements as original petition pages. 
Issuance of nominating petition forms; restrictions. Application requirements . The election committee shall make nominating petition forms available starting on the twenty-eighth (28th) day before the deadline for filing petitions. The election committee shall not issue any nominating petition forms unless the person requesting the nominating petition forms makes a written application for such forms, which application shall contain the following: (1) The name of the candidate to appear on such nominating petition, compared by the election committee with the candidate's name as it appears on their school record, and verified and corrected by the election committee; and (2) a signed statement by the candidate that the candidate consents to the placing of the candidate's name on such petition. 
Circulator . Each circulator of a nominating petition page shall be a student enrolled at a New Haven public high school including only those charter high schools whose governing boards choose to participate in the election and notify the committee on student elections to the board of education on or before January first (1st) of their schools that will participate. Any individual proposed as a candidate in any nominating petition may serve as circulator of the pages of such nominating petition. 
Signature pages . Before any signatures may be obtained on a petition signatures page, above the space provided for signatures shall be indicated the name and address of the candidate, the office sought for election and the election period thereof. Such indication may not be altered or amended after any person has signed the page. Each page of a nominating petition shall contain the names and street addresses of the signers. 
Statement by circulator . Each page of a nominating petition submitted to the election committee shall contain a statement as to the eligibility of the circulator and authenticity of the signatures thereon, signed by the person who circulated the same. Such statement shall set forth (1) such circulator's school, (2) the circulator's date of birth, and (3) that each person whose name appears on such page signed the same in person in the presence of such circulator and that either the circulator knows each such signer or that the signer satisfactorily identified himself to the circulator. 
Signing and certification of circulator's statement; receipt for pages; certification of signatures . The election committee shall not accept any page of a nominating petition unless the circulator thereof has signed the statement as to eligibility of the circulator and authenticity of the signatures thereon. 
The election committee forthwith give to each circulator submitting a page or pages of a nominating petition a receipt indicating the number of such pages so submitted and the date upon which such pages were submitted. 
The election committee shall certify on each such page the date upon which it was submitted to the election committee by the circulator and the number of names of electors on such petition page, which names were on the list of enrolled New Haven public high school students last-completed. The election committee shall certify on each such page the date upon which it was submitted to the election committee by the circulator and the number of names of electors on such petition page, which names were on the list of enrolled New Haven public high school students last-completed or the last completed list of enrolled New Haven students at the Charter Schools that opted to participate in the election. In the checking of signatures on such nominating petition pages, the election committee shall reject any name if such name is not the name of an elector as specified above. 
In the checking of signatures on such nominating petition pages, the election committee shall reject any name if such name is not the name of an elector as specified above. 
Rejection of defective pages. Approval of petitions . The election committee may not count for purposes of determining compliance with the number of signatures required the signatures certified on any petition page filed if: (1) The name of the candidate or their address has been omitted from the face of the petition; (2) the page does not contain a statement by the circulator as to eligibility of the circulator and authenticity of the signatures thereon. 
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the election committee shall approve every nominating petition which contains sufficient signatures counted and certified on approved pages. 
Election logistics . The election committee in conjunction with the board of education will manage the details of the election to minimize disruption to school functions and maximize opportunities for student participation and education through the election process. 
The election committee shall coordinate with the board of education to allow student campaigns access to schools. The board of education shall work with the election committee to ensure that student candidates have access to materials for campaigning. 
(c)  Student members of the board of education . There shall be two (2) non-voting student members of the board of education. The student members shall be elected by vote of all students enrolled in New Haven public high schools including charter schools. 
For the first implementation of the student memberships, one (1) rising junior and one (1) rising senior will be elected in the week that includes the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in June 2015. The rising junior will serve a term from July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2017 and the rising senior will serve a term from July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2016. 
Thereafter, one (1) student will be elected in the week that includes the first (1st) Tuesday after the first (1st) Monday in June each year to serve a two-year term, such that the board of education shall include one (1) junior and one (1) senior high school student. 
After the first implementation, candidates eligible for the position of student member of the board of education shall be New Haven residents enrolled in New Haven public high schools in their sophomore year of high school. 
(d)  Board of education student member election committee . The election process for student member of the board of education shall be coordinated and administered by an election committee composed of seven (7) members: The chairs of the education committee and the youth services committees of the board of alders or their designees (2), two (2) community leaders in New Haven selected by the president of the board of alders, two (2) members of the New Haven Board of Education or their designees and one (1) member of the mayor's staff chosen by the mayor. 
The election committee shall submit a written report to the board of alders assessing the first election process, including any recommendations for changes, no later than ninety (90) days after the 2015 election period. 
(e)  Filing of candidacies for student members of the board of education . A candidacy for election as a student member of the board of education may be filed by any New Haven resident enrolled in a New Haven public high school in their sophomore year of high school. 
Any such candidacy shall be filed by filing with the election committee a petition signed by at least one hundred (100) students enrolled in New Haven public high schools, including signatures of students enrolled at no fewer than five (5) different schools, with at least fifty (50) signatures coming from schools other than the candidate's school. 
(f)  Time for filing of candidacies for student members of the board of education . Candidacies shall be filed with the election committee not later than four o'clock p.m. (4:00 p.m.) on the twenty-eighth (28th) day preceding the election period for student members of the board of education. Said day and hour shall be specified on the petition forms. 
(g)  Petition form . Each petition for nomination shall be on a form prescribed and provided by the election committee. Such form shall provide lines for the signatures, schools, class years, dates of birth and the printing of the names of signators. A signator shall print their name on said line following the signing of the signator's name. Before issuing a petition form, the election committee shall, above the space provided for signatures, type or print the name and address of the candidate, the office sought for election and the election period thereof. The election committee shall give to any person requesting such form one (1) or more petition pages, suitable for duplication, as the Election Committee deems necessary. An original petition page may be duplicated by or on behalf of the candidate listed on the page and signatures may be obtained on such duplicates. The duplicates shall be filed in the same manner and shall be subject to the same requirements as original petition pages. 
(h)  Issuance of nominating petition forms; restrictions—Application requirements . The election committee shall make nominating petition forms available starting on the twenty-eighth (28th) day before the deadline for filing petitions. The election committee shall not issue any nominating petition forms unless the person requesting the nominating petition forms makes a written application for such forms, which application shall contain the following: (1) The name of the candidate to appear on such nominating petition, compared by the election committee with the candidate's name as it appears on their school record, and verified and corrected by the election committee; and (2) a signed statement by the candidate that the candidate consents to the placing of the candidate's name on such petition. 
(i)  Circulator . Each circulator of a nominating petition page shall be a student enrolled at a New Haven public high school. Any individual proposed as a candidate in any nominating petition may serve as circulator of the pages of such nominating petition. 
(j)  Signature pages . Before any signatures may be obtained on a petition signatures page, above the space provided for signatures shall be indicated the name and address of the candidate, the office sought for election and the election period thereof. Such indication may not be altered or amended after any person has signed the page. Each page of a nominating petition shall contain the names and street addresses of the signers. 
(k)  Statement by circulator . Each page of a nominating petition submitted to the election committee shall contain a statement as to the eligibility of the circulator and authenticity of the signatures thereon, signed by the person who circulated the same. Such statement shall set forth (1) such circulator's school, (2) the circulator's date of birth, and (3) that each person whose name appears on such page signed the same in person in the presence of such circulator and that either the circulator knows each such signer or that the signer satisfactorily identified himself to the circulator. 
(Ord. No. 1765 , 3-16-15; Ord. No. 1783 , 11-16-2015)  
Secs. 2-353—2-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 2-371. - Definitions; limits of applicability. 
As used in this article: 
(a)  Agency means an agency, authority, board, commission, department, or office of the city over which the city exercises oversight responsibility. 
(b)  General fund means the city's general operating fund that is created by appropriating ordinances derived from sources including the city charter and this Code as amended from time to time. The general fund is controlled by a legal budget. This fund is used to account for all financial resources except those properly accounted for by another fund. 
(c)  Capital project means any physical public betterment or improvement, or any preliminary studies and surveys relative thereto, the acquisition of permanent property, equipment for any public betterment or improvement when first erected or acquired, major alterations and repairs to existing buildings or structures, and major pieces of equipment. 
(d)  Capital project fund means a city fund regulated by project budgetary control. It is used to pay for a capital project in accordance with the requirements of the charter and other ordinances. 
(e)  Special revenue fund means a fund used to account for the proceeds of one (1) or more specific revenue sources that are generally controlled by grant requirements, specific ordinances, statutes or other legal requirements. It is to be distinguished from such sources as special assessments or major capital project funds, and is generally not controlled by a legal budget. 
(f)  Internal service fund means a special revenue fund used to account for the financing of goods or services between city departments or agencies on a cost reimbursement basis. It is the source for the payment of self-insured public and auto liability, workers' compensation and medical claims. 
(g)  Appropriation means an authorization to make expenditures and incur liabilities for a specific purpose. It is made by enactment of or amendment to one (1) or more appropriating ordinances derived from the city charter or this Code. 
(1)  In the capital budget, an appropriation is the sum authorized for a single project. Its specific purpose is described in the project's narrative. 
(2)  In the general fund budget, (except as provided in the charter section 153 as amended from time to time, for the department of education), the terms appropriation, individual lines of appropriations and line item are synonymous. These terms are used in sections 22(d), 23, 58, 59, 60 and 61 of the charter. 
When used in conjunction with salaries and wages, an appropriation is the sum authorized within an agency; and 
When used in conjunction with any other type of expenditure, an appropriation is the sum authorized within an agency for one (1) or more estimates grouped together. The terms total appropriation and total appropriations are synonymous, and mean the sum of authorizations made for a number of specific purposes grouped together. 
(h)  Transfer of appropriation means an authorization to shift part or the entire sum budgeted for one appropriation to another general fund appropriation as provided by the charter and ordinances. 
(i)  In re the Housing Authority of the City of New Haven and the New Haven Parking Authority provisions of this article shall apply only to funds used to account for appropriations, if any, made for the use of such agency. 
(j)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to fiduciary funds held by the city in a trustee capacity, or as another's agent. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-371 amends and supersedes former § 2-176 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 6-16-94.  
Sec. 2-372. - Budget requests. 
Each agency shall begin preparing the annual general fund, special revenue fund and capital budget requests on the first business day of January, or earlier, as specified by the mayor for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-372 amends and supersedes former § 2-177 which derived from the Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 2-373. - Programmatic information; inclusion in budget document. 
Each agency shall provide information, as prescribed by the mayor, setting forth its programs and their legal authority. This information shall be descriptive only, and accompany budget requests. The information shall not confer any legal rights, or additional powers not otherwise granted by the state statutes, city charter or ordinances as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-373 amends and supersedes former § 2-178 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-374. - Policy amendments. 
Each policy amendment approved by the board of aldermen shall be printed verbatim in the budget document as part of the ordinance, order, or resolution it amends. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-374 renumbers former section 2-179 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-375. - Payroll certifications. 
No payment to any person for personal service to the city shall be made to such person unless the personnel director or his/her authorized agent certifies on an appropriate payroll voucher that to the best of his/her knowledge, the payee has been appointed and compensated in accordance with all applicable provisions of law or contract. The payment voucher must bear such certification for payment to be made. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-375 amends and supersedes former § 2-181 which derived from the codification of 1985.  
Sec. 2-376. - Authorization of contracts to be executed one year from date, and non-bid contracts in excess of one hundred thousand dollars. 
(a)  Unless expressly authorized by law or by vote of the board of aldermen, the city shall not be bound by any contract executed after one (1) year from the date thereof. The board of aldermen's prior approval is necessary for any city contract that does not go to bid that costs more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(b)  The determination of whether a contract is to be executed after one (1) year shall include its initial term plus all automatic renewals and options to renew. Any renewal which materially alters the terms or conditions of a contract shall be resubmitted to the board of aldermen for approval. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-376 amends and supersedes former § 2-40 which derived from the Code of 1928, § 462; Ord. of 9-4-90, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. of 4-2-01.  
Sec. 2-377. - Handling proceeds from fire insurance policies, other unexpected sources. 
(a)  Upon the mayor's recommendation, the proceeds of any fire insurance policies, or from the sale of any city property, shall be held as a special fund subject to the order of the board of aldermen. 
(b)  Unless received for a special purpose, any other unexpected income shall be deposited in the contingent fund account. If income is received for a special purpose, it shall be held and expended for that purpose. Any remaining balance shall be transferred to said account. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-377 amends and supersedes former § 2-49 which derived from the Code of 1928, §§ 5, 6; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-378. - Annual report distribution. 
City funds shall not be used to distribute the city's annual report on or during the sixty (60) calendar days before any primary or general municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-378 amends and supersedes former § 2-180 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-379. - Non-grant special revenue funds. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statute section 7-148(2)(K) as amended from time to time, which authorizes municipalities to establish funds which do not lapse at the end of the fiscal year, the controller may establish a special revenue fund to account for the non-grant revenues and expenditures associated with a city agency's activity, provided that the board of aldermen has authorized and directed such action. No activity currently accounted for in the general fund shall be removed from it, and placed in a special revenue fund, unless the board of aldermen has approved such action pursuant to a request from the mayor to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-379 amends and supersedes former § 2-183 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-380. - Annual special revenue fund budgets. 
The mayor shall prepare a budget for each special revenue fund, and shall submit each such budget to the board of aldermen as part of the annual budget submitted on March 1 for the ensuing fiscal year. Each special revenue fund budget shall be accompanied by a statement of revenues, expenditures, and change in balance for each such fund for the preceding fiscal year, and a report of revenues and expenditures for the current fiscal year. When the grantor approves a submitted grant budget pursuant to an executed agreement with the city, the submission of such budget to the board of aldermen shall be for informational purposes only. When the mayor deems it impracticable for a non-grant special revenue fund to be budgeted, he/she shall submit a statement of anticipated revenues and expenditures for such fund for the ensuing fiscal year in lieu of a budget. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-380 amends and supersedes former § 2-183 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-381. - Expenses attributable to other funds. 
Each general fund, special revenue fund or capital project budget, which includes revenues or expenditures attributable to an activity budgeted in another fund or project account, shall identify such revenues or expenditures and their source of activity. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-381 amends and supersedes former § 2-185 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-382. - Provision for compensation expenses. 
Each general fund, special revenue fund and capital project budget shall include adequate provision for payments of all salaries and wages, social security, medical benefits, or other compensation expenses properly chargeable to such budget, unless a different distribution of such costs has been duly authorized. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-382 amends and supersedes former § 2-186 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 2-383. - Insufficient funds; interfund borrowing. 
No moneys from one fund or project account shall be used to pay expenses properly chargeable to another fund or project account, nor shall any moneys be loaned or advanced between funds or project accounts without prior approval by the mayor and board of aldermen. The following situations shall not require aldermanic approval: 
(1)  The payment of debt service or bonds; and 
(2)  Payments needed to meet payroll and/or grant expenses under state, federal or other grants already confirmed or awarded to the city, but for which the city has not yet received and/or finally executed the final grant documents. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-383 amends and supersedes former § 2-187 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-384. - General fund—Budget components. 
The general fund budget consists of: 
(1)  The appropriating ordinances, and supporting schedules and documents that specifically describe and justify each agency's appropriations; and 
(2)  The tax levy and revenue appropriating ordinance, and the revenue estimates upon which the ordinance is predicated. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-384 amends and supersedes former § 2-188 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-385. - Same—Transfers; transfer committee established. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 60 of the city charter as amended from time to time, the controller shall not transfer any appropriation if the transfer is in the amount of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more in a line item, and is not subject to the provisions of section 2-386 of this Code as amended from time to time, unless he/she receives prior approval from the mayor and the transfer committee. No city agency, official or employee can expend or obligate transferred moneys without the mayor's and the transfer committee's approval. If the transfer is subject to the provisions of section 2-386 of this Code as amended from time to time, the board of aldermen's prior approval is necessary to effectuate such transfer. 
(b)  The transfer committee shall consist of two (2) aldermen of different political parties, and are chosen by the board of aldermen. Additionally, the mayor appoints two (2) persons to serve on the transfer committee, who serve at his/her pleasure. All members of this committee shall serve for two (2) year terms, concurrent with the aldermanic and mayoral terms of office. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-385 amends and supersedes former § 2-189 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 11-15-93.  
Sec. 2-386. - Same—Aldermanic approval of certain actions. 
The board of aldermen's prior approval shall be required for a transfer of appropriation or other action if the effect of such action would result in one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  To create a position not included in the budget as adopted, or to reclassify an existing and included position; 
(2)  To increase the total annual salary estimate included in an appropriation for any reason; or 
(3)  To change the board's previously approved appropriation by at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-386 amends and supersedes former § 2-190 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-387. - Financial reports from the controller. 
Pursuant to city charter section 22(c) as amended from time to time, the controller shall prepare monthly and/or quarterly reports, which shall include reports of the general fund and each special revenue fund. Additionally, quarterly reports shall include a report of each capital project appropriation existing for any part of the current fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-387 amends and supersedes former § 2-191 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-388. - Monthly reports. 
Pursuant to section 62 of the city charter as amended from time to time, the mayor shall prepare a monthly financial report, which shall have executive reports appended to it. The monthly financial report shall summarize certain monthly activities, which include the following subjects: 
(1)  Tax collector's report on collections, comparing actual to budget and to levy; 
(2)  Mayor's report on grants accepted by the city; 
(3)  Treasurer's report on investments of all city funds; 
(4)  Controller's report on all bonds, notes or other issued debt instruments; 
(5)  Controller's report on transfers approved pursuant to sections 2-385 and 2-386 of the ordinances; 
(6)  Personnel director's report on all non-educational hiring including new hires, transfers, promotions and compliance with budgeted salaries; 
(7)  Travel expenses incurred; and 
(8)  Overtime by department. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-388 amends and supersedes former § 2-192 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-389. - Action to eliminate a projected deficit. 
If the mayor projects a deficit and recommends its elimination in a monthly financial report submitted to the board of aldermen pursuant to section 62 of the city charter as amended from time to time, his/her recommendations shall be effected unless the following conditions occur: 
(1)  Two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the entire board of aldermen vote to consider such recommendations at the meeting at which such report is received; and 
(2)  The board of aldermen approves other action to eliminate the full amount of such projected deficit at the next board meeting following the mayor's monthly financial report submission. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-389 amends and supersedes former § 2-193 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-390. - Bond sale committee. 
There shall be a bond sale committee consisting of the mayor, the controller and the president, majority leader and minority leader of the board of aldermen The committee shall supervise and approve all issuances and sales of bonds, notes or other obligations of the city that the board of aldermen lawfully authorizes. Additionally, the committee shall approve interest rates, maturity schedules, and all other terms pertaining to the issuance and sale of city bonds, notes or other obligations, which are authorized by Conn. General Statutes section 7-370 as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-390 amends and supersedes former § 2-194 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-391. - Agency fund established; administration. 
(a)  The controller shall designate an agency fund for municipal collection services. The controller shall use this fund in his/her capacity as agent to account for transactions associated with the use of collection agencies, or other contractors used by the City of New Haven for collection of delinquent taxes and other receivables. The treasurer shall serve as the custodian of the fund's assets. 
(b)  The controller shall be the administrative director of this fund, and he/she shall create a complete set of accounting records for the purposes specified herein. 
(c)  When the controller determines that there is a need to establish a project or activity within said fund, he/she shall submit a project budget to the board of aldermen for its approval. The project budget shall comply with all applicable provisions of the city's charter and ordinances, and include provisions for contractual services, including a method of payment for such services. Additionally, said budget shall specify a basis and time frame for transferring net income resulting from the services from said fund to specific line items in the general fund. 
(d)  The controller shall provide a report on said fund to the mayor, board of aldermen and the financial review and audit commission on a quarterly basis, or more frequently if so requested. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-391 amends and supersedes former § 2-195 which derived from Ord. of 8-7-95.  
Sec. 2-392. - Capital budget—Components. 
The capital budget shall contain the following: 
(1)  A detailed cost estimate of each proposed project; 
(2)  A statement of anticipated revenues, and city funds required in connection with each project; 
(3)  A listing of all capital projects including a financial summary currently being carried out by the city; 
(4)  An annual report enumerating all vendors, city employees, private contractors, consultants and other personnel who have received capital project funds for services; and 
(5)  A multiyear capital project plan covering a period of not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-392 amends and supersedes former § 2-201 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-393. - Same—Contents; surplus fund report. 
The capital budget for each fiscal year shall include specific project appropriations and narratives, bond authorizations and a proposed disposition of surplus capital project appropriations in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The controller shall certify all funds remaining after completion of the project or the purpose for which the appropriation was made; 
(2)  Such surplus funds shall be: (i) used for retirement of existing debt or payment of debt service thereon, (ii) reappropriated to finance capital projects in the same manner as an original appropriation, or (iii) transferred to the school construction trust fund under section 2-334 of the ordinances; 
(3)  These surplus funds shall be used only as authorized by this section. The controller is authorized to lawfully invest such funds temporarily until they are disposed of in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-393 amends and supersedes former § 2-202 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 5-20-96, § 2.  
Sec. 2-394. - Same—Preparation of capital project estimates. 
The capital projects committee shall receive a detailed estimate for each agency's proposed capital projects for the next fiscal year. The estimates shall be in such form as prescribed by said committee or otherwise by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-394 amends and supersedes former § 2-203 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-395. - Same—Project maintenance program. 
A capital project submitted to the capital projects committee shall include a project maintenance program if said committee requires it, or if the project includes any of the following: 
(1)  A fixed or movable bridge; 
(2)  New construction or major alteration to any public building or structure whose total construction or renovation area exceeds thirty thousand (30,000) square feet; or 
(3)  A major piece of equipment or rolling stock which exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a per unit purchase price basis. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-395 amends and supersedes former § 2-204 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-396. - Same—Aldermanic amendments. 
The board of aldermen may increase, reduce or eliminate any capital project included in the proposed capital budget. Additionally, said board may amend any narrative or supporting language attached to, or contained within, the proposed capital budget, provided that the total of all such changes shall not increase the total amount of the capital budget as transmitted pursuant to city charter section 80 as amended from time to time. The board may not add any capital project to the capital budget submitted by the mayor except in accordance with the emergency certification procedure described in section 2-397 of the ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-396 amends and supersedes former § 2-205 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-397. - Same—Emergency certification procedure. 
Once the proposed capital budget is submitted to the board of aldermen, the mayor shall not propose further revisions to it without first obtaining a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the board of aldermen certifying the proposed amendment or revision as an "emergency". Once certified, the mayor shall obtain the capital projects committee's approval of the proposed revisions. This approval must be done in the same manner that is required by the city charter and ordinances concerning the annual capital budget's preparation and submission as they are amended from time to time. Once the capital project committee approves the revisions, the mayor shall resubmit the revised capital budget to the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-397 amends and supersedes former § 2-206 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-398. - Same—Review of authorizations. 
The capital projects committee shall annually review all capital projects for which bonds or bond anticipation notes were authorized but not issued, for which two (2) complete years have passed from the board of aldermen's appropriation approval date. The purpose of the review is to determine which projects and purposes are no longer viable, and the reasons for their lack of viability. The committee shall transmit any recommendations regarding the abandonment of such capital projects to the mayor in accordance with section 2-402 of the ordinances as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-398 amends and supersedes former § 2-208 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-399. - Same—Aldermanic review. 
The board of aldermen may at its discretion review the progress of any capital project after two (2) complete fiscal years from the board's appropriation approval date. 
Editor's note— § 2-399 amends and supersedes former § 2-209 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-400. - Same—Appropriations to be frozen; exception. 
Unless bonds or bond anticipation notes have been issued in any amount pursuant to a capital project's appropriation, such appropriation shall be frozen on the last day of the municipal fiscal year occurring after four (4) complete years from the board of aldermen's appropriation approval date for such project. If bonds or bond anticipation notes have been so issued, the full amount of such appropriation shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-400 amends and supersedes former § 2-210 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-401. - Same—Action on frozen appropriations. 
The capital projects committee shall review all such frozen appropriations, and propose recommendations to the mayor in accordance with section 2-402 of the ordinances as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-401 amends and supersedes former § 2-211 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93.  
Sec. 2-402. - Same—Amendments. 
The capital projects committee may recommend amendments to capital budgets or projects previously approved by the board of aldermen. Such recommendations shall be proposed to the mayor. If the mayor approves such recommendations, he/she shall submit them to the board of aldermen as part of the annual capital budget unless circumstances warrant an earlier submission. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-402 amends and supersedes former § 2-212 which derived from Ord. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 2-403. - School construction trust fund established; deposit to fund; uses of fund. 
(a)  There shall be a school construction trust fund (hereafter the "fund"). During each fiscal year the following sources shall provide deposits to the fund: 
(1)  The proceeds of the trust fund sale of October 1995; 
(2)  Any appropriations made to the fund in the general fund budget for such fiscal year; 
(3)  Any portion of general fund cash surplus transferred to the fund pursuant to the procedure set forth in ordinance section 2-385 as amended from time to time; 
(4)  Any portion of cash surplus from completed capital projects transferred in accordance with the procedures set forth in ordinance section 2-393; 
(5)  Any state or federal grants-in-aid of such school construction projects, and any gifts or contributions provided for such projects; and 
(6)  Any investment earnings allocated to the fund for such fiscal year. 
(b)  Moneys in the fund shall be used from time to time subject to the board of aldermen's approval for the following purposes: 
(1)  To meet appropriations in the city's capital budget, or in any amendment to ordinance section 2-402, for major school construction projects such as new school buildings and additions and renovations to existing buildings. This includes administration costs and planning expenses and costs in support of such projects; or 
(2)  Transferred to the general fund to meet appropriations for the payment of debt service on the city's bonded indebtedness issued for school construction projects. 
(c)  The fund shall continue until terminated, and its moneys that are kept on deposit shall be non-lapsing, and held separately from the moneys in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-403 amends and supersedes former § 2-213 which derived from Ord. of 5-20-96, § 1)  
Sec. 2-404. - Audit; selection. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-392 as amended from time to time, the city shall have all of its accounts audited at least once annually. 
(b)  No independent firm of certified public accountants appointed pursuant to state law and the city charter shall perform any part of the annual city audit for more than four (4) consecutive years unless such independent firm is selected as the most qualified firm as a result of the quadrennial auditor selection process. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-404 amends and supersedes former § 2-22.1 which derived from Ord. of 10-21-85, § 1; Ord. No. 1267, 8-7-00.  
Sec. 2-405. - Process for transparent allocation and distribution of resources. 
A new four-member City Resources Allocation Subcommittee (hereafter referred to as the C.R.A. subcommittee will be formed consisting of two (2) aldermanic representatives, to be selected by the leadership of the Board of Aldermen as follows: one (1) from leadership, and one (1) from the members of the Board of Aldermen not in leadership, and two (2) members from the administration, to be appointed by the Mayor, each member of the subcommittee serving a two-year term beginning in 2012. 
In the FY 2012-2013 budget funds [shall] be allocated to have an independent, expert consultant complete an up-to-date survey rating condition of all of the city's streets and sidewalks, with said survey to be submitted to the City Resources Allocation Subcommittee, and to be undertaken at least once every four years. The City of New Haven shall maintain two lists, each produced by such independent, expert consultant, showing the block by block condition of (1) all sidewalks, and (2) all streets in New Haven. These lists shall be kept current and shall be posted on the city's website; and 
Aldermen are encouraged to and can choose to have an open and participatory process, in which their ward residents are involved in identifying and addressing needs in their respective wards. On an annual basis, each of the aldermen shall develop a list of projects for their ward ranked in order of greatest priority based on a scale which factors in public safety urgency, as well as the degree of constituent concern. Such list shall be submitted to the City Resources Allocation Subcommittee on a date determined by the allocation subcommittee in 2012 and annually no later than June 15 of each year thereafter. 
The appropriate type of paving treatment for a ward street to be repaved shall be determined by the city engineer and/or the director of public works. The subcommittee shall consult with and seek the advice and expertise of the city engineer, director of public works and director of parks, recreation and trees in expediting completion of the selected sidewalk, street and tree projects. 
The City of New Haven shall allocate and distribute all resources for sidewalk improvements, street paving, tree trimming or removal, and stump removal, equitably in the following manner. 
A.  Federal and State funding for specific streets, roads, and sidewalks will be coordinated with the aldermen in the affected wards. 
B.  Other funds designated for sidewalk improvements, street paving, tree trimming or removal, and stump removal shall be divided into two funds: An Emergency Street Paving Fund to be used for urgent unforeseeable projects to be done throughout the city, regardless of ward, which pose a public safety risk and require immediate remedial action; and a General Street Paving Fund, which addresses ongoing repair needs in the wards, as selected by the C.R.A. subcommittee, based on the consultant's ratings and Aldermanic input. 
The new resource allocation process for sidewalk improvements, street paving, tree trimming or removal, and stump removal shall take effect and commence operation beginning with the Fiscal Year budget 2012-2013 and that; 
A.  The funds for street paving consist of the: 
1.  Emergency Street Paving Fund: Each fiscal year funds shall be allocated for this purpose based on the average of the last five (5) years actual expenditures for urgent unforeseeable projects throughout the city which posed a public safety risk and required immediate remedial action. 
2.  General Street Paving Fund: Each fiscal year funds a minimum of seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) shall be allocated for this purpose. The C.R.A. subcommittee may recommend that the board of aldermen increase the amount. 
B.  The funds for sidewalks consist of the: 
1.  Emergency Sidewalk Fund: Each fiscal year funds shall be allocated for this purpose based on the average of the last five (5) years actual expenditures for urgent unforeseeable projects throughout the city which posed a public safety risk and required immediate remedial action 
2.  General Sidewalk Fund: Each fiscal year a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall be allocated shall for this purpose. The C.R.A. subcommittee may recommend that the board of aldermen increase this amount. 
C.  The funds for trees consist of the General Ward Tree Fund: Each fiscal year a minimum of one hundred sixty thousand dollars ($160,000.00) from the park department's capital budget "street trees fund" shall be allocated for this purpose to be divided equally between all wards. The C.R.A. subcommittee may recommend that the board of aldermen increase this amount. 
Working within budgetary limits, the City Resources Allocation Subcommittee will select and approve all street and sidewalk work prior to any work commencing (with the exception of emergency repairs, which must be reported to the C.R.A. subcommittee for review no more than thirty (30) days from when such job commenced). The C.R.A. subcommittee shall prioritize and select all non-emergency projects to be scheduled, based on ratings by the consultant; recommendations and input on each ward's priorities based on lists supplied by individual aldermen; and based on advice and consultation with the city engineer, director of public works and other appropriate city officials. Emphasis is to be given to repairing those streets and sidewalks deemed to be in the worst condition or a greater safety risk. 
The C.R.A. subcommittee will communicate regularly with the board of aldermen on the selection and scheduling of the projects to be done on streets, sidewalks, and trees, as well as provide regular quarterly reports on all street, sidewalk and tree work to the entire board, upon submission such communication including but not limited to all quarterly reports shall also be posted on the city's website by the city staff on the C.R.A subcommittee; and 
The C.R.A. will report to the Finance Committee of the Board of Aldermen in November, 2012 and as needed to review this ordinance and make recommendations for amendment to the ordinance for future fiscal years. 
(Ord. No. 1684 , 7-2-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1684 , adopted July 2, 2012, did not specificially set out provisions for inclusion in the Code. For purposes of classification, and per instruction from the city, these provisions have been included as § 2-405.  
Secs. 2-406—2-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PURCHASING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-431—2-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENT OF PERSONAL SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-451. - Purchasing and bidding procedures. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. The City of New Haven hereby declares that it narrowly construes the types of personal services that can be provided through the bidding procedures set forth in city charter section 74 as amended from time to time. This policy is premised upon the following grounds: 
(1)  City charter section 156 as amended from time to time, provides for a civil service board and a department of personnel consisting of a personnel director and such other employees as shall be provided in the budget; 
(2)  City charter section 158 as amended from time to time, sets forth a broad mandate and duty of the civil service board to ascertain the competency of applicants for all positions or promotions in the city government by competitive examination except for specified exceptions; 
(3)  Unless city charter section 74 is narrowly construed, the purchasing agency could usurp the position and authority of the civil service board and the personnel director and their clear charter mandate to provide for employment based upon merit selection. 
(b)  Definitions. The following are defined terms for the purposes of this article: 
Municipal employee means any person who holds employment with the municipal government of New Haven for which such person receives financial compensation from the city: 
(1)  Whether such employment is in the classified or unclassified service; 
(2)  Whether such employment is part-time or full-time; and 
(3)  Whether such employment is permanent or temporary. 
Independent contractor means any individual(s), firm, partnership or corporation in business for himself/herself/itself who contracts to do certain specified work according to his/her/its own methods and means, and without being subject to the control or supervision of any municipal employee except as to the result of the work. 
The municipal government of the City of New Haven means: 
(1)  The City of New Haven, and all departments, agencies, authorities, boards, commissions, bureaus and offices created by and existing under the city charter; 
(2)  The City of New Haven and all departments, agencies, authorities, boards, commissions, bureaus and offices created by or existing under an ordinance or resolution of the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven (whether or not such ordinance or resolution was adopted pursuant to a state statute authorizing such ordinance or resolution). 
Expert professional consultant means any independent contractor as defined herein providing highly technical, specialized and advanced advice and/or work product, and whose responsibilities shall not include any job duties: 
(1)  For which a civil service test (or classification) currently exists; or 
(2)  Which are assigned to any current member of a city bargaining unit. 
(c)  Scope of purchasing agent's authority to bid contracts pursuant to city charter section 74: 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall process requests for proposals only for work to be performed by independent contractors, as defined herein. However, the following types of independent contractors are specifically excluded from the purchasing and bidding procedures set forth in charter section 74 as amended from time to time: 
a.  Architects; 
b.  Engineers; 
c.  Land surveyors; 
d.  Physicians/Medical doctors; 
e.  Dentists; 
f.  Lawyers/Attorneys; 
g.  Accountants; 
h.  Artists; 
i.  Actuaries; 
j.  Expert professional consultants; and 
k.  Such other professional or technical services as the board of aldermen may provide by ordinance. 
(2)  Contracts with the excluded classes of independent contractors shall only be entered into by the mayor on behalf of any municipal department, authority, board, commission, bureau or office, or by the president of the board of aldermen on behalf of the board of aldermen. 
(3)  The city's purchasing agent shall immediately cease and desist from utilizing the purchasing and bidding procedures of city charter section 74 as amended from time to time to procure personal services, except and unless the provider of the services is an independent contractor, as defined herein. Contracts with expert professional consultants shall be initiated through a written proposal describing the program and the personnel involved. 
(4)  For the purposes of requests for proposals for work performed by independent contractors for professional services, whether the business is a "city-based business," as defined in Code section 2-483(a), shall be a factor considered in the selection of such contractor. 
(5)  The City of New Haven's policy on city-based businesses shall be stated in the request for proposal. 
(d)  Authority of the purchasing agent to determine status as an independent contractor and/or exempt professional, subject to review: 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall determine in the first instance whether a "request for proposal" is properly seeking work to be done by an independent contractor as defined herein; 
(2)  Upon the determination that a "request for proposal" is properly seeking work to be done by such an independent contractor, the department initiating said request selects the proposing party to perform such work. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-451 amends and supersedes former § 2-146 which derived from Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 12-21-92; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Secs. 2-452—2-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1391, adopted Sept. 19, 2005, repealed former section 2-152 in its entirety which pertained to the scope of competitive bidding requirements and derived from Ord. of 10-15-90. 
 
Sec. 2-481. - Disability insurance required of bidders on city contracts. 
(a)  Whenever the city purchasing agent advertises for invitations to bid for contracts, he/she shall require that the contractors maintain a worker's compensation insurance policy, a binder for such a policy, or evidence of adequate self-insurance protecting company workers against injury. This requirement shall be a condition precedent to the award of any contract. The general contractor shall certify for all subcontractors. 
(b)  Any such worker's compensation insurance policy shall be issued by a company authorized to write such policies in Connecticut, and shall be in such form that is satisfactory to the city purchasing agent. 
(c)  The city purchasing agent shall require and affirm that no bidders, including all general contractors and subcontractors, are in arrears to the state's second injury fund. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-481 amends and supersedes former § 2-22.2 which derived from Ord. of 11-18-85; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-482. - Minimum bidding requirements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise required by federal and/or state law or regulation, sealed bidding shall not be required for contracts or purchases of supplies, materials or equipment and non-construction related services having a value less than or equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Contracts and purchases for said items and services having a value greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00) but less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be awarded in accordance with procedures established by the purchasing agent, which shall include preference for city-based businesses as defined in Code section 2-483 and consistent with the procedures set forth therein. 
(b)  Except as otherwise required by federal and/or state law or regulation, sealed bidding shall not be required for construction and construction related contracts and services having a value less than or equal to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Contracts and purchases for construction and such related services having a value greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00) but less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be awarded in accordance with informal quotation and informal bidding procedures established by the purchasing agent, which shall include preference for city-based businesses as defined in Code section 2-483 and consistent with the procedures set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-482 amends and supersedes former § 2-151 which derived from Ord. of 10-15-90; Ord. of 12-21-92; Ord. No. 1292, § 5, 11-19-01.  
Sec. 2-483. - Preference for city-based businesses. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section "city-based business" shall mean a business with its principal place of business located within the City of New Haven. A business shall not be considered a "city-based business" unless evidence satisfactory to the purchasing agent has been submitted with each bid to establish that said business has its bona fide principal place of business in New Haven. Such evidence may include evidence of ownership of or a long-term lease of the real estate from which its principal place of business is operated, or payment of property taxes on the personal property of the business. A "city-based business" shall maintain such status throughout the term of any contract with the City of New Haven. Failure to maintain such status shall be grounds for the city to terminate said contract. 
(b)  On any contracts or purchases the lowest responsible bidder shall be determined in the following order: 
(1)  On contracts or purchases involving a total contract price of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or less: any city-based bidder that submitted a low bid not more than ten (10) percent higher than the lowest bid, provided such city-based bidder agrees to accept the award of the bid at the lowest bid amount. If more than one (1) city-based bidder has submitted bids not more than ten (10) percent higher than the lowest bid, and has agreed to accept the award of the bid at the lowest bid amount, the lowest responsible bidder shall be the city-based bidder that submitted the lowest bid. 
(2)  On contracts or purchases involving a total contract price of over a million dollars ($1,000,000.00) but less than five million dollars ($5,000,000.00): any city-based bidder that submitted a bid not more than five (5) percent higher than the lowest bid, provided such city-based bidder agrees to accept the award of the bid at the lowest bid amount. If more than one (1) city-based bidder has submitted bids not more than five (5) percent higher than the lowest bid, and has agreed to accept the award of the bid at the lowest bid amount, the lowest responsible bidder shall be the city-based bidder that submitted the lowest bid. 
(3)  On contracts or purchases involving a total contract price of over five million dollars ($5,000,000.00): any city-based bidder that submitted a bid not more than three (3) percent higher than the lowest bid, provided such city-based bidder agrees to accept the award of the bid at the lowest bid amount. If more than one (1) city-based bidder has submitted bids not more than three (3) percent higher than the lowest bid, and has agreed to accept the award of the bid at the lowest bid amount, the lowest responsible bidder shall be the city-based bidder that submitted the lowest bid. 
(4)  The responsible low bidder. 
(c)  The City of New Haven's policy on city-based businesses shall be stated in the invitation to bid. 
(d)  Paragraph (b)(1), (2) and (3) shall apply to any contracts or purchases that are put out to competitive bid, and the city and the contractor are to share in the revenue generated by the contractor's services. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-483 amends and supersedes former § 2-153 which derived from Ord. of 12-21-92.  
Sec. 2-484. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of Code sections 2-485 and 2-486, the following definitions apply:] 
(a)  Contract means any public contract as defined hereafter. 
(b)  Person means one (1) or more individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations or joint ventures. 
(c)  Public contract means any agreement or formal commitment that the city enters into to expend funds in return for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing, or any lease, lease by way of concession, concession agreement, permit or permit agreement whereby the city leases, grants or demises property that the city owns, or otherwise grants a right or privilege to occupy or use said property. 
(d)  City means any official, agency, board, authority, department, office, or other subdivision of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-484 amends and supersedes former § 2-154 which derived from Ord. of 12-21-98)  
Sec. 2-485. - Obligations of persons seeking to contract with city; affidavits, disclosures and certifications. 
(a)  The city shall not award a contract to any person or entity until the bureau of purchases receives the following documents: 
(1)  Such person's affidavit attesting that he/she/it does not owe delinquent taxes or other financial obligation to the city, provided, if such person has entered into an agreement to pay delinquent taxes in installment payments satisfactory to the tax collector, and the payments under said agreement are not in default, the affidavit shall recite that agreement; 
(2)  Such person's affidavit attesting that he/she/it has either filed a list of taxable personal property with the assessor for the most recent grand list as required by state statute, or that he/she/it is not required to file such list; and 
(3)  Disclosures as required by Code section 2-486 as amended from time to time. 
(b)  If said affidavits and disclosures are not submitted as part of competitive bid provisions, the city agency, board, authority, office, department or official seeking the contract shall obtain them. 
(c)  The city shall not award a contract to any person until the following certifications have been obtained: 
(1)  A certification from the city assessor that such person has filed a current list of taxable personal property pursuant to Conn. General Statute section 12-40 as amended from time to time, or a certification that such person is not required to file such list; and 
(2)  A certification from the city's tax collector that such person or any affiliated entity, either directly or through a lease agreement, owes no back taxes; provided, that if the taxpayer owes back taxes, but he/she/it or another responsible party has executed an installment payment agreement with the city which is satisfactory to the tax collector, and such payments are not in default, then the fact that such person owes the city back taxes shall not be a bar to the contract. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-485 amends and supersedes former § 2-155 which derived from Ord. of 12-21-98.  
Sec. 2-486. - Disclosures required by persons seeking to contract with city. 
(a)  Any person seeking to enter into a contract with the city shall disclose all names under which he/she/it has provided services or materials to the city within one (1) year of the disclosure submitted for each such contract as required by this section. 
(b)  Any person seeking to enter into a contract with the city shall disclose: 
(1)  The names of all persons affiliated with such person's business; 
(2)  The names of all business organizations in which such person has an ownership interest; 
(3)  The names of all owners in such entity, provided, if such entity is a corporation, the names of its officers, and common stock holders who hold more than twenty-five (25) percent of its outstanding stock; and 
(4)  The identity of all affiliates, individuals or business entities that own or have owned taxable property situated in the city within one (1) year prior to the date of the disclosure required by this section. 
(c)  Any person doing business under a trade name that is seeking to enter into a contract with the city to provide it with goods, materials or services, shall disclose where such entity is incorporated or registered to conduct such business, and the address of its principal place of business. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-486 amends and supersedes former § 2-156 which derived from Ord. of 12-21-98.  
Sec. 2-487. - Observation of Martin Luther King Day. 
The city shall not award any contract to any person, as defined in Code section 2-484(b), until and unless said person provides a written statement to the city affirming that the contractor, all associated subcontractors and all employees thereof performing work on a city contract shall observe Martin Luther King Day as a national holiday. The statement shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the corporation counsel, and shall be filed with affidavits, disclosures and certifications required by Code section 2-485 as amended from time to time. The purchasing agent shall promulgate this section's provisions, and include it with bid documents, contract applications, and other materials given to city bidders and contractors. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-487 amends and supersedes former § 2-157 which derived from Ord. of 1269, 8-7-00.  
Sec. 2-488. - Performance and payment bond. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 49-41 as amended from time to time, and unless otherwise authorized, the city purchasing agent shall require that contractors obtain a payment bond and performance bond when their contracts involve the construction, alteration or repair of any public building or public work in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). The bonds must be in amounts that are satisfactory to the city purchasing agent. 
(b)  The city purchasing agent has discretion to require a performance bond for any contract exceeding twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for the provision of supplies, materials or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-488 amends and supersedes former § 2-158 which derived from Ord. No. 1292, § 6, 11-19-01.  
Secs. 2-489—2-510. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - LIVING WAGE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1657 , adopted June 6, 2011, repealed former Art. IX, §§ 2-511—2-524, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1391, adopted Sept. 19, 2005. 
 
Sec. 2-511. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply throughout this article. 
City means the City of New Haven and any department, administrative unit, or other office, position, administration, institution or agency of city government. 
Contract or service contract means any agreement whereby the city is committed to expend funds for services provided to or for the city or its residents on a weekly or more frequent basis for at least one of the following services: 
(1)  Food preparation on an ongoing basis on or to city property for city programs, except occasional meetings, receptions, or similar functions; 
(2)  Security services on city property; 
(3)  Custodial, cleaning, and/or routine, non-technical maintenance services on city property; 
(4)  Clerical and other non-supervisory office work; 
(5)  Transportation to, from, or among city facilities; 
(6)  Management, supervision or other oversight of services specified in this definition. 
The term "contract" or "service contract" shall not include contracts where services are incidental to the delivery of products, equipment or commodities. A contract for the purchase or lease of goods, products, equipment, supplies or other property is not a contract or service Contract for the purposes of this definition. 
Contractor or service contractor means any person that enters into a service contract with the city. 
Covered employee means any: (a) year-round, full-time paid Employee of the City of New Haven for all the hours that they work for the City, and, (b) all employees of covered employers for all hours they perform work relating to a service contract. The term year-round means work performed all twelve (12) months of the calendar year. The term full-time means work performed for nineteen (19) hours or more per week or as may be amended from time to time by any existing statute, ordinance, contract or collective bargaining agreement. The term covered employee shall not be construed to abrogate, impair or otherwise affect the rights of employees or employers under any existing or future collective bargaining agreement or any individual whose wage rate is subject to regulation mandating a prevailing or other wage rate. 
Covered employer means: 
(1)  The city; 
(2)  Any service contractor with any single service contract greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); and 
(3)  Any subcontractor for a service contractor, as defined by the definition of "service contractor. 
The term "covered employer" shall not include any non-profit organization, as defined by Section 501 (c) (3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
For a service contractor, the responsibilities of a covered employer start at the beginning of the term of the service contract and will continue until the termination of the service contract. In the case of a subcontractor, the responsibilities of a covered employer start at the beginning of the term of the service subcontract and will continue until the termination of the service subcontract. 
Health benefits means the benefit level set in subjection 2-512(b) of this article. 
Living wage means the hourly wage level set in section 2-512(b) of this article. 
Person means one or more of the following: individuals, corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, joint ventures, or other entity. The term "person" shall not include any non-profit organization, as defined by Section 501(c) (3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
Subcontract means any contractual relationship under which a person assists a service contractor in performing a service contract or accepts or transfers any right or responsibility set forth in a service contract. 
Subcontractor means any person that has entered into a subcontract. 
( Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 6-6-11 )  
Sec. 2-512. - Living wage and other provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. Covered employers shall pay no less than the living wage to their covered employees. Covered employers shall also comply with the other requirements of this section. 
(b)  A mount of wage required. 
(1)  The living wage shall be an hourly wage, which, based on two thousand hours of work per year, is equivalent to one hundred and thirty-three percent (133%) of the most recently published Poverty Guidelines for the 48 Contiguous States and the District of Columbia for a family of four (4), as published annually by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 
(2)  If health benefits are not provided to the covered employee, the covered employer must provide to the covered employee an additional one dollar ($1.00) per hour towards the provision of health care benefits. 
(c)  Sick leave. 
(1)  covered employees shall receive paid sick leave. Sick leave is an employee benefit to be used only for absences caused by illness, a non-work related injury to the employee or an employee's immediate family member. 
(2)  Covered employees shall be paid their regular hourly salary for each hour of sick leave taken as accrued. Such paid sick leave shall accrue: (1) from the commencement of an employee's employment, (2) at a rate of one (1) hour of paid sick leave for each forty (40) hours worked by an employee, and (3) in one-hour increments up to a maximum of fifty-six (56) hours per year. 
(d)  Cuts in non-wage benefits prohibited. No covered employer will fund wage increases required by this chapter, or otherwise respond to the provisions of this chapter, by reducing the health, insurance, pension, vacation, or other non-wage benefits of any of its employees. 
( Ord. No. 1657, § 2, 6-6-11 )  
Sec. 2-513. - Responsibilities of covered employers. 
(a)  Payroll record-keeping and reporting. 
(1)  Each covered employer shall maintain payrolls for all covered employees and any other records sufficient to determine whether the covered employer has paid living wages to all covered employees. All such documents shall be preserved by the covered employer for a period of three (3) years. 
(2)  Upon request by the city, a covered employer shall produce for inspection and copying its books and payroll records for any or all of its covered employees for a period of up to three (3) years. Failure to maintain and produce the required documents upon request by the city may result in a finding of a violation and subject the covered employer to sanctions under section 2-514 of this article. 
(b)  Notice. Every covered employer shall post and keep in conspicuous places on its premises, where notices to employees and applications for employment are customarily posted, a copy of this ordinance or any other city sanctioned material(s) that informs employees of their rights under this article. Additionally, the covered employer shall provide, either by hand, or by U.S. Mail delivery, notice as to rights under this article to all covered employees. All notice under this section must be written in a language that is read by a minimum of ten (10) percent of all covered employees. 
( Ord. No. 1657, § 3, 6-6-11 )  
Sec. 2-514. - Compliance, enforcement and sanctions. 
(a)  Grievance procedure 
(1)  Any person who believes that a covered employer is not complying with requirements of this article has the right to file a complaint with the city's internal auditor of the office of the controller. Complaints of alleged violations may be made at any time and shall be investigated promptly by the internal auditor. Complaints and other written and oral statements made by an employee shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed to the covered employer without the consent of the employee. 
(2)  Where a violation of any provision of this law has been determined by the internal auditor, the service contractor will be given a written notice by the internal auditor. The internal auditor shall require the covered employer to cure the violation immediately and provide full back-pay to any covered employees denied the living wage. In case of violations, the city also may pursue all available legal remedies, including but not limited to, any or all of the following penalties and relief: 
a.  Withholding of all future payments under the involved public contract to the contractor in violation until it is determined that the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance; 
b.  Cancellation of the public contract; 
c.  A fine for each violation of this article in an amount not to exceed two-hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) or the maximum amount permitted by law, as provided for in subsection 2-514(b). 
d.  In case of violation, or the threat of violation of the compliance procedure, appropriate equitable or legal proceedings may be brought to enforce these provisions against contractors, and subcontractors who are not in compliance with this section. 
(3)  A contractor or subcontractor shall have the right to a hearing to dispute the allegations of the complaint and/or the finding(s) of the internal auditor under this section. In such instance, all procedures for conducting contested cases, including, but not limited to, all notice provisions, shall be done in accordance with section 2½-41, et seq., of The Code of the City of New Haven. 
(b)  Fine procedure. 
(1)  Notice of violation. To the extent that the city seeks to impose fines for a violation of this ordinance, the city shall serve a written notice to the covered employer of the violation(s) of this article by personal in-hand service or delivery, or by mailing such notice to the covered employer's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall direct the correction or abatement of the violation within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the written notice and shall notify the covered employer that failure to correct or abate the violation shall result in the issuance of a citation in accordance with this article. Such notice shall further inform the covered employer that failure to, correct or abate the violation will result in fines being imposed and may be also converted into court judgments. 
(2)  Citation/penalties. The city shall serve a written civil citation notifying the covered employer of the violation(s) of this article. The citation shall be served upon the covered employer by personal in-hand service or delivery, or by mailing such citation, to the covered employer's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. The civil citation shall provide the covered employer with the following information: 
a.  The allegations made against him/her and the amount of the proposed fines; 
b.  That he/she may contest his/her liability before the internal auditor by delivering written notice in person or by mail to the internal auditor within ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt of the citation(s); 
c.  That if he/she does not demand such a hearing within such ten (10) calendar days in accordance with this article, he/she shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the internal auditor may assess a fine without further notice; and 
d.  If a covered employer requests a hearing to dispute and/or contest the fines in the same manner as set forth in subsection 2-514(a)(3) regarding grievance procedures, the fines imposed may be converted to a court judgment for money damages with additional court cost imposed; 
(3)  Fines collected. All funds collected by the city as fines through the civil citation process shall be deposited into an account to be used for associated costs in enforcing and administering this ordinance (e.g., court fees, service of notices and citations, copying, postage, etc.). The account shall be a continuing or revolving account. 
(c)  Reporting by the city. Each fiscal year, the internal auditor shall maintain a report detailing any reported violations of this article and any actions taken as a result. Such a report shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  The number of violations reported in the previous fiscal year; 
(2)  The types of violations reported in the previous fiscal year; 
(3)  The actions taken in response to the violations reported in the previous fiscal year. 
( Ord. No. 1657, § 4, 6-6-11 )  
Sec. 2-515. - Disqualification of contractors. 
(a)  Disqualification of contractors. 
(1)  Should the city wish to disqualify a contractor or subcontractor from all future bids for any public contract with the city under this section until such time as the contractor or subcontract is in compliance, the city must proceed in accordance with C.G.S. chapter 54, C.G.S. Section 7-148w, and section 2½-41, et seq., of The Code of the City of New Haven. The hearing officer, who shall be appointed by the controller or his/her designee(s), shall issue a written decision within ninety (90) days of the last date of such hearing and state in the decision the reason for the decision taken, and, if the contractor is being disqualified, the period for such disqualification. The existence of a cause for disqualification shall not be the sole factor to be considered in determining whether the contractor shall be disqualified. in determining whether to disqualify a contractor, the hearing officer shall consider the seriousness of the contractor's acts or omissions and any mitigating factors. the hearing officer shall send the decision to the contractor by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(2)  The causes for disqualification from bidding on, applying or participating in, contracts shall include the following: 
a.  A willful violation of a statutory or regulatory provision or requirement applicable to a public contract, agreement or transaction; 
b.  A willful failure to perform in accordance with the terms of one or more public contracts, agreements or transactions; 
c.  A history of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance of one or more public contracts, agreements or transactions; 
d.  Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for or admission to commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such a contract or subcontract; 
e.  Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for or admission to the violation of any state or federal law for embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which affects responsibility as a municipal contractor; 
f.  Conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for or admission to the violation of any state or federal antitrust, collusion or conspiracy law arising out of the submission of bids or proposals on a public or private contract or subcontract. 
(3)  For purposes of a disqualification proceeding under an ordinance adopted under this section, conduct may be imputed as follows: 
a.  The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of any officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee, or other individual associated with a contractor may be imputed to the contract when the conduct occurred in connection with the individual's performance of duties for or on behalf of the contractor and the contractor knew of, or had reason to know of such conduct. The term "other seriously improper conduct" does not include advice from an attorney, accountant or other paid consultant if it was reasonable for the contractor to rely on such advice. 
b.  The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of a contractor may be imputed to any officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee, or other individual associated with the contractor who participated in, knew of, or had reason to know of the contractor's conduct. 
c.  The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of one (1) contractor participating in a joint venture or similar arrangement may be imputed to other participating in a joint venture or similar arrangement may be imputed to other participating contractors if the conduct occurred for on behalf of the joint venture or similar arrangement and these contractors knew of or had reason to know of such conduct. 
(4)  The city may reduce the period or extent of disqualification, upon the contractor's request, supported by documentation, for the following reasons: 
a.  Newly discovered material evidence; 
b.  Reversal of the conviction upon which the disqualification was based; 
c.  Bona fide change in ownership or management; 
d.  Elimination of other causes for which the disqualification was imposed; or 
e.  Other reasons the city deems appropriate. 
(b)  The city may grant an exception permitting a disqualified contractor to participate in a particular contract or subcontract upon a written determination by the internal auditor that there is good cause, in the interest of the public, for such action. 
( Ord. No. 1657, § 5, 6-6-11 )  
Sec. 2-516. - Non-impairment of existing service contracts. 
Nothing contained herein shall operate to impair any existing service contracts. the provisions of this article shall apply to a service contract entered into that meets the requirements for coverage under this law. 
( Ord. No. 1657, § 6, 6-6-11 )  
Sec. 2-517. - Severability. 
In the event any provision of this local law shall be held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or render unenforceable any other provisions hereof. 
( Ord. No. 1657, § 7, 6-6-11 )  
Secs. 2-518—2-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1391, adopted Aug. 8, 2005, repealed provisions pertaining to the city demonstration agency which were formerly included as Art. VI, §§ 2-91—2-95 and derived from Ord. of 8-3-70, §§ 1—3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-551. - Appointment of minority representatives to city boards and commissions. 
(a)  When the mayor selects a person to fill a vacancy on a city board, commission or agency, he/she shall consult a listing of interested persons, who have submitted their names in a letter of request in response to a general notice published in a local newspaper of general circulation. Such newspaper shall annually publish said notice once on or about December 1st. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be responsible for the annual publication of the above described notice. 
(c)  Two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the membership of said board, commission or agency shall be affiliated with the city's major political party as defined in Conn. General Statutes section 9-372 as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-551 amends and supersedes former § 2-24 which derived from Ord. of 4-21-86.  
Sec. 2-552. - Appointments to the board of zoning appeals. 
Pursuant to Section 4.A(2) of the 2013 revised Charter of the City of New Haven, the leadership of the board of alders, as defined in section 2-37 of this Code, shall nominate two (2) individuals to serve on the board of zoning appeals. The terms of said appointees shall be five (5) years. Said nominees shall be subject to confirmation by the full board of alders in the same manner as confirmation of the mayor's appointments to city boards and commissions. 
(Ord. No. 1760, 1-20-15 )  
Secs. 2-553—2-580. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMISSION ON AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 
 
Sec. 2-581. - Permanent commission on affirmative action, established, purpose. 
The city's permanent commission on affirmative action is hereby established for the purpose of assuring equal opportunity in municipal employment. The commission shall consist of nine (9) members, and be responsible for studying, recommending and pursuing changes to city ordinances and executive orders to ensure conformance with federal, state and local laws and regulations including the city charter. Additionally, the commission shall exercise oversight responsibility for implementing the city's affirmative action plan. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-581 along with the other sections of this division amends and supersedes former section 2-89 which derived from Ord. of 8-1-83, §§ 1—13; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-582. - Commission, membership, terms, meetings. 
(a)  The commission on affirmative action shall be composed of the following persons: 
(1)  One (1) representative from the board of aldermen, and one (1) representative from the civil service commission. They shall serve only as long as they are members of said bodies. Neither representative can be a city employee, nor serve on any other city commission while on this commission; 
(2)  Seven (7) city residents selected by the mayor with the board of aldermen's approval; and 
(3)  The city's chief administrative officer shall serve as an ex officio, non-voting member of the commission. 
(b)  Appointments shall conform to the minority representation provisions of Connecticut General Statutes section 9-167a as amended from time to time. 
(c)  All terms will be for two (2) years. If a vacancy arises from the members of the board of aldermen and/or the civil service commission, the appropriate board or commission shall select the representative to serve the remainder of the term. The mayor shall fill all other vacancies. The calendar year for the commission shall be July 1st through June 30th of each succeeding year. 
(d)  No member of the commission shall be an employee of the City of New Haven while serving on the commission. 
(e)  The nine (9) members of the commission shall elect the chairperson by majority vote. 
(f)  The commission shall meet not less than six (6) times annually for the conduct of business, and may request the presence of coordinators, department heads and other appointing authorities, who influence action capable of affecting the city's progress concerning affirmative action efforts. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-582 along with the other sections of this division amends and supersedes former section 2-89 which derived from Ord. of 8-1-83, §§ 1—13; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-583. - Powers, duties. 
The commission on affirmative action shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Prepare the commission's annual budget in consultation with the city's chief administrative officer, and submit it to the mayor for approval and inclusion in the city's annual budget; 
(2)  Meet with the civil service commission on issues of mutual concern affecting the city's affirmative action efforts; 
(3)  Develop an annual report on the status of affirmative action hiring for presentation to the mayor and other interested persons; 
(4)  Submit formal recommendations to the mayor for corrective action where appropriate; and 
(5)  Adopt appropriate operating rules and procedures for the conduct of business. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-583 along with the other sections of this division amends and supersedes former section 2-89 which derived from Ord. of 8-1-83, §§ 1—13; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-584. - Affirmative action officer. 
There shall be an affirmative action officer, who reports to the city's human resources director. This officer shall provide staff support to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-584 along with the other sections of this division amends and supersedes former section 2-89 which derived from Ord. of 8-1-83, §§ 1—13; Ord. of 8-2-93.  
Sec. 2-585. - Commission on equal opportunities. 
This Code authorizes the establishment of a commission on equal opportunities, and empowers it to receive, initiate and investigate complaints of discriminatory practices in the city. The commission shall take appropriate action if it finds a hiring practice resulting from the city's affirmative action plan to be in violation of applicable law or regulation, or if a city department fails to provide information to it in violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-585 along with the other sections of this division amends and supersedes former section 2-89 which derived from Ord. of 8-1-83.  
Secs. 2-586—2-610. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMMISSION ON PILOT/REVENUE LOBBYING 
 
Sec. 2-611. - Commission on PILOT/revenue lobbying. 
(a)  A commission on PILOT programs and other state legislation is hereby established. This commission shall encourage the Connecticut General Assembly to provide significant additional funding of the PILOT program, mobilize various statewide organizations affiliated with its members, and enact other legislation that will benefit the city. 
(b)  The members of such commission shall consist of: 
(1)  All members of the Connecticut State Senate and the Connecticut State House of Representatives residing in New Haven; 
(2)  One (1) representative from each of the following: Yale University, the Hospital of St. Raphael, Yale-New Haven Hospital, the Greater New Haven Chamber of Commerce, the United Way of Greater New Haven, Albertus Magnus College, a representative of the Greater New Haven Central Labor Council-AFL-CIO, a Community Labor Alliance representative and four (4) public citizen members appointed by the mayor; and 
(3)  Two (2) members of the New Haven Board of Aldermen selected by the president said board. 
(c)  The chair shall be elected by majority members of the commission present and voting. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-611 amends and supersedes former § 2-26 which derived from Ord. of 8-12-85.  
Secs. 2-612—2-640. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONSERVATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-641. - Established, purpose. 
The city's city plan commission is hereby designated as the city's conservation commission. This commission is established for the development, conservation, supervision and regulation of natural resources, including water resources, within the city's territorial limits. The commission shall act in accordance with the powers as set out in Conn. General Statutes section 7-131a as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-641 amends and supersedes former § 2-106 which derived from Ord. of 6-3-74, § 1.  
Sec. 2-642. - Powers delegated to commission. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-42 as amended from time to time, the city's city plan commission is hereby empowered to regulate activities affecting wetlands and watercourses within the city's territorial limits, and thereby carry out and effectuate the purposes and policies of Conn. General Statutes sections 22a-36 to 22a-45a, inclusive, as the statutes cited herein are amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-642 amends and supersedes former § 2-107 which derived from Ord. of 6-3-74, § 2.  
Sec. 2-643. - State statutes to be followed. 
In promulgating regulations or amendments relating to inland wetlands and watercourses, the city's city plan commission shall act in accordance with all pertinent federal, state and local laws and guidelines, and conform to the regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-39 as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-643 amends and supersedes former § 2-108 which derived from Ord. of 6-3-74, § 3.  
Sec. 2-644. - Public hearing required prior to adoption of regulations. 
Prior to adopting regulations or substantial amendments relating to inland wetlands and watercourses, the city's city plan commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice shall be given in accordance with Conn. General Statutes sect. 8-7d as amended by Public Acts 03-177 and 04-257 and otherwise from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-644 amends and supersedes former § 2-109 which derived from Ord. of 6-3-74, § 4.  
Secs. 2-645—2-670. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DEPARTMENT OF CULTURAL AFFAIRS, CULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMISSION AND MUNICIPAL FUND FOR WORKS OF ART  
Subdivision I. - Department of Cultural Affairs 
 
Sec. 2-671. - Department of cultural affairs; established; director; duties. 
There shall be a department of cultural affairs within the city's office of economic development. The department shall be headed by a director, who is appointed by the mayor upon the recommendation of the cultural affairs commission. The director shall hire such necessary clerical and staff assistance within the budget appropriation for the office of economic development, administer the department, and execute the commission's activities. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-671 amends and supersedes former § 2-142 which derived from Ord. of 3-22-82; Ord. of 11-20-89, § 3; Ord. of 5-29-90, § 1.  
Subdivision II. - Cultural Affairs Commission 
 
Sec. 2-672. - Cultural affairs commission. 
There is hereby established the cultural affairs commission. Through the department of cultural affairs, the commission shall be recognized and designated as the municipal body responsible for the city's arts and cultural activity. It shall be responsible for duties as described by Conn. General Statutes section 7-122b (c) as amended from time to time, including the selection of, and contractual arrangements with any artist, artisan, or craftsperson, review of any design or plan of works of art, execution and completion of such works, and their acceptance and placement. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-672 amends and supersedes former § 2-172 which derived from Ord. 12-20-82.  
Sec. 2-673. - Commission, membership, terms. 
The cultural affairs commission shall be composed of the following persons: 
(1)  One (1) alderman elected biannually by the board of aldermen, who shall serve only so long as he/she is a member of that board; 
(2)  Fifteen (15) members appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen, who shall be city electors during their terms. Nine (9) of these members shall be active in the city's cultural community as artists, arts administrators or board members, and the remaining six (6) shall be citizen members. The members of the commission shall serve three (3) year terms, provided that no more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the appointments expire in any one (1) year; and 
(3)  The mayor, who shall serve only so long as he/she remains in office. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-673 amends and supersedes former § 2-140 which derived from Ord. of 3-22-82; Ord. of 11-20-89, § 1; Ord. of 5-29-90, § 1.  
Sec. 2-674. - Powers, duties. 
The cultural affairs commission shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Encourage, sponsor or conduct programs to advance awareness of, interest in, and development of the fine arts, performing arts and cultural activities. The commission may perform these acts alone, or in collaboration with public or private agencies; 
(2)  Broaden awareness that culture and the arts can culturally and economically contribute to benefit the city; 
(3)  Develop guidelines for the receipt and purchase of works of art to be placed on municipal property, and advise the mayor and board of aldermen in these areas; 
(4)  Develop guidelines and oversee the care, maintenance and preservation of the city's art collection; 
(5)  Seek out and receive grants for artistic and cultural programs, develop programs for the expenditure of such funds, and assist others in preparing applications for such funds; 
(6)  Administer the city ordinance establishing a municipal fund for works of art; 
(7)  Foster communication and coordination with government agencies, public and private organizations and institutions with respect to artistic and cultural activities and development; 
(8)  Assist in the development of facilities for artistic and cultural activities; 
(9)  Advise and assist the city in connection with such other artistic and cultural activities that the city refers to it; and 
(10)  Designate the department of cultural affairs to operate on its behalf. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-674 amends and supersedes former § 2-141 which derived from Ord. of 3-22-82; Ord. of 11-20-89, § 2; Ord. No. 1038A, §, 5-29-90; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 1.  
Sec. 2-675. - Implementation procedures. 
The cultural affairs commission may propose new procedures to uniformly implement this division's provisions to the board of aldermen for its approval. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Subdivision III. - Municipal Fund for Works of Art 
 
Sec. 2-676. - Definitions. 
The following words shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Work of art means art work which is to be an integrated part of any municipal facility, including but not limited to, a fresco, mosaic, sculpture, and other architectural embellishment of functional art created by a professional artist, artisan or craftsperson. It includes any work of visual art which is not to be an integrated part of such municipal facility such as a drawing, painting, sculpture, mosaic, photograph, work of calligraphy, or work of graphic art or mixed media. Any municipal facility may include more than one work of art. The term does not include architectural landscaping and/or landscape gardening. 
(b)  Municipal facility means any facility or building owned or leased by the city, and open to the public or intended for such use, including but not limited to, courthouses, schools, libraries, administrative office buildings and parks. It does not include sheds, warehouses, maintenance garages, sewage plants or buildings of a temporary nature. 
(c)  Allocated fund means not more than one (1) percent of the total municipal funds allocated for the purpose of construction, reconstruction or remodeling of a municipal facility. The funds are exclusive of land acquisition, any non-construction costs including the cost of such work of art, and any augmentations to such costs for works of art. 
(d)  Municipal fund for works of art means the money appropriated pursuant to this legislation dedicated to the purchase of artwork for municipal facilities. 
(e)  Construction project means any project paid wholly or partially by the city involving the construction, reconstruction or remodeling of any municipal facility. 
(f)  Construction, reconstruction, remodeling include, but are not limited to, the repair, replacement, erection, alteration, remodeling, conversion, modernization, improvement, reconstruction, rehabilitation, renovation, or addition to any building or structure that constitutes a construction project as herein defined. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-677. - Funding for works of art. 
In allocating municipal funds for the purpose of construction, reconstruction or remodeling of any municipal facility, the city shall provide not more than one (1) percent of the total construction, reconstruction or remodeling costs to fund works of art. The costs shall be exclusive of (1) the cost of any land acquisition; (2) any non-construction costs, including the cost of such work of art; and (3) any augmentations to such costs, for works of art. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-677 amends and supersedes former § 2-171 which derived from Ord. of 12-20-82.  
Secs. 2-678—2-700. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY AGENCY 
 
Sec. 2-701. - Created, composition. 
(a)  There is hereby established the city's environmental advisory council (EAC). Its membership shall be as follows: 
(1)  The chief administrative officer, the city's engineer and the city plan director or their designees who shall serve as non-voting members. The three (3) city administrators shall consult with other city staff as needed. The city engineer shall provide staff to render logistical support. 
(2)  One (1) member of the board of alders, who is appointed by said board; and 
(3)  Six (6) city residents and three (3) resident alternates, who are appointed by the mayor. These city residents shall represent the interests of all neighborhoods in the city. Of the residents, two (2) plus an alternate shall be appointed for a three-year term, two (2) plus an alternate shall be appointed for a two-year term, and two (2) plus an alternate shall be appointed for a year. Thereafter, citizen council members shall serve three-year terms. 
(b)  All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1781 , 9-21-2015) 
Editor's note— § 2-701 amends and supersedes former § 2-120 which derived from Ord. of 1-7-74, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-77; Ord. of 6-17-85; Ord. of 3-12-01.  
Sec. 2-702. - Officers, meetings, etc. 
(a)  The EAC will hold elections to elect its chair, vice-chair, and secretary. The council's secretary shall coordinate the council's activities. 
(b)  The environmental advisory council shall hold regular meetings on the first Wednesday of every quarter except when such Wednesday is a holiday. Otherwise, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding business day. The council may hold such additional meetings as the chair deems necessary. For purposes of any council meeting, a quorum shall be equal to five (5) or more of its members. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1781 , 9-21-2015) 
Editor's note— § 2-702 amends and supersedes former § 2-121 which derived from Ord. of 1-7-74, § 2; Ord. of 4-4-77; Ord. of 6-17-85.  
Sec. 2-703. - Duties. 
The council shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Collect, analyze, and disseminate information and interpretations of federal, state, and local laws and regulations; 
(2)  Its members shall advocate, advise, and engage on behalf of the council and its mission. 
(3)  Advise the mayor, board of alders, city agencies, boards, commissions, and departments, and the private sector of all federal and state and municipal laws, regulations and department procedures related to environmental protection matters; 
(4)  Collect, analyze, interpret, publish, and disseminate base line information concerning historical, existing, and projected environmental conditions concerning air, water, solid waste, noise, and use of natural recourses in the city; 
(5)  Prepare position papers and testimony, and make appropriate representations to federal, state, and local agencies concerning laws and regulations, and their impact upon local development projects and the city's environmental and economic viability; 
(6)  Collaborate with other cities and towns within Connecticut, the federal government, and public and private organizations and public interest groups such as the Connecticut Conference of Municipalities, the United States Conference of Mayors and the National League of Cities for purposes of effecting sound administrative procedures to achieve reasonable environmental standards within New Haven; and 
(7)  Recommend establishing boards and commissions, and enacting laws and regulations to preserve the environment, and on any other matter which be in the best interest of New Haven concerning its natural resources, to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 1781 , 9-21-2015) 
Editor's note— § 2-703 amends and supersedes former § 2-122 which derived from Ord. of 1-7-74, § 3; Ord. of 4-4-77.  
Secs. 2-704—2-730. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal preservation board, § 2-791 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-731. - Historic district commission established, purpose. 
(a)  The city's historic district commission is hereby established to regulate the manner in which a building or structure may be erected, altered, arranged, restored, moved or demolished within an historic district. Any such action requires the approval of said commission. The commission is empowered to exercise all the powers, duties, and functions enumerated in Conn. General Statutes sections 7-147a to 7-147k inclusive as amended from time to time. 
(b)  The historic district commission shall consist of five (5) members, and up to five (5) alternates. The mayor appoints the commission members, who shall serve five (5) year terms. Members shall be city electors, hold no salaried city office, and serve without compensation. 
(c)  At least one (1) member of the commission shall be an architect or an architectural historian, one (1) member shall be selected from a list submitted by the New Haven Preservation Trust, and one (1) member shall be a resident or owner within the historic district. As each new historic district, if any, is approved, the mayor shall designate a new member or alternate, as the case may be, who shall be an owner or resident thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2-732. - Public hearing required, publication of notice. 
The historic district commission shall hold a public meeting upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the city not less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen (15) days before such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05)  
Secs. 2-733—2-760. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - HOMELESS ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-761. - Homeless advisory commission established; membership; purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby established the city's homeless advisory commission. Its membership shall be as follows: 
(1)  One (1) member from the board of directors of an organization engaged in providing shelter to the homeless; 
(2)  Five (5) homeless representatives from the homeless, current homeless shelter clients, or former homeless persons; 
(3)  One (1) homeless advocate, or a member of a homeless advocacy agency or organization; 
(4)  Four (4) citizens who can be business owners, or individuals with backgrounds in housing, health, or substance abuse fields, or interested persons; and 
(5)  Two (2) members of the board of aldermen, one (1) from each political party who are appointed by the president of the board of aldermen. 
(b)  The following members shall serve ex-officio, and shall not have voting rights: 
(1)  City community services administrative officer or his/her designee; and 
(2)  City director of the livable city initiative or his/her designee. 
(c)  The quorum of the homeless advisory commission shall be equal to a majority of its membership. All members shall reside in New Haven except the representative of the state Department of Social Services. All members, except for the above listed city government representatives, shall be appointed by the mayor, and approved by the board of aldermen. The term of office of each member shall be two (2) years. The initial appointments of the non-city representatives shall be staggered so that half the initial members shall serve for one (1) year terms as follows: 
(1)  The following shall serve initial one-year terms: three (3) of the citizen members; and three (3) of the homeless members; 
(2)  The following shall serve initial two-year terms: the shelter board member, two (2) of the homeless members, one (1) citizen member, and the homeless advocate member; 
(3)  The aldermanic members shall serve two (2) year terms, coterminous with their aldermanic terms. 
(d)  The community services administration, through the special project coordinator, shall provide staff support to the homeless advisory commission. The commission shall meet at least once a month, and more often if needed. Only elected officials may serve more than three (3) consecutive terms. No individual shall serve in a dual capacity on the commission. 
(e)  The purpose of the homeless advisory commission is to provide advice to the mayor and board of aldermen concerning the problems of homeless individuals and families in New Haven, and to make recommendations as to proposed solutions. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-761 amends and supersedes former section 2-160 which derived from Ord. of 1-3-89; Ord. of 7-5-89, §§ 2—5; Ord. of 11-19-90, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 9-3-96, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-20-98, §§ 1—9.  
Sec. 2-762. - Powers, duties. 
The homeless advisory commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Monitor planning documents which address the issue of homelessness in New Haven, with a particular focus on the City of New Haven Consolidated Plan, the Continuum of Care Plan, and other plans which may be developed over time; 
(2)  Study the conditions of homeless persons and families, and the facilities that provide services to them; 
(3)  Receive complaints and comments from neighborhood groups and individuals, and use its discretion to refer such complaints and comments to appropriate departments for investigation. The departments shall report the results of any investigation to the commission; 
(4)  Prepare reports of the results of any of its studies, and transmit such reports including recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen as it shall deem appropriate; 
(5)  Make recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen as to funds necessary to provide services to homeless persons and families, and advise said authorities about possible additional funding sources to meet such needs; 
(6)  Make recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen concerning any comprehensive plans that they adopted relating to the provision of services and housing to homeless persons and families; 
(7)  Request that appropriate city departments meet to ensure their coordination for the provision of housing and services to homeless individuals and families; 
(8)  Ensure that the appropriate entity, such as the city, will evaluate homeless shelters at least every two (2) years, review the entity's evaluations, and recommend the amelioration of problems as appropriate, and investigate the feasibility of ensuring that service providers will perform such evaluations or secure existing ones of the homeless population; 
(9)  When transitional housing programs are being considered, the affected neighborhoods and aldermen will be notified and their input sought. The commission shall consult the city, the board of aldermen, the service provider's representatives, residents, consumers and advocacy communities concerning its recommendations of the desired process. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-762 amends and supersedes former section 2-161 which derived from Ord. of 1-3-89; Ord. of 7-5-89, § 6; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 8-2-93; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 2; Ord. of 9-21-99.  
Secs. 2-763—2-790. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - MUNICIPAL PRESERVATION BOARD[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Historic district commission, § 2-731 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-791. - Municipal preservation board established, purpose. 
(a)  The city's municipal preservation board is hereby created. This board is created to prevent the unreasonable destruction of historic structures and landmarks, and recommend properties or districts to be nominated by the state historic preservation board for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places. 
(b)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 10-321q(b) as amended from time to time, the board of aldermen may appoint this board, which shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more than nine (9) members. All members shall be appointed for a one (1) year term commencing July 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-791 along with § 2-792 supersedes and amends former section 2-135 which derived from Ord. of 1-5-81.  
Sec. 2-792. - Public hearing required prior to nomination. 
(a)  The municipal preservation board may conduct public meetings for the purpose of providing local public review on the nomination of any parcel of real property to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(b)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 10-321q(c) as amended from time to time, notice of the time, place and subject matter of each such hearing shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality not more than fifteen (15) nor less than seven (7) days prior to it. 
(Ord. No. 1391, 9-19-05) 
Editor's note— § 2-792 along with § 2-791 supersedes and amends former section 2-135 which derived from Ord. of 1-5-81.  
Secs. 2-793—2-795. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CIVILIAN REVIEW BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-796. - Civilian review board. 
(a)  The civilian review board has the authority to monitor and to review and conduct independent investigations of civilian complaints of police misconduct by police officers empowered to act with municipal police powers in the City of New Haven. 
(b)  The office and the professional staff that provide assistance to the civilian review board shall be located in, the office of the commission on equal opportunities. 
(c)  The office of the civilian review board shall be funded permanently by annual allotments for personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities in an amount no less than that of similarly sized existing departments, offices, and agencies of the City of New Haven. 
(d)  The office of the civilian review board may not be eliminated by any action of any part of the executive branch of government of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-797. - Objectives. 
The civilian review board's function is to create a public, transparent, and impartial means by which to review, monitor and independently investigate any civilian complaints of police misconduct against a police officer employed by a police department empowered to act with municipal police powers in the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 2, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-798. - Membership. 
(a)  The civilian review board shall consist of a number of members with no more than fifteen (15), and with a quorum of seven (7), and shall, at a minimum, consist of members selected as follows: one (1) member from each of the police districts in the City of New Haven, one (1) member of the board of alders, and, at least, two (2) at-large members. 
(b)  All members of the civilian review board shall be residents of the City of New Haven. 
(c)  No member of the civilian review board shall be a current sworn officer of any police department or law enforcement entity. 
(d)  Except for the member of the board of alders appointed by the president of the board of alders, no current elected official shall be a member of the civilian review board. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 3, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-799. - Appointment. 
(a)  The mayor shall nominate all members of the civilian review board, except the at-large members, who shall be nominated by the board of alders, and the aldermanic representative, who shall be a member of the board of alders appointed by the president of the board of alders. 
(b)  All nominees shall be confirmed by a majority vote of the board of alders. 
(c)  Mayoral nominees shall be selected from among the names recommended by each community management team, which shall make said recommendations at a mandatory biennial meeting, where it elects officers. Said recommendations shall be made from among the names submitted to each community management team by community engagement organizations and similar neighborhood-based organizations in each respective police district. 
(d)  The board of alders shall maintain a list of community engagement organizations or similar neighborhood-based organizations, who are interested in offering names of prospective civilian review board members. 
(e)  The civilian review board shall be reflective of the city's diversity. 
(f)  If there is no recommendation to the mayor from a community management team within ninety (90) days of a vacancy, the board of alders in consultation with the mayor will nominate an eligible resident to fill that vacancy. 
(g)  For initial implementation, each community management team shall make recommendations of names to the mayor within ninety (90) days of the passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived. The mayor then shall make appointments pursuant to article II section 8 and article VII section 1 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 4, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-800. - Term. 
Except for the initial term of the representatives for the odd number policing districts which shall be three (3) years, the term of office for each member shall be two (2) years. The terms shall be staggered as follows: initial appointments to odd-numbered police districts shall be for a period of three years only, and all other and all subsequent appointments shall be for a period of two years. The initial term of the member of the board of alders shall end on December 31, 2019, or until a successor is appointed and duly qualified. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 5, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-801. - Duties. 
The civilian review board shall have the following authority, and such other authority as may be set forth by ordinance: 
(1)  To monitor, review and independently investigate civilian complaints of alleged police misconduct against any police officer acting in the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers to monitor and review the processing of internal affairs complaints by any police department acting within the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers in order to make sure such processing is complete, accurate and factually supported; and to make recommendations to the police chief alongside any recommendations made by internal affairs; 
(2)  To receive a copy of any civilian complaint of alleged police misconduct filed against any police officer acting in the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers within five (5) days of the filing of said complaint; 
(3)  To receive, in writing, a copy of any findings of fact and/or recommended disposition of a complaint at the same time it is forwarded to internal affairs, before it is submitted for final action to the relevant chief of police and to interview the officer(s) preparing such proposed findings of fact and/or recommended disposition; 
(4)  To hear appeals from any civilian complainant within ninety (90) days of the completion of an internal affairs investigation by any police department acting within the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers; 
(5)  To require any police department acting within the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers to investigate civilian complaints of alleged police misconduct in the event no investigation has been commenced after an initial complaint; 
(6)  To prepare an annual report to the office of the mayor and the board of alders indicating: 
a.  The number, type, and basic facts of complaints filed; 
b.  The number of police officers against whom complaints were filed and the number of police officers against whom multiple complaints were received; 
c.  The civilian review board's findings and recommendations on the complaints; 
d.  Internal affairs' findings and recommendations on the same complaints; and 
e.  The disposition of the complaints, provided such disclosure does not violate confidentiality laws and regulations; 
g.  To require any police department acting within the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers to reopen any closed investigation and to continue an investigation, if in the judgment of the civilian review board, an initial investigation was incomplete, unfair, or otherwise unresolved; 
h.  To recommend revisions to policies, the manner of processing civilian complaints, training protocols, and/or provisions of general orders or departmental standards, to any police department acting within the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers; 
i.  To develop policies and procedures for the filing and processing of civilian complaints to the civilian review board, for the operations of said board, and for the training of members of said board and the community-based agencies and organizations, as selected by said board; 
j.  To develop a memorandum of understanding with the Yale University Police Department designed to effectuate the goal of assuring transparent civilian review of any civilian complaint of an alleged police misconduct by an officer employed by a police department acting within the City of New Haven pursuant to municipal police powers. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 6, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-802. - Investigations. 
(a)  When the civilian review board by simple majority vote of members present determines it in the public interest, the civilian review board shall contract or hire the services of certified independent investigators who are not active, sworn police officers. The civilian review board shall rely upon the findings and investigative reports of the independent investigator in making recommendations. 
(b)  The independent investigator shall have access to the same files and reports as internal affairs, as allowed by existing statutes or requirements of law. 
(c)  In appropriate circumstances, the civilian review board may take sworn testimony from witnesses concerning the alleged misconduct which is the subject of the complaint. Any officer or member of the police department may be called to attend and participate as allowed by existing statutes or requirements of law. 
(d)  Following the review of a civilian complaint, the civilian review board will promptly report its findings and recommendations to the police chief, the board of police commissioners, and the complainant. These recommendations may include discipline or other actions the civilian review board deems appropriate. 
(e)  The police chief shall not make a decision regarding a civilian complaint until she or he has received the findings and recommendations of both the civilian review board and internal affairs. Should the police chief elect not to accept either the findings or the recommendations of the civilian review board, she or he shall promptly notify in writing the civilian review board of her or his decision and the reasons for said decision related to the specific civilian complaint. In the event the police chief adopts the findings or accepts the recommendation of the civilian review board, she or he shall promptly notify in writing the civilian review board. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 7, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-803. - Staff. 
The civilian review board shall have the authority to hire, with the approval of the board of alders, such staff as is necessary to perform the duties herein described and to perform such other tasks as the civilian review board may in its discretion require with the exception of the first civilian review board coordinator, who shall be hired by the board of alders. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 8, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-804. - Applicability of other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall exempt any person from applicable provisions of any other laws of the city, state, federal, or other appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 9, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 2-805. - Confidentiality of records. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to preserve and enhance the security of persons and property within the city. Where public release of certain information may put someone in jeopardy, it shall be the intent of the civilian review board to preserve the confidentiality, where permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1853 , § 10, 1-7-19)  
Secs. 2-806—2-820. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - DEMOCRACY FUND[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1589, adopted May 4, 2009, repealed former Art. XI, §§ 2-821—2-834 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. XI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1442, adopted March 5, 2007. 
 
Sec. 2-821. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure that all the citizens of New Haven have a fair and meaningful opportunity to participate in the election of their mayor. Specifically, the ordinance aims to: 
(1)  Counter the perception that New Haven's public policy is influenced by campaign contributions; 
(2)  Ensure that meritorious mayoral candidates are able to raise and spend sufficient campaign funds through public financing of elections to convey their messages to the voters; 
(3)  Reduce the need for ongoing fundraising and to encourage mayoral candidates to spend more time communicating with citizens; 
(4)  Give all citizens an opportunity for a reasonable supporting role in the selection of mayor by making even small contributions meaningful. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-822. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined in this section, or the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the definitions in this section shall govern the interpretation of this ordinance. 
(1)  Mayoral committee means a committee designated by a single candidate, or established with the consent, authorization, or cooperation of a single candidate, for the purpose of a single primary or election and to aid or promote such candidate's candidacy alone for the office of mayor. "Mayoral committee" as used in this article shall not include any "exploratory committee", "political committee" or "Party committee" as those terms are defined in Connecticut General Statutes, Section 9-601. 
(2)  Candidate means an individual who seeks election or nomination for election to the office of mayor, whether or not such individual is elected. For purposes of this ordinance, an individual shall be deemed to seek election or nomination for election if such individual has (1) been endorsed by a party or become eligible for a position on the ballot at an election or primary, or (2) solicited or received contributions, made expenditures, or given his or her consent to any other person to solicit or receive contributions or make expenditures with the intent to bring about his or her election or nomination for election to the office of mayor. 
(3)  Campaign treasurer means the individual appointed by a candidate to receive and disburse funds on behalf of the candidate or mayoral committee. 
(4)  Election means any primary or general election for mayor of the City of New Haven. 
(5)  Contested election means any election in which more than one candidate seeking a party nomination or election to the office of mayor has raised or spent five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The administrator will declare an election a contested election. 
(6)  Qualified committee means a mayoral committee determined by the Administrator, pursuant to 2-245(h), as eligible to receive public matching funds. A candidate for election or nomination for election to the office of mayor shall only have a single "qualified committee" at any given time. 
(7)  Contribution means any gift, payment, subscription, advance, deposit of money, or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the election or nomination for election of a candidate, and shall also include but not be limited to: 
a.  The payment by any person other than a candidate or a mayoral committee of compensation for the personal services of any other person which are rendered without charge to a candidate or his or her mayoral committee for any purpose; 
b.  A loan made to a mayoral committee, whether or not made in the regular course of the lender's business, to the extent the loan is not repaid by the date of the first election following the date of the loan; 
The term "contribution" shall not include: 
(i)  The value of services provided without compensation by individuals who volunteer a portion or all of their time on behalf of a candidate; or 
(ii)  The use of real or personal property, or the cost of invitations, food or beverages, voluntarily provided by an individual to a candidate at the individual's residential premises for candidate-related activities, to the extent the aggregate value, per election, of such property, invitations, food or beverages do not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) in value; or 
(iii)  The travel expenses of any individual who on his or her own behalf volunteers his or her personal services to any candidate, to the extent such expenses are not reimbursed and to the extent the aggregate value, per election, does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) in value. 
(8)  Matchable contribution means a contribution, not in violation of the contribution limits set forth in subsection 2-825(a) of this article, made by a registered voter of the City of New Haven to a participating candidate's mayoral committee, which contribution may be matched by public matching funds as provided in this article. 
The following contributions are not matchable: 
(i)  In-kind contributions of property, goods or services; 
(ii)  Contributions in the form of a purchase price paid for an item with significant intrinsic or enduring value; 
(iii)  Contributions in the form of the purchase price for or otherwise induced by a chance to participate in a raffle, lottery, or similar drawing for valuable prizes; and 
(iv)  Contributions from individual vendors to whom the participating candidate or his or her mayoral committee makes an expenditure. 
(9)  Expenditure means any purchase, payment, distribution, gift of money, or anything else of value made by a mayoral committee. The timing of expenditures is when they are incurred, not when they are actually paid. 
(10)  Qualified campaign expenditure means an expenditure of a participating mayoral committee that shall be counted toward its expenditure ceiling. Participating mayoral committees may not make any expenditures that are not qualified campaign expenditures. "Qualified campaign expenditures" include all expenditures for campaign-related purposes, taking into account the public nature of matching public funds and the public financing grant, the purposes of the democracy fund as stated above, the reasonableness of the expenditures under the circumstances, and the fair market value of the goods or services purchased with the expenditure. 
Examples of typical "qualified campaign expenditures" include but are not limited to: reasonable and appropriate expenditures for printing and mailing costs; political advertising expenses; campaign communications such as signs, bumper stickers, T-shirts or caps with campaign slogans, etc.; office supplies; campaign events (e.g. food, rent of hall or tent, etc.); food for volunteers while they are working (limited to no more than ten dollars ($10.00) per person for breakfast or twenty dollars ($20.00) per person for lunch or dinner); campaign staff salaries and expenses; campaign travel expenses, such as fuel and tolls; and post-election parties, thank you notes or advertising to thank supporters or voters (such post-election expenditures, are limited to a cumulative maximum of ($250.00) per election). 
"Qualified campaign expenditures" shall also include but not be limited to: 
a.  The actual expense paid or incurred by a mayoral committee for its pro rata share of the cost of operating a campaign headquarters and of preparing, printing and disseminating any political communication on behalf of the candidate and any other candidate or candidates for other municipal offices; and 
b.  A non-monetary contribution provided to the mayoral committee, other than volunteer personal services and non-reimbursed payments for the travel expenses of an individual who volunteers his or her personal services to a single candidate, if the expenses are incurred voluntarily and without any understanding or agreement that they will be reimbursed; and 
c.  A "coordinated expenditure" as that term is defined in Conn. Gen. Statutes § 9-601(19) (see Appendix). 
"Qualified campaign expenditures" shall not include: 
(i)  Expenditures for personal goods and services of the candidate which would otherwise be purchased independently of the campaign, including but not limited to day-to-day household food items and supplies; vehicle and transportation expenses unrelated to the campaign; mortgage, rent or utility expenses for the candidate's personal residence, even if part of the residence is being used by the campaign; and clothing, including attire for political functions such as business suits, dresses or shoes; or 
(ii)  Expenditures to support or oppose any ballot measure, political committee, or the campaign of any candidate other than the candidate for whom the funds were originally designated; or 
(iii)  Compensation to the candidate for services provided by the candidate; or 
(iv)  Payment of civil penalties, fines or forfeitures to the board or any other governmental or regulatory authority, or the cost of defending the candidate in enforcement proceedings brought by the board or any other governmental or regulatory authority; or 
(v)  The expenses involved in contesting an enforcement decision, civil penalty, fine, forfeiture imposed by the board or any other governmental or regulatory authority, or the expenses involved in seeking a recount of an election; or 
(vi)  Expenditures made without the consent, knowing participation, or consultation with a candidate or a mayoral committee. 
(11)  Individual means a single human being. 
(12)  Person means an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. 
(13)  Board means the democracy fund board established in section 2-823. 
(14)  Fund means the democracy fund established in section 2-823. 
(15)  Administrator means the democracy fund administrator. 
(16)  Investigator means the democracy fund investigator. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-823. - Democracy fund administration. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the city's general fund a separate non-lapsing reserve account to be known as the democracy fund. For fiscal year 2008-2009 and subsequent fiscal years, the board shall issue in January a report to the mayor and the board of aldermen of its expenditures and the current balance of its account, and shall include a specific recommendation for funding for the following fiscal year. In 2007 and in subsequent years, the board of aldermen will consider the recommendation of the democracy fund board and the on-going funding needs of the fund in its budget deliberations and again in its post-budget approval amendment process. The board of aldermen will exercise its best efforts to make sufficient appropriations to the fund to allow it to carry out its operations effectively. The board of aldermen will also consider in a prompt manner any interim requests made by the board for supplemental appropriations needed during the fiscal year. The fund can also accept any voluntary individual contributions made to it. 
Once city general funds or individual contributions are appropriated and deposited into the fund, they cannot be transferred for other purposes, canceled, or rescinded. The city's finance department shall be responsible for the prudent investment of the fund's assets, balancing the need for investment growth with the need for liquidity at certain time periods. Investment earnings credited to the assets of the fund shall become part of the assets of the fund. All monies deposited in the fund shall be used only for the purposes of this article, including for the administration of the fund. Any unused funds shall carry over from year-to-year in the fund. 
(b)  The fund shall be overseen by the democracy fund board. The board's membership will consist of seven (7) members. No more than three (3) members can belong to the same political party. Members will be nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the New Haven Board of Aldermen. Of the first seven (7) members appointed, four (4) will be nominated to four-year terms, and three (3) members to two-year terms. The mayor will indicate the length of the initial term of the first seven (7) members when nominating them. After each original term has expired, all appointments will be for terms of four (4) years. In the event that a member is no longer able to serve due to illness, death, or resignation, the mayor may nominate a replacement to serve out the remainder of the term. Replacement nominees must also be confirmed by the New Haven Board of Aldermen. If a member's term has expired and his or her successor has not been appointed and confirmed, the member shall continue to serve until his or her successor has been appointed and confirmed. A member may be removed only for just cause, which may include excessive absenteeism from board meetings or failure to carry out the duties of a board member, as determined by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Said board's duties shall include the: 
(1)  Selection of the democracy fund administrator and democracy fund investigator; 
(2)  Review of the performance of the administrator and the investigator; 
(3)  Selection and engaging of an independent attorney to advise the board on legal matters, when necessary; 
(4)  Establishment of rules of procedure for board meetings, hearings and general operation not inconsistent with this article; 
(5)  Approval of forms and materials required for the administration of the program set forth within this article; 
(6)  Approval of the matching funds disbursement calendar drafted by the administrator 
(7)  Direction of the investigator to confidentially investigate and report to the board concerning any alleged violations or complaints made about participating candidates; and 
(8)  Any other general administrative duties required to ensure compliance with this article, as well as the approval of expenditures from the fund therefore. 
(d)  The board shall be empowered to audit and examine all matters relating to the performance of its functions and any other matter relating to the proper administration of this article. These audit and examination powers extend to all participating candidates and their mayoral committees. 
(e)  The board shall be empowered to adopt and publish regulations to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(f)  The administrator's responsibilities shall include the administration of the public matching funds system, the public financing grant, contribution limitations, voluntary expenditure ceilings, the auditing of candidate financial reports and statements to ensure compliance with this article, and the proposing of recommendations for the determination and resolution of complaints and disputes brought before the board. The investigator's responsibilities shall include the confidential investigation of, and the preparation of reports concerning, alleged violations and complaints made against participating candidates at the direction of the administrator or the board. 
(g)  The administrator shall draft any and all forms necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, including the forms for the standardized candidate contract and for candidate requests for public matching funds. Said forms must be approved by the board. The administrator shall also draft a schedule for the issuing of matching contributions to participating candidates. Said schedule must be approved by the board. 
(h)  The administrator shall review candidate contracts and declarations, participation and non-participation affidavits, nomination papers, requests for public matching funds, and campaign financial disclosure reports in a timely fashion to certify a candidate's eligibility to receive public matching funds. After review, and in accordance with the approved schedule for matching the contributions of participating candidates, and if the administrator determines that the candidate is eligible, the administrator shall issue a request to the treasurer of the city for checks or electric fund transfers to be issued to the candidate's qualified committee. 
(i)  The administrator shall have five (5) calendar days to process requests for public matching funds and disburse the public funds to the qualified committee. 
(j)  The administrator shall issue a press release in a timely fashion identifying those candidates who have signed a candidate contract. In addition, the administrator should, in collaboration with the board, undertake public education and outreach efforts to explain the rationale and operation of the fund. 
(k)  The board shall establish a procedure for the investigation and hearing of alleged violations and disputes, consistent with basic due process principles, including notice and the opportunity to be heard and to have the alleged violation or dispute fairly and impartially adjudicated. The board shall establish procedures designed to attempt to secure voluntary mediation of disputes and voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-824. - Candidate contract. 
(a)  Each candidate for election or nomination for election to the office of mayor shall file an affidavit with the administrator not later than four o'clock p.m. on the sixtieth day before the date set for the primary or general election. The affidavit shall include a written certification that the candidate either intends to abide by the rules and limitations of this article or does not intend to abide by these rules and limitations. The certification shall be made by both the candidate and the campaign treasurer of the candidate's mayoral committee. 
(b)  A candidate who so certifies the candidate's intent to abide by the rules and limitations of this article shall be referred to as a "participating candidate". A candidate who so certifies the candidate's intent to not abide by the rules and limitations of this ordinance shall be referred to as a "nonparticipating candidate." A candidate who fails to file such affidavit in a timely manner shall be deemed to be a "nonparticipating candidate." The Administrator shall prepare a list of the participating candidates and a list of the nonparticipating candidates and shall make such lists available for public inspection. 
(c)  By the same date as stated in subsection (a) above, the participating candidate shall also file a candidate contract in a form approved by the board. In oder for the candidate to qualify for the public matching funds program, the administrator must approve the candidate contract. 
(d)  The candidate contract shall include, without limitation, written certifications by the candidate and his or her campaign treasurer that: 
(1)  The campaign treasurer shall expend any funds received from the fund in accordance with the provisions of this article and any regulations adopted by the board pursuant to subsection 2-823(e); 
(2)  The candidate and the campaign treasurer shall be personally and jointly and severally liable and shall repay to the fund any such monies that are not expended in accordance with this ordinance and the board's duly adopted regulations; 
(3)  The candidate and the campaign treasurer shall abide by all the provisions of this article, and accept the penalties, including personal liability, associated with noncompliance with this article; 
(4)  The candidate and the campaign treasurer shall file with the board, on the same dates required by the state, copies of the reporting statements required under Conn. Gen. Statutes Section 9-608; 
(5)  The candidate and the campaign treasurer shall report to the administrator as soon as the campaign has either raised or spent five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) (the contested election limit); 
(6)  The candidate and the campaign treasurer shall report to the administrator as soon as the candidate obtains a party nomination or successfully or unsuccessfully petitions to be on a ballot, and when the candidate withdraws from an election; 
(7)  Upon signing a candidate contract, the candidate and the campaign treasurer shall immediately report to the administrator amounts raised or spent prior to filing for participation, including any contributions received from improper sources or in improper amounts; 
(8)  Primary candidates and their campaign treasurers shall file a full campaign finance report with the administrator on August 10 for the month of July, and general election candidates and their campaign treasurer shall file a full campaign finance report with the administrator on September 10 for the months of July and August; shall be subject to the record-keeping and reporting requirements of this article, and to audit and examination as provided in this article. The candidate contract may include any other items or requirements applicable to all participating candidates as determined by the board. 
(e)  Before making an initial application for public matching funds, a participating candidate may withdraw from participation by filing an affidavit with the board, which shall include a written certification of such withdrawal. A candidate who files such an affidavit shall be deemed to be a nonparticipating candidate for the purposes of this article, and shall not be penalized for such withdrawal. No participating candidate may withdraw from participation after making an initial application for public matching funds. 
(f)  The administrator must accept or reject a signed candidate contract within five (5) calendar days of its receipt. In determining whether to accept or reject a candidate contract, the Administrator shall be governed by the requirements for such a contract specified in this article and any other requirements applicable to all participating candidates established by the board. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-825. - Voluntary expenditure ceiling and contribution limits. 
(a)  No participating candidate, nor the mayoral committee of such candidate, shall accept contributions in excess of three hundred dollars ($300.00), in the aggregate for a particular election, from any individual or party town committee. Subject to the contribution limits of this ordinance and those imposed by Chapter 155 of the Connecticut General Statutes, a participating candidate and his or her mayoral committee may only accept contributions from individuals and from a New Haven party town committee, and may not accept contributions from "political committees" or "business entities" as those terms are defined in Connecticut General Statutes, Section 9-601(a). The contribution limits of this ordinance take precedence over state-imposed limits. Only contributions from registered voters of the City of New Haven shall be considered matchable contributions under this ordinance. 
(b)  No participating candidate, nor the mayoral committee of such candidate, shall make qualified campaign expenditures in excess of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) in a primary election, or in excess of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) in a general election, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(c)  If a nonparticipating candidate, or the mayoral committee of such candidate, makes expenditures of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for either a primary or a general election, participating candidates who have reached eighty-five (85) percent of the expenditure ceiling can either choose to (1) apply for and spend an additional twenty-five thousand-dollar ($25,000) public financing grant from the fund or (2) have the expenditure ceiling lifted. A participating candidate who has not reached eighty-five percent (85) of the expenditure ceiling of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) shall not be eligible to receive this twenty-five thousand-dollar ($25,000.00) grant. 
(d)  Any participating candidate who chooses to have the voluntary expenditure ceiling lifted will not have further contributions matched. 
(e)  Any participating candidate whose mayoral committee receives, before or after he or she agrees to participate, a contribution in excess of the amount allowed under this article, or a kind of contribution not allowed under this article, must return promptly (or, if received prior to participation, promptly after agreeing to participate) the excess portion of the contribution or the entire contribution, as the case may be, and if returning such contribution or portion thereof is not possible or feasible, it shall be paid to the fund. 
(f)  For purposes of the voluntary expenditure ceilings, qualified campaign expenditures to a candidate who wins a primary made at any time up to and including the date of the primary election shall be considered expenditures for that primary election, and qualified campaign expenditures made after the date of the primary election shall be considered expenditures for the general election. However, in the event that payments are made but the goods or services are not used during the primary period, the payments shall be considered qualified campaign expenditures for the general election period. Payments for goods or services used during both periods shall be prorated. 
(g)  Any monies raised by a participating primary candidate, who will also be a general election candidate, in the primary election period (which ends on 11:59 p.m. of either the day of the primary or the day it is determined that there will not be a primary), including matching funds and a public financing grant, that are unexpended, as defined in (f) above, will become part of the general election candidate committee's funds and, to the extent expended, will be counted toward the general election expenditure ceiling. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-826. - Eligibility for matching funds. 
In order for a candidate for the office of mayor to be eligible for public matching funds, the candidate must satisfy all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Sign and file with the board, through the administrator, an affidavit and candidate contract, as provided in section 2-824 above. This contract must be approved by the administrator. 
(2)  Agree to participate and actually participate in at least one (1) public forum per primary or general election, to be designated by the administrator, at which all candidates qualified for the relevant ballot are invited to participate. 
(3)  Agree to limit and actually limit the use of personal funds for campaign purposes to no more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) per primary or general election. 
(4)  Agree to furnish to the administrator, and actually furnish, on the same dates required by the state and in the same format, electronic or paper, copies of the reporting statements made to the state under Conn. Gen. Statutes, Section 9-608, to maintain such records of contributions and expenditures as are required by the board, to furnish to the administrator or the investigator any information he or she may request relating to campaign contributions and expenditures, and to furnish such documentation and such other proof of compliance with this article as may be requested by the administrator or the investigator. 
(5)  Raise the threshold of qualifying contributions specified in section 2-827. 
(6)  Not have lost a primary election for mayor in the same year as the general election for which the mayoral candidate is requesting public matching funds. 
(7)  Not be in default to the city, or not have agreed to a payment arrangement with the city, regarding outstanding tax payments or contractual obligations. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-827. - Qualifying contributions threshold. 
Public matching funds shall be allocated to participating mayoral candidates beginning on April 1st of the election year upon satisfying the requirements of section 2-826. A candidate shall satisfy the qualifying threshold for a primary election and for a general election separately. The qualifying threshold for disbursement of matching funds shall be according to the following formula: 
(1)  A participating candidate must raise two hundred (200) contributions from distinct registered voters of the City of New Haven of no less than ten dollars ($10.00) and no more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) to receive matching funds. A qualified primary candidate who wins the primary is deemed to be qualified for the general election. 
(2)  Once the administrator determines that a participating candidate has met the contributions threshold, the candidate shall receive a match of fifty dollars ($50.00) per distinct individual contributor who is a registered voter of the City of New Haven of twenty-five or more dollars ($25.00) until the candidate raises enough funds to meet the voluntary expenditure ceiling. The participating candidate shall receive a two (2) to one (1) match for any such contributions under twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(3)  All contributions received by a participating candidate must include the name and address of the contributor on the check or on a separate card or sheet with the name and address of the contributor and signed by the contributor and stating the amount of the contribution. Only individual contributions of twenty-five ($25.00) or less shall be accepted in cash. All contributions made by cash, credit card, Pay Pal or similar payment program, or money order, and in-kind contributions, must be accompanied by the signed card or sheet referred to above. The form of the card or sheet used with contributions shall be approved by the board. 
(4)  The administrator must regularly make disbursements to participating candidates as specified by the disbursement schedule approved by the board. 
(5)  The request for public matching funds shall be made on a form and in a manner determined by the administrator, and shall include copies of each check, money order or other written legal tender, as well as copies of all signed contribution cards, relating to contributions eligible to be matched by public funds. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, a loan, pledge or non-monetary contribution shall not be considered a matchable contribution. 
(7)  No more than one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) in public matching funds shall be disbursed to each participating candidate per primary or general election. 
(8)  During the final sixty (60) days before an election, a participating mayoral committee may only submit a request for public matching funds to the administrator when the matching funds requested amount to three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) or more. 
(9)  A payment of public matching funds does not constitute the board's final determination of the amount for which a participating candidate may qualify, and such payment is subject to post-payment audit and readjustment by the board. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-828. - Public financing grants. 
Once a participating candidate meets the qualifying contributions threshold, meets all requirements to appear on the primary or general election ballot, whether as a nominated or petitioning, but not as a write-in, candidate, and the election has been declared contested pursuant to subsection 2-822(5), the candidate shall be eligible to receive a fifteen thousand-dollar ($15,000.00) public financing grant from the fund. Such a candidate may receive the fifteen thousand-dollar ($15,000.00) public financing grant once before a primary election and once before a general election, with disbursement of the grant by the board to be timed as follows: 
(1)  For a primary election such a candidate who has received a party nomination may receive a grant when another candidate has successfully petitioned to appear on the primary ballot, and such a candidate who has successfully petitioned to appear on the primary ballot may receive a grant as soon as he or she has been qualified to appear on the ballot. 
(2)  For a general election, such a candidate who receives a party nomination shall receive a grant either: 
a.  After the time for petitioning to appear on a primary ballot has expired and no one has successfully petitioned to appear on a primary ballot; or 
b.  After the completion of the primary election or elections for all parties having such elections. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-829. - Insufficient public funds. 
If there are insufficient public matching funds available for all participating candidates, whatever funds are available in the fund shall be distributed on a pro rata basis to participating candidates in such allocations as determined by the administrator and approved by a majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-830. - Use of public matching funds. 
(a)  Public matching funds shall be used exclusively for qualified campaign expenditures to promote the candidacies of the participating candidates. 
(b)  All surplus public matching funds, or matching funds used in violation of the requirements of this article, shall be returned or reimbursed to the fund. 
(c)  If the candidate withdraws from a primary or general election, becomes ineligible or dies during the campaign, or if a candidate is eligible for a primary election, but the primary election is canceled, the candidate's qualified committee will return to the fund, for deposit in the fund, all monies received from the fund which it has not spent, or has not become legally obligated to expend, on qualified campaign expenditures as of the date of such occurrence. 
(d)  When determining whether these are surplus matching funds that must be returned to the fund, the board will consider the first funds spent to be public funds. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-831. - Cost of living adjustment. 
Beginning in 2008 and every four (4) years thereafter, the amounts of the voluntary contribution size limit, the public financing grants, the use of personal funds limit, the contribution and expenditure ceiling per election cycle, the contested election limit, the civil penalty, shall be adjusted according to four-year aggregate cost of living changes in the New Haven MSA, as shown in the Consumer Price Index for all items in the New Haven MSA. The adjustment shall be rounded to the nearest five-dollar size variation (i.e. $25, 30, 35, 310, 315, 320) for the minimum qualifying contribution and the voluntary contribution size limit. The adjustment shall be rounded to the nearest thousand for the public financing grant, the personal funds limitation, and the contribution and expenditure ceilings (i.e. $16,000, 17,000, 18,000, 301,000, 302,000, 303,000). 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-832. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be personally and jointly and severally liable for the re-payment of any funds thereby obtained or expended. 
(b)  Alleged violations of this article and other complaints brought against the participating candidates, their agents and/or their mayoral committees shall be investigated promptly and confidentially by the investigator, who shall report his findings to the board. The board shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of documents in connection with an investigation or a hearing. The board shall grant an administrative hearing regarding any alleged violation or dispute, at which all interested parties may present testimony and evidence. The board shall render its decision as soon as practicable after the hearing is concluded. The board shall notify the parties of its decision by certified or registered mail. 
(c)  The board is authorized to levy a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, or twice the amount of any improper expenditure or contribution, whichever is greater, against any person the Board finds to be in violation of any provision of this ordinance. In the case of failure to pay any such penalty within thirty (30) days of written notice thereof sent by certified or registered mail to such person, the board may apply to the Connecticut Superior Court for an order requiring such a person to pay the penalty imposed and such court costs, state marshal's fees and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Board as the court may determine. 
(d)  The administrator may further seek the application of any and all criminal and civil actions, penalties, sanctions, orders (including cease and desist orders) and remedies available under the laws of the State of Connecticut, including but not limited to prosecution for misappropriation of funds of the city. The administrator is authorized to refer any violation to the State Election Enforcement Commission, the District Attorney's Office, the Chief State's Attorney's Office, the Attorney General's Office or any other appropriate authority. 
(e)  The remedies provided in subsections (a), (c) and (d) above shall also apply to any person who causes any other person to violate any provision of this section or who aids and abets any other person in a violation. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-833. - Applicability of other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall exempt any person from applicable provisions of any other laws of the city, state, federal or other appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-834. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article, or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance, shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder of this article, to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to this extent the provisions of this article are severable. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-835. - Effective date. 
The ordinance from which this article derives shall become effective upon passage. 
(Ord. No. 1589, 5-4-09)  
Secs. 2-836—2-850. - Reserved  
ARTICLE XII. - DISCRIMINATION AGAINST PERSONS PREVIOUSLY CONVICTED 
 
Sec. 2-851. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Applicant means any person considered for, or who requests to be considered for, employment by the city or by one of its vendors. 
Awarding authority means any department, agency, or office of the City of New Haven that authorizes a vendor to perform requested goods and/or services. 
City means the City of New Haven or any department, agency, or office thereof, unless specifically excluded by this section. 
Conviction means any sentence arising from a plea or verdict of guilty, including a sentence of incarceration, a suspended sentence, a sentence of probation or a sentence of unconditional discharge. 
Employment means any occupation, vocation, job, or work for pay, including temporary or seasonal work, contracted work, contingent work and work through the services of a temporary or other employment agency; or any form of vocational or educational training with or without pay. Employment shall not, for the purposes of this section, include any positions at the New Haven Board of Education or membership in any sworn position. 
Otherwise qualified means any applicant who meets all other criteria for a position or consideration for a position. 
Relationship to the job means the nature of criminal conduct for which the person was convicted has a direct and/or specific negative bearing on a person's fitness or ability to perform one or more of the duties or responsibilities necessarily related to the employment sought. 
Vendor means any vendor, contractor, or supplier of goods and/or services to the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1585, 2-17-09)  
Sec. 2-852. - Prohibition against unfair discrimination against persons previously convicted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise dictated by state and federal law, the city shall not inquire about an applicant's conviction history until after it has been determined that the applicant is otherwise qualified for the position. City job applications shall not contain a "box" or inquiry regarding a job applicant's prior convictions. 
(b)  After an applicant has been identified as otherwise qualified for the position, the city will offer a conditional offer of employment to the applicant, pending a conviction history check by the human resources department. Prior to conducting any conviction history check on an applicant, the city must provide standard written notification to the applicant advising: 
(1)  That a conviction history check is going to take place; 
(2)  That he or she will have the opportunity to rebut a decision by the city should it decide to retract the conditional offer of employment; and 
(3)  What kinds of specific evidence the applicant can present during this rebuttal. 
(c)  (1)  If, as a result of a conviction history check, the city finds a valid reason to refuse, rescind, or revoke the offer of a position to an applicant, then the city must immediately notify the applicant of the potential adverse employment action, and provide the applicant with a photocopy of the conviction history report with a highlight(s) of the particular conviction(s) that relates to the job's responsibilities, thus warranting a denial of employment. 
(2)  The applicant or current employee shall have ten (10) business days, after receipt of notice and the photocopy of the conviction history report from the city, to respond to the city regarding the conviction history report. The city shall provide the applicant with an opportunity to present information rebutting the accuracy and/or relevance of the conviction history report, including information pertaining to any of the factors listed in subsubsection (d), infra. The city must review all information and documentation received from the applicant prior to taking any final action as to whether to hire said applicant. 
(d)  In making a determination concerning a previous criminal conviction, the city shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The nature of the crime and its relationship to the job for which the person has applied; 
(2)  The information pertaining to the degree of rehabilitation of the convicted person; 
(3)  The time elapsed since the conviction or release; 
(4)  Any information produced by the person, or produced on his behalf, in regard to his rehabilitation and good conduct; 
(5)  The age of the person at the time of occurrence of the criminal offense or offenses; 
(6)  The gravity of the offense(s); and 
(7)  The public policy of this city, as expressed in this chapter, to encourage the employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses. 
(e)  In no case may records of conviction which have been erased be used, distributed or disseminated, by the city or any of its agencies, or its vendors, in connection with employment, except as by dictated by law. 
(f)  In order to prevent discrimination against municipal employees in accordance with federal guidelines, any information pertaining to an applicant or employee's record of conviction obtained by the human resources department in conjunction with the hiring process shall remain confidential within that department, and shall not be used, distributed or disseminated, by the city or any of its agencies, or its vendors, to any other department, entity or individual, except as dictated by law. 
(Ord. No. 1585, 2-17-09)  
Sec. 2-853. - Vendors. 
(a)  The city will do business only with vendors that have adopted and employ conviction history policies, practices, and standards that are consistent with city standards outlined in this chapter. 
(2)  The awarding authority shall review all Vendors' criminal history policies for consistency with city standards. The vendors' criminal history standards will be part of the criteria to be evaluated by the city as to whether to award a city contract. Further, the city will be able to evaluate a vendor's execution of the criminal history standards as a part of the performance criteria of said city contract(s); the awarding authority, in consultation with the office of corporation counsel and the community services administration, shall consider any vendor's deviation from these criminal history standards as grounds for rejection, rescission, revocation, or any other termination of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 1585, 2-17-09)  
Sec. 2-854. - Waiver. 
(a)  Under exigent circumstances, an awarding authority, by its highest ranking member, in consultation with the office of corporation counsel and the community services administration, may grant a vendor a waiver of the criminal history standards on a contract-by-contract basis. A written record of the waiver shall be kept on file by the awarding authority, the community services administration and the office of corporation counsel, and shall also be submitted to the City of New Haven Commission of Equal Opportunities. The written record shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  A summary of the terms of the contract; 
(2)  The details of the vendor's failure or refusal to conform to the city's criminal history standards; and 
(3)  A brief analysis of the exigency causing the grant of waiver. 
(b)  No waiver may be considered perfected unless the Awarding Authority fully complies with the provisions of this sub-section. 
(Ord. No. 1585, 2-17-09)  
Sec. 2-855. - Data collection. 
Any awarding authority, vendor, applicant or other interested party may contact the community services administration to report any problems, concerns or suggestions regarding the implementation, compliance and impact of these sections, and the community services administration shall log every comment received with a summary of the comment and shall keep on file any written comments. Subsequent to logging any comment the community services administration shall refer all complaints to the office of the corporation counsel and shall notify the relevant awarding authority of the complaint and any further investigation that the community services administration in consultation with the office of corporation counsel deems necessary or appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1585, 2-17-09)  
Sec. 2-856. - Severability. 
If any provision of these sections shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1585, 2-17-09)  
Secs. 2-857—2-890. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MARSHALS 
 
Sec. 2-891. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Marshals Ordinance" 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-892. - Declaration of policy. 
The purpose of the marshals ordinance is to ensure fairness, transparency and economy in the method of selection and compensation of state marshals to perform the exclusive duties of state marshals, as defined by statute, in the service of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-893. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
City, its boards and commissions or City of New Haven is the City of New Haven including all of its departments, agencies or employees thereof and any other of its quasi-government entities or contractors of the city including but not limited to attorneys, consultants, or other bodies acting on behalf of the City of New Haven. 
Marshals mean such person who performs within the City of New Haven as marshals for or by the direction of the city, or any department, agency or employee thereof or contractors of the city including but not limited to attorneys, consultants, or other bodies acting on behalf of the City of New Haven. Marshal also is a person engaged in the business, or offering the services, of a marshal service, pursuant to any regulation, ordinance or statute so designed for that purpose. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-894. - Municipal marshals list. 
(a)  No marshal shall engage in business on behalf of the City of New Haven, as defined in this article, or offer such service on a city related matter on behalf of the city without first being approved on a list of authorized marshals by the purchasing agent or, if engaged by an attorney for city business, without agreement to payment according to the municipal marshal fee schedule set by the city. 
(b)  (1)  The purchasing agent or his designee shall prepare annually and maintain a list, to be called the "municipal marshals list," of marshals not to exceed fifteen (15) in number who may perform municipal marshals services. 
(2)  The municipal marshal list shall be prepared according to regulations established and promulgated by the purchasing agent in the interests of fairness, transparency and fiscal responsibility. In preparation of the municipal marshal list, the purchasing agent shall consider a balance of genders, ethnicities and multilingual ability. The provisions of section 2-483. "Preference for city-based businesses." shall apply to this selection process. 
(3)  The purchasing agent shall require the following information of all applicants: 
a.  The applicant's name, home address, telephone number and proposed business address; 
b.  The applicant's office location, and hourly availability; 
c.  Any complaints and or grievances against the marshal and the resolution of such during the three (3) previous years 
d.  Such other information as the purchasing agent shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article. 
(c)  Each marshal included in the municipal marshals list must meet minimum standards, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  That the marshal is fit and proper to conduct the proposed work of a marshal; 
(2)  That the applicant has available resources for fulfilling the role of a marshal pursuant to any regulation, ordinance or statute so designed for that purpose; 
(3)  The marshal shall have sufficient operational capacity to accept and respond to all calls for marshal services, including, but not limited to, serving of subpoenas, tax warrant or other warrants and notifications. 
(4)  The marshal shall agree to protect, indemnify and save harmless the city, its servants, agents and employees of and from any and all liability or claim of liability, expense, damage, causes of action, suits, claims or judgments on the part of anyone growing out of any act or omission by the said marshal or of any act or omission by any employee or agent of said marshal in the performance of duties and obligations. Unless the claim results from the negligence of the licensee; when city established procedures are followed, the marshal shall not be responsible for any damage claims arising during the period of activity on behalf of the city. 
(5)  The marshal shall provide general liability insurance in limits of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(6)  The marshal shall not be or become delinquent in the payment of any tax, assessment, or fee due to the city. The property from which the marshal operates shall not be or become delinquent in the payment of any tax, assessment, or fee due to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-895. - Removal from list. 
(a)  The purchasing agent may, for cause, suspend or remove any marshal from the municipal marshals list, who is in violation of applicable rules and regulations, or any provision of this article, including but not limited to the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent conduct or misstatement of a material fact, or that a fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time of his making application, and such fact would have constituted just cause for refusal of inclusion on the municipal list. 
(2)  The licensee has violated any of the requirements of this article or any of the rules and regulations as established of such a nature as to affect the proper discharge of his duties under this article. 
(3)  The licensee, his agent or employee, acts in a manner which is prejudicial, offensive or detrimental to the best interests of the public and such actions are of such nature as to affect the proper discharge of his duties under this article, including but not limited to reckless and wanton disregard for duties of a marshal; 
(4)  The intentional disregard of a lawful order including but not limited to one to tow or execute a tax warrant given by the appropriate city department having jurisdiction of same matter. 
(5)  Delinquency of the payment of any tax, assessment, or fee due to the city including those on the property from which the marshal operates without an arrangement in place to rectify such delinquency. 
(b)  Suspension or removal shall take effect after due notice in writing to the marshals, and a hearing before the purchasing agent to be held, if requested by the marshals, not less than three (3) days after the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-896. - Grievance procedure. 
Any denial of an application for inclusion upon the municipal marshal list may be appealed to the state marshal commission. While the disposition of such appeal is pending the appellant shall be disqualified from any work on behalf of the city, any city entities, or any other agencies or individuals doing work on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-897. - Maintenance of records. 
The purchasing agent or his designee shall at all times keep and maintain exact records of the services each municipal marshal rendered, including the date and nature thereof, in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-898. - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of this article by any person as defined in this ordinance be subject to the provisions of Chapter 12 5/8 and a fine not to exceed the maximum penalty permitted by statute. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 2-899. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence or portion of this article is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1588, 4-20-09)  
Chapter 2½ - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1390, adopted Sept. 19, 2005, amended and restated former Ch. 2½, Arts. I—IV, in its entirety. The editor has renumbered the sections of this restated chapter in order to reserve sections for future amendments. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2½-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Agency means each municipal board, commission, department, bureau, agency, administration or other entity authorized pursuant to federal law, state law, the city charter, ordinance (including, but not limited to, appropriating ordinances), executive order or any other law to make regulations or determine contested cases. This term does not include the mayor, (but does include the coordinators that the mayor appoints pursuant to city charter section 11(i) as amended from time to time, and other officials that are appointed to aid him/her in carrying out his/her duties as the city's chief executive and administrative officer), the board of aldermen and the corporation counsel. 
Applicant means a person, who desires to receive a direct loan or grant from an agency, and has submitted a completed application to the agency. 
Contested case means any proceeding that an agency conducts to determine a party's legal rights, duties, or privileges after an opportunity for hearing, or in which a hearing is in fact held pursuant to local law or regulation. This term does not include any proceeding conducted in accordance with federal or state law or regulation, the charter, any other ordinance, or any collective bargaining agreement, provided there is no otherwise established procedure. 
License includes the whole or part of any agency permit, certificate, approval, registration, charter, or similar form of permission required by law, but it does not include a license solely for revenue purposes. 
Party means such person or agency named or admitted as a party, or properly seeking or entitled as a right to be admitted as one. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, governmental subdivision, or public or private organization of any character, other than an agency. 
Regulation means each agency statement of general applicability that implements, interprets or prescribes law. The term includes the amendment or repeal of a prior regulation, but does not include: 
(1)  Statements solely concerning the agency's internal management, which do not affect private rights or procedures available to the public; 
(2)  Intra-agency or inter-agency memoranda; 
(3)  Statements applying to a particular person or transactions not of general application. This term does not include investigatory techniques or procedures to be used for prospective law enforcement actions by the city's police and fire departments. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-1; Ord. of 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-2. - Annual performance evaluation of coordinators and agency heads. 
(a)  The mayor, or the head of a board or commission where appropriate, ("supervisor"), shall prepare the following documents pertaining to each executive position not included in a collective bargaining agreement: 
(1)  The complete position description, list of preferred or required qualifications, and a written statement of any other criteria that may be used in the selection of a person to fill the position; 
(2)  A statement of the goals of the evaluation process; 
(3)  A statement of the specific criteria to be used to evaluate the executive employee's ("incumbent's") annual performance; and 
(4)  A statement of the procedures which will be followed if the incumbent's performance is found to be unsatisfactory. 
The mayor or the supervisor shall prepare the above documents in conjunction with the personnel director's professional advice. 
(b)  The supervisor shall conduct an annual performance evaluation of the preceding calendar year for each incumbent. The annual performance evaluation shall be completed no later than January 31st. The incumbent shall be given written notice of the date, time and location of the evaluation meeting, and a copy of the evaluation process goals and criteria at least two (2) weeks before the evaluation date. The supervisor shall submit a letter to the board of aldermen indicating that the evaluation has been done. Such letter shall be submitted within ten (10) business days following completion of the annual performance evaluation. 
(Ord. of 5-7-90; Code of 1985, § 2½-1.1; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Secs. 2½-3—2½-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AGENCY; ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES; FILINGS; BUDGETS; GRANT AND LOAN PROGRAMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Former Ch. 2½ contained a § 2½-2 titled, "Filings with city-town clerk; organizational chart; program descriptions; contact persons; other regulations." This former section was repealed by Ord. No. 1390, adopted Sept. 19, 2005. 
 
Sec. 2½-21. - Fiscal impact statements. 
Whenever an agency submits a matter involving the expenditure of general funds, special funds, bond funds or a commitment of the city's credit to the board of aldermen, it shall include a statement concerning the fiscal impact of the matter on the city. The statement shall be provided as prescribed by the controller, and shall identify the funding source to be expended, and the impact of the matter on the then existing general fund budget or capital budget. The agency shall file a copy of the statement with the controller concurrently with its submission to the board of aldermen. This provision shall not apply to the agency's annual budget request. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1, Code of 1985, § 2½-3; Ord. of 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-22. - Procedures for direct grant and loan program. 
(a)  No agency may provide a direct financial grant or loan, other than general assistance, to an applicant unless it has adopted regulations concerning application procedures for such assistance, and filed them with the city clerk. However, when the terms and conditions for applying for and receiving such assistance are governed by any other federal, state or local law, regulation or enactment, then the agency administering such assistance will be deemed to have satisfied this section by filing a notice setting forth the applicable reference to such legal authority with the city clerk. 
(b)  On or before January 1st and July 31st of each year, the agency responsible for administrating the grants or loans identified in subsection (a) of this section shall file a status report about them to the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Commencing with budget preparation relating to the city's community development plan, expenditures for physical and economic development, restoration and related activities shall be prepared. The five (5) year planning period shall be consistent with appropriate federal and state reporting requirements and funding authorization. The plan shall include the reprogramming of surplus funds from prior years. The board of aldermen shall propose the appropriation for the first year of the plan. Subsequent years of the plan shall be used for planning purposes only, and therefore be non-binding. 
(d)  There shall be a special revolving fund, as designated by the controller, under the administrative direction of the development administrator. Unless otherwise specified in the grant agreement, all of the repayments of direct loans to private developers and individuals made by the city, or from public and private grant proceeds, shall be deposited into the revolving fund. This shall not apply to general assistance or the community development block program. The city shall only use the deposited repayments for approved economic development and community development projects as follows: 
Any proposal for the use of the revolving funds shall be submitted to the board of aldermen for its approval. The proposal shall be filed with a capital projects committee report. This report shall advise the board as to the compatibility of the proposed use of the proceeds of the special revolving fund with the city's six-year capital program and the multi-year community development improvement program. The capital projects committee shall adopt necessary and appropriate procedures to prepare its advisory report. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Ord. of 9-17-84; Code of 1985, § 2½-5; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-23. - Certain contracts reporting. 
Within thirty (30) days of the close of each fiscal year, each agency shall file a copy of all contracts that the mayor executed on its behalf with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-6; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-24. - Tax assessment deferral, abatement and exemption reviews and reports required. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), the controller, city assessor and tax collector shall review the fiscal impact of the grand list before the board of aldermen approves any tax deferral, assessment deferral, payment in lieu of taxes agreement or assessment exemption. Such review shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  The assessor shall compare the existing assessment with the proposed adjusted assessment, and report the impact on the grand list to the controller; 
(2)  The tax collector shall compare the existing tax with the proposed adjusted tax, and report the tax impact on the grand list to the controller; and 
(3)  The tax collector and city assessor shall report their findings to the proper committee of the board of aldermen before final aldermanic action is taken on any such tax or assessment proposal. 
This process shall also apply to the aldermanic tax abatement procedure for "hardship" cases. 
(b)  Since no aldermanic action is required for individual applications under the city's rehabilitation assessment deferral program established pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 12-65(c) as amended from time to time, this ordinance section's requirements are limited to the preparation of the reports referenced in paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3). These reports shall be used to prepare the semi-annual reports submitted to the board of aldermen on the first day of every March and October. 
(c)  When the city assessor annually certifies the grand list, he/she shall prepare a report for the controller's review. This report shall: 
(1)  Indicate the tax deferral(s), tax abatement(s) granted for the year for which the grand list is being certified, and the effect on the grand list; 
(2)  Indicate the cumulative effect of such deferrals, abatements and exemptions on the grand list; and 
(3)  Include a schedule, developed with the development administrator's assistance, that calculates the increase resulting to each grand list from tax deferral programs, and annual payments in lieu of taxes for the budget year applicable to the grand list for that budget year for grand list certification, and nine (9) succeeding grand list years. 
After the controller reviews this report, the assessor shall submit it to the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 4-18-83; Ord. of 4-23-84; Ord. of 3-18-85; Code of 1985, § 2½-7; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-25. - Traffic impact studies. 
Except as provided in this chapter, a traffic impact study shall be submitted to the board of aldermen before it approves any tax deferral, tax abatement, assessment deferral, payment in-lieu of taxes agreement, land disposition agreement, assessment exemption or direct or indirect financial assistance for any development project involving new construction of more than fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet of floor area in one structure, or the addition of two hundred (200) or more parking spaces. The study shall show the amount and direction of traffic to be generated by the proposed development, and shall estimate its effect on the roadway capacity and safety. Upon submission, the board shall refer the study to the department of traffic and parking. This department shall provide an advisory report on the traffic impact study to the board of aldermen before any approvals are granted. The department shall issue its advisory report no more than sixty (60) days after receiving the traffic impact study. 
(Code of 1985, § 2½-9; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 1; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Secs. 2½-26—2½-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCTING CONTESTED CASES 
 
Sec. 2½-41. - Contested cases. 
(a)  In a contested case, all parties shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing after reasonable notice. 
(b)  The notice shall include: 
(1)  A statement of the time, place, and nature of the hearing; 
(2)  A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; 
(3)  A reference to the particular section(s) of the charter, ordinance(s), or regulation(s) involved; and 
(4)  A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. If the agency or other party is unable to state the matters in detail at the time the notice is served, the initial notice may be limited to a statement of the issues involved. Thereafter, upon application by any party, a more definite and detailed statement shall be furnished. 
(c)  All parties shall have the opportunity to present evidence and argument on issues involved. 
(d)  Unless precluded by law or regulation, any contested case may be informally disposed of by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or default. 
(e)  The record in a contested case shall include: 
(1)  The notice given pursuant to subsection (b) above; 
(2)  All pleadings, motions and intermediate rulings; 
(3)  Evidence received or considered; 
(4)  Questions and offers of proof, objections and rulings thereon; and 
(5)  Any decisions, opinions, or report by the officer presiding at the hearing. 
(f)  Oral proceedings or any part thereof shall be transcribed only on a party's written request. The requesting party shall pay, accordingly, the cost of such transcript or part thereof. 
(g)  Findings of fact shall be based exclusively on the evidence and on matters officially noticed. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-12; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-42. - Contested cases; evidence. 
In contested cases: 
(1)  The agency may receive any oral or documentary evidence, but may exclude that which is irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious. When claimed by a party, agencies shall give effect to legally recognized rules of privilege. Subject to these requirements, when a hearing will be expedited and the interests of the parties will not be substantially prejudiced, an agency may receive any part of the evidence in written form; 
(2)  If original documentary evidence is not readily available, it may be received in the form of copies or excerpts. Upon request, parties shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original; 
(3)  A party may conduct cross-examinations; and 
(4)  Notice may be taken of matters within the public's general knowledge, and of generally recognized technical or scientific fact within the agency's specialized knowledge. Parties shall be notified of the material so noticed either before or during the hearing, or by reference in preliminary reports or otherwise. Parties shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed. The agency's experience, technical competence and specialized knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of the evidence. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82; § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-13; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-43. - Proposal for decision; procedure, waiver. 
When in a contested case, a majority of the agency officials who are to render the final decision have not heard the case or read the record, a decision adversely affecting a party other than the agency itself shall not be made until the parties are served with a proposal for decision, and each adversely affected party is given an opportunity to file exceptions, and present briefs and oral argument to the officials rendering the decision. The proposal for decision shall contain each issue of fact or law or other reason(s) that supported it. The proposal for decision must be prepared by the person who conducted the hearing, or one who has read the record. The parties may waive compliance with this section by written stipulation. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82; § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-14; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-44. - Final determination, notification of right of appeal. 
(a)  Each agency shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter pending before it, and shall render a final decision in all contested cases within ninety (90) days following the close of evidence, and the filing of briefs in such proceedings. 
(b)  A final decision or order adverse to a party in a contested case shall be in writing or stated in the record. The final decision or order shall state whether there is a right of appeal. Parties shall be notified either personally or by mail of any decision or order. Upon request, a copy of the decision or order shall be delivered or mailed forthwith to each party or to his/her attorney of record. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-15; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-45. - Possible communications between agency members and employees and parties in contested cases. 
Unless required by law or regulation, after commencement and during the pendency of a contested case, members or employees of an agency assigned to render a decision, or to make findings of fact and conclusions of law in a contested case, shall not directly or indirectly communicate with any person or party in connection with any issue of fact or law, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. Any agency member may communicate with other members of the agency, and may have the aid and advice of one (1) or more personal assistants. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-16; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Sec. 2½-46. - Matters involving licenses. 
(a)  This article concerning contested cases and licenses shall apply when notice and an opportunity for hearing must precede the grant, denial or renewal of a license, and there is no other procedure for such action. 
(b)  In those instances where a hearing is required to be held under this article: 
(1)  When a licensee has made timely and sufficient application for a license renewal, or a new license with reference to any continuing activity, the existing license shall not expire until the agency has made a final determination regarding it. If the application is denied, or the new license has limited terms, the existing license shall be in effect until the last day for seeking review of the terms of the agency order, or a later date fixed by a reviewing court order. 
(2)  Before any license is lawfully revoked, suspended, annulled or withdrawn, the agency must give the licensee notice by mail of the facts or conduct warranting the intended action. Additionally, the licensee must have been given an opportunity to show compliance with all lawful requirements for the retention of the license. If the agency finds that public health, safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency action, and incorporates a finding to that effect in its order, the agency may summarily suspend the license pending proceedings for revocation or other action. The agency shall notify the licensee of such action by mailing its order to the address listed in the license. These proceedings shall be promptly instituted and determined. 
(Ord. of 11-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 2½-17; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Secs. 2½-47—2½-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ANNUAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 2½-61. - Annual reports required by the board of aldermen. 
(a)  Pursuant to city charter section 58 as amended from time to time, the mayor shall submit an annual budget document to the board of aldermen. The document shall include a summary of the operations of every board, bureau, commission, department, office, authority, agency or fund for the previous fiscal year. Copies of the document shall be filed and made available for public inspection at the city clerk's office and the public library. 
(b)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 10-220(c) as amended from time to time, the board of education shall annually submit a strategic school profile report for each school under its jurisdiction, and for the school district as a whole, to the state's Commissioner of Education. 
(c)  On January 15th or the next business day thereafter, the mayor shall annually submit a grantee performance report on the city's community development block grant program to the board of aldermen. 
(d)  Any person who willfully violates this section shall be fined up to the maximum authorized by state statutes or this Code per day that the violation continues. 
(Code of 1985, § 2½-18; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 9-23-98; Ord. No. 1390, 9-19-05)  
Chapter 3 - DUST CONTROL AND SANDBLASTING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1399, adopted Jan. 3, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 3 of the 1962 Code, reprinted in 1985, in its entirety. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
Cross reference— Health, Ch. 16 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Dust Control and Sandblasting Ordinances." 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-2. - General definitions. 
When used in reference to this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings. 
(1)  Aerosol means a dispersion or any suspension of small solid or liquid particles, or any combination thereof, in the air or other gaseous medium. 
(2)  Air pollutant means dust, fumes, mist, smoke or other particulate matter, vapor, gas, aerosol, odorous substances or any combination thereof, but does not include carbon dioxide, uncombined water vapor or water droplets, or molecular oxygen or nitrogen. 
(3)  Air pollution means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one (1) or more air pollutants, or any combination thereof, in such quantities and of such characteristics and duration as to be, or likely to be, injurious to public welfare, to the health of human, plant or animal life, to property, or to unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(4)  Air pollution control equipment means any device that controls emissions from a process or fuel-burning or refuse-burning equipment, and thus reduces the creation of, and/or the emission of, air pollutants into the atmosphere. 
(5)  Air pollution source means any source at, from or by reason of which any air pollutant is directly or indirectly emitted into the ambient air space. 
(6)  Alteration means any modification or change in the design, capacity, process or arrangement, or any increase in the connected load of equipment or control apparatus which will affect the kind or amount of air pollutants emitted. 
(7)  Ashes include cinders, fly ash, or any other solid material resulting from combustion, and may include unburned combustibles. 
(8)  Control apparatus means any device which prevents, controls, detects or records the emission of air pollutants. 
(9)  Director of public health means the director of public health of the City of New Haven, or any duly or lawfully appointed member of the bureau of environmental health, as authorized by the board of health. 
(10)  Dusts means minute solid particles released into the air by natural forces, or by mechanical processes such as crushing, grinding, milling, drilling, demolishing, shoveling, conveying, covering, bagging, sweeping, etc. 
(11)  Dust-separating equipment means any device for separating dust from the air to a gas medium in which it is carried. 
(12)  Equipment means any device capable of causing the emission of an air pollutant into the open air, and any stack, conduit, flue, duct, vent or similar device connected or attached to, or serving the equipment. 
(13)  Excess air means air entering a combustion chamber in excess of the amount theoretically required to complete combustion of materials in the combustion chamber. 
(14)  Fly ash means particulate matter capable of being gas-borne or air-borne, and consisting essentially of fused ash and/or burned or unburned material. 
(15)  Fuel means any form of combustible matter—solid, liquid, vapor or gas excluding combustible refuse. 
(16)  Heat-transfer operation means contact between the combustion product gases and the process material. 
(17)  Installation means the placement, assemblage or construction of equipment or control apparatus at the premises where the equipment or control apparatus will be used, and includes all preparatory work at such premises. 
(18)  Load regulation period means a period of rapid fuel increase or decrease to a boiler or steam generator necessary to satisfy a change in output requirements, which change could not reasonably have been satisfied by a normal increase or decrease of the fuel supply. 
(19)  Mist means a suspension of any finely divided liquid in any gas or atmosphere. 
(20)  Noxious gases means gases which are, or may be, injurious, harmful, hurtful or unwholesome. 
(21)  Nuisance means the discharge into the open air of any smoke, soot, dust, fumes, odors, noxious gases or other emissions which cause injury, detriment or annoyance, or which endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any person or of the public, or which cause or are likely to cause injury or damage to business or property. 
(22)  Owner(s) means the owner(s) of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate thereof, a lessee or joint lessees of the whole thereof, an agent, or any other person in possession or in control of the premises. 
(23)  Particulate matter means any material, except water in uncombined form, that is or has been airborne, and exists as a liquid or a solid at standard conditions. 
(24)  Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, public or private institution, group, agency, political subdivision or agency thereof, or any legal successor, representative, agent, or any agency of the foregoing. 
(25)  Pollen means the fertilizing element of vegetation. 
(26)  Rubbish means all solid wastes other than garbage such as paper, rags, metal and cardboard containers, street sweepings and other solid commercial and domestic wastes. 
(27)  Soot means the dark substance, essentially carbon, resulting from the burning or heating of fuel or refuse. 
(28)  Standard commercial equipment means equipment manufactured in quantity for the purpose intended and completely specified as to size, type and rating in catalogs and other printed literature readily available locally to officials of the City of New Haven. 
(29)  Vapors mean the gaseous form of a substance normally in the liquid or solid state. 
(30)  Volatile or volatile matter means the gaseous constituents of solid fuels as determined by the procedure defined in the ASTM method amended or revised to the current date. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-9; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 3-3—3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 3-21. - Establishment of dust control and sandblasting in the department of health. 
The director of public health shall have the power to designate the director of the bureau of environmental health and his/her staff to perform the duties required to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-12; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-22. - Director of public health to enforce dust control and sandblasting standards. 
(a)  The director of public health shall seek compliance with this chapter through the cooperation and conciliation among all concerned parties. If compliance is not obtained through such means, the director of public health shall: 
(1)  Issue an order of compliance with this chapter's provisions by identifying the provision that is being violated, as well as a description of the violation, and indicate the time allowed for such compliance; and/or 
(2)  Institute judicial process to impose penalties for noncompliance, or institute judicial recourse to enjoin further violation. 
(b)  No penal action shall be instituted against the City of New Haven, or any of its agencies, departments, bureaus, officers or employees for acts, omissions or violations done in their official capacities or performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-13; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-23. - Additional functions and powers of the director of public health. 
The director of public health shall exercise the following powers and functions: 
(1)  Enter any property, premises or place at any reasonable time to enforce this chapter, thereby safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
If the owner deems the process or equipment under investigation to be secret, he/she may file an affidavit with the director of public health indicating that the process or equipment will comply with this chapter. Plans and specifications filed with the affidavit will remain the property of the owner, and shall be strictly for the confidential use of the director of public health, unless the owner or operator expressly agrees to their publication or availability to the general public. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any city department, agency or officer from using such records or information in compiling or publishing analyses or summaries relating to the atmosphere's general condition, provided that such records or information do not directly or indirectly identify any owner or operator, or reveal any confidential information under this section. 
(2)  Recommend that the board of aldermen adopt ordinances, rules or regulations to facilitate the equitable administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Advise the city's chief of the department of fire services of any relevant conditions existing in the city justifying the prohibition of open burning. 
(4)  Perform all other actions that he/she deems necessary or proper for the effective enforcement of this chapter. 
(5)  Advise, consult and cooperate with other agencies of the city, political subdivisions of the state, industries, state agencies, the federal government, and affected groups and persons to advance the purposes of this chapter. 
(6)  Encourage and conduct studies and research relating to dust control, sandblasting and conservation of air resources. 
(7)  Encourage voluntary cooperation by people, industries, city agencies and others in preventing and controlling dust in the city and metropolitan community. 
(8)  Accept, receive and administer funds, grants or gifts from public or private agencies, and the federal government to carry out the functions described in this chapter. Funds received by the director of public health shall be deposited with the city's fiscal officer, and held in a special account established for the department of health's dust control and sandblasting activities. 
(9)  The director of public health is specifically empowered to invoke all of his/her powers under the law if he/she finds that any person is causing or contributing to air pollution, thereby creating an emergency requiring immediate action to protect the public health or safety. 
(10)  Represent the city in any and all matters relating to dust control and sandblasting. 
(11)  Employ personnel, purchase equipment, supplies and materials, and enter into contracts to carry out purposes of this chapter in conformance with city practices in connection with the department of health. 
(12)  Carry out all other activities as may be necessary to enforce this chapter, and rules and regulations promulgated by the board of health and state regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-14; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-24—3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION 
 
Sec. 3-41. - Initial procedure on complaint of violation. 
Whenever the director of public health receives a complaint, or has cause to believe that any person is violating this chapter by causing or permitting air pollution or air contamination, he/she shall order an investigation into the matter. If he/she finds that there is a violation, he/she shall endeavor to eliminate it by conference, conciliation and persuasion. Such methods shall not extend beyond a ninety (90) day period from the date of the initial investigation. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-16; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-42. - Recommendation to department of environmental protection. 
In case conference, conciliation and persuasion fail to result in the correction of any cause of air pollution, the director of environmental health may report such violation to the State Department of Environmental Protection, and request it to take immediate action. 
(Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-43. - Issuance of an order. 
In case conference, conciliation and persuasion fail to result in the correction of any cause of air pollution, the director of environmental health shall issue a written order upon the violator. The order shall specify the article provision(s) violated, and include a statement describing the manner and extent to which the violation occurred. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-17; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-44—3-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 3-61. - Manner of compliance. 
(a)  Standards. The director of public health has discretion to approve the means, methods, processes, equipment and operations used by one engaging in conduct covered by this chapter. 
(b)  Circumvention. Nothing in this Code authorizes any practice(s) intended or designed to evade or circumvent this regulation's basic requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-18; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 3-62—3-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPERATIONS EXEMPT FROM THE APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER 
 
Sec. 3-81. - Operations specifically exempt. 
The following operations are exempt from the application of this chapter: 
(1)  See Fire Code chapter section "Precautions against Fire, General"; 
(2)  Fires used only for recreational purposes, or occasional cooking of food for human consumption accomplished in a fireplace or barbecue; 
(3)  Exceptions in the form of experimental operations that arise from investigation, experiment or research to advance the state of knowledge or technique. In order for the exemption to apply, the director of public health and the chief of fire services must have approved such operations, and set a time limitation for them. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-20; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 3-82—3-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TIME PERMITTED FOR ORIGINAL COMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Time permitted for original compliance. 
The director of public health may grant an extension of time to those that will not achieve code compliance by the effective date. The extension shall encompass time for engineering, procurement, fabrication, installation and adjustment. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-21; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-102. - Application for time to comply. 
Persons responsible for emissions that will not be in compliance with this chapter on its effective date shall submit a written request to the director of public health for additional time, and estimate the additional time needed for such compliance. This estimate may be amended within ninety (90) days of the original request where the person submits written material facts indicating that additional time is required for compliance. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-22; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-103. - Failure to meet time for compliance requirements. 
If a person who was given additional time for compliance as stated in the above sections fails either to (1) comply with this chapter by the deadline, or (2) make progress toward compliance to the director of health's satisfaction, said director may require that person to make additional reports concerning the progress of such installations whenever the director deems necessary. If said director finds noncompliance with (1) and (2) of this section, he/she shall institute this chapter's directives. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-23; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-104—3-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONDITIONS NOT IN VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER 
 
Sec. 3-121. - Upset condition, breakdown or scheduled maintenance. 
Excessive emissions resulting from upset conditions in, or breakdown of, any operating equipment or related air condition equipment, or the shutdown of such equipment for scheduled maintenance, shall not be deemed as a code violation provided all the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Such occurrences shall have been reported to the office of the director of public health as soon as possible; for scheduled maintenance, such report shall be submitted at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to shutdown, and for upset conditions or breakdown, such report shall be made within four (4) hours of the occurrence. 
(2)  The person responsible for the excessive emission shall initiate and complete appropriate action to correct the conditions causing it, and reduce the frequency of such occurrence. Upon request by the director of public health, the person must submit a full written report of such occurrences, including a statement of all known causes, and the nature of the actions to be taken pursuant to this subsection's requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-24; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-122. - Regulation of dissemination of dust. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit materials to be handled, transported, or stored; or a building, its appurtenances, or a road to be used, constructed, altered, repaired or demolished without taking reasonable precautions to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne. Such reasonable precautions shall be in accordance with good industrial practice, and the state's environmental protection laws, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Use, where possible, of water or chemicals for dust control in the demolition of existing buildings or structures, construction operations, the grading of roads, or the clearing of land; 
(2)  Application of asphalt, oil, water, suitable chemicals or coverage on materials, stockpiles and other surfaces which can give rise to airborne dusts; 
(3)  Installation and use of hoods, fans, and fabric filters to enclose and vent the handling of dusty materials. Adequate containment methods shall be employed during sandblasting or other similar operations; 
(4)  Covering, at all times when in motion, open bodied trucks and trains transporting materials likely to give rise to airborne dusts; and 
(5)  The prompt removal of earth or other material from paved streets onto which earth or other material has been deposited by trucking or earth- moving equipment, erosion of water or other means. 
(b)  Agricultural activities are exempt from the provisions of subsection (a). However, agricultural practices such as tilling of land and application of fertilizers shall be conducted in a manner as to minimize dust from becoming airborne. 
(c)  No person shall cause or permit the discharge of visible emissions beyond the lot line of the property on which the emissions originate when: 
(1)  The emissions remain visible and exist near ground level outside the property boundaries; or 
(2)  The emissions remain visible and impinge on a building or structure so that the public health, safety or enjoyment of life may be diminished. 
(d)  No particulate matter shall be emitted into the open air in such a manner as to cause a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-33; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-123—3-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTY, VALIDITY AND INTENT OF CHAPTER 
 
Sec. 3-141. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed an offense. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per day in which the violation occurs. 
(c)  In the event that a firm or corporation violates a provision of this chapter, the officer(s) or person(s) responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalty herein provided. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-40; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-142. - Validity of the chapter. 
If a judicial determination declares that any provision of this chapter is void or unconstitutional, all other parts of the Code not subject to this determination shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-41; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-143. - Chapter not intended as violation of any other statute or ordinance, or to impair civil remedies. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to permit any practice which is otherwise a violation of any statute, ordinance, order or regulation. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to impair or abrogate any civil remedy or process which might otherwise be available to any person. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-42; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-144. - Effect of conflict between this chapter and other ordinance. 
When any provision of this chapter conflicts with any zoning, building, fire, safety, health or other ordinance or code of this city or state law, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of public health and safety shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 12-2-68; Code of 1985, § 3-43; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-145. - Sandblasting, definitions. 
The following words shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Interested person means any owner of real property adjacent to the building for which sandblasting is proposed. 
(b)  Occupied building means one in which at least one (1) person, firm or corporation resides or maintains a commercial establishment. 
(c)  Sandblasting means the use of sand or any finely divided aggregate particles propelled in a high velocity of air for the purpose of cleaning the facade of a building. 
(d)  Vacant building means one in which no person, firm or corporation resides or maintains a commercial establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 3-146. - Sandblasting, prohibited; permit required. 
(a)  Sandblasting shall not be performed on any occupied building in the city. Sandblasting shall not be performed on any vacant building in the city unless the owner obtains a permit from the city's director of public health. The owner must file an application listing the names of all interested persons, and a fee in the amount set out in the Licenses and Permits chapter of this Code. 
(b)  Once the application is filed, the director of public health shall notify all interested persons. No action shall be taken on the application for five (5) business days from the mailing date of the notice. The director of public health shall grant the application upon the written approval of the chief of the department of police services, the director of the office of traffic and parking, and the city's building inspector or their designees. However, no permit shall be granted unless the owner complies with the following conditions: 
(1)  Sandblasting shall only be performed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and shall not be performed on legal holidays; and 
(2)  Sandblasting shall be performed under conditions designed to protect the health, safety and property of interested persons. These conditions shall include, but not be limited to, encapsulation of the building for which sandblasting is proposed, wetting down of the building to stop the spread of dust, and any other proper methods required by the director of public health. 
(c)  Any person who performs sandblasting without obtaining the permit described in this section shall be subject to the penalties stated in this chapter. 
(d)  The department of police services is specifically authorized and directed to take all necessary or appropriate lawful actions to terminate any sandblasting in violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-17-85; Code of 1985, § 3-46; Ord. No. 1399, 1-3-06)  
Chapter 4 - AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 4 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Construction of airplane hangers, Building Code Pars. 608.4—608.41. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 4-1, 4-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1388, adopted Sept. 6, 2005, repealed former sections 4-1, 4-2, in their entirety which pertained to the airport zoning board and derived from Ord. of Jan. 15, 1954.  
Sec. 4-3. - Airport surfaces—Purposes; established. 
(a)  Purposes; map adopted. For the purpose of regulating the height of structures and trees for the protection of life and property in relation to the use of the Tweed New Haven Regional Airport, the airport surfaces identified in Title 14 U.S Code of Federal Regulations Part 77 (14CFR77), Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace, as shown on maps prepared for the Tweed-New Haven Airport Authority identified as FAR Part 77 Surfaces, are hereby adopted and established as the approach areas of the New Haven Municipal Airport, and said map with all additions and amendments is hereby adopted as a part of this Code of Ordinances in every respect as fully as though set out herein. 
(b)  Included on zoning map. A copy of said airport surfaces map (s) shall become a part of the zoning map of the city and shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-2-48, § 1; Ord. No. 1388, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 4-4. - Same—Height limitations. 
Within the airport surfaces described in section 4-3 hereof and shown on the airport surfaces map(s), no structure or tree shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow above the applicable height limit herein established, pursuant to 14CFR77, for said airport surfaces, except that the board of zoning appeals shall have the power to grant a variance of this regulation where a literal application or enforcement of the same would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-2-48, § 2; Ord. No. 1388, 9-6-05)  
Sec. 4-5. - Effect on other height regulations. 
The height regulations existing at the time of the adoption of the provision of sections 4-3 through 4-5 shall not limit the effectiveness or scope of the airport approach surfaces height regulations adopted under section 4-4 hereof. 
(Ord. of 2-2-48, § 3; Ord. No. 1388, 9-6-05)  
Secs. 4-6—4-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1388, adopted Sept. 6, 2005, repealed former sections 4-6—4-9 in their entirety. 
Former section 4-6 pertained to airport rates and fees and derived from the following; 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Section 
Ord. of 	12- 1-80 	2 
Ord. of 	 9- 4-84 	
Ord. of 	 3- 5-86 	
Ord. of 	 6- 1-87 	
Ord. of 	12- 7-87 	
Ord. of 	 5-29-90 	
Ord. of 	 4- 1-91 	
Ord. of 	 5-24-93 	
Ord. of 	 7- 6-93 	
 
Former section 4-7 pertained to a penalty for nonpayment of fees and derived from an Ord. of May 3, 1982. 
Former section 4-8 pertained to automobile parking fees and derived from an Ord. of May 3, 1982. 
Former section 4-9 pertained to contractural agreement with the Town of East Haven and derived from an Ord. of Aug. 1, 1983.  
ARTICLE II. - FIELD RULES 
 
Sec. 4-10. - Federal license required. 
Only aircraft and airmen licensed by the administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency shall operate on or over the airport, provided however, that this restriction shall not apply to public aircraft of the federal government, or of a state, territory, or possession of a political subdivision thereof, or the aircraft licensed by a foreign country with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering the operation of such licensed aircraft. 
(Ord. of 9-3-30)  
Sec. 4-11. - Applicability of federal, state regulations. 
(a)  No person shall navigate any aircraft overland upon, or fly the same from, or service, maintain, or repair any aircraft on the airport, or conduct any aircraft operations on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with the requirements of the Civil Air Regulations established by the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency under the authority of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 and the regulations of the Department of Aeronautics of the State of Connecticut. 
(b)  The air traffic rules as established by the administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency under the authority of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 and the regulations of the Department of Aeronautics of the State of Connecticut, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of these rules. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-12. - Authority of airport commissioners. 
(a)  Personnel. The board of airport commissioners shall have full authority over the airport manager and all other city employed airport personnel. 
(b)  Fees, licenses. The board of airport commissioners shall promulgate such fees and licenses as it deems appropriate for use of the airport, airport facilities and concessions. The right is reserved to the board of airport commissioners to change, modify, rescind or supplement the matter of fees and licenses as the need may arise; provided, that no fee or license shall be effective until it shall have been first approved by the board of aldermen, and published at length in one or more of the daily newspapers published in New Haven, and also printed and posted in conspicuous places within the limits of the airport. 
(c)  Rules, regulations. The board of airport commissioners shall have full authority to establish rules and regulations to control all aircraft parking, ground movements and flight operations at the airport. All such rules and regulations shall be displayed on the bulletin board in lobby of administration building and all other flight operation offices. The right is reserved to the board of airport commissioners to revoke, rescind, abrogate, cancel, suspend, amend, change, modify or supplement rules and regulations for aircraft parking, ground movement and flight operations at the airport as the need may arise. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 1)  
Sec. 4-13. - Authority of airport manager. 
(a)  Control public. The airport manager shall at all times have authority to take such action as may be necessary in the handling, conduct and management of the public in attendance at the airport. 
(b)  Remove damaged aircraft. In order to restore flight operations, the airport manager, with prior approval of the Federal Aviation Agency and state department of aeronautics, may immediately remove wrecked or damaged aircraft from the flight or ramp areas of the airport at the expense of the owner, and without liability for damage which may result in the course of such removal. 
(c)  Suspend operations. Except in the case of scheduled operators, the airport manager or his authorized representative shall have the authority to suspend flight operations on or from the airport when, in his opinion, the condition of the flight area and/or local meteorological conditions might make such operations unsafe. 
(d)  Enforce regulations. The airport manager or his authorized representative shall have full authority to enforce all ordinances and rules and regulations established by the board of airport commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-14. - Permit required for commercial use. 
No person shall use the airport as a base or terminal for the carrying on of commercial aviation, or the carrying of passengers, freight, express, or mail, or for student flying, or operation of club or group owned aircraft, communications, or other commercial or private purpose or transportation without first securing a permit from the airport manager and paying the fees and charges, if any, prescribed for such privileges, the use of the airport, its facilities, and for services rendered as established by the board of airport commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-15. - Permit to sell goods, services at airport. 
No person shall engage in the sale of refreshments or of any other commodity or service within the confines of the airport without previously having secured a permit from the board of airport commissioners and having paid or made satisfactory arrangements to pay such fees or other sums of money as the said board of airport commissioners may determine for such privilege. Any such sale or service shall be subject to any and all rules and regulations the board of airport commissioners may establish. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30, rule 5)  
Sec. 4-16. - Permission required to solicit, advertise at airport. 
(a)  No person or group shall solicit funds for any purpose at the airport without obtaining prior permission from the board of airport commissioners. 
(b)  No person or group shall install, post, distribute or display signs, advertisements, circulars, printed or written matter at the airport without obtaining prior permission from the board of airport commissioners.  
Sec. 4-17. - Permission for test flights. 
Persons must obtain prior permission of the board of airport commissioners before engaging in test flight operations from the airport with experimental aircraft. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-18. - Tampering with aircraft. 
No person shall interfere or tamper with any aircraft at the airport or enter or start the engine of such aircraft without prior consent of the owner. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-19. - Animals in buildings. 
Dogs or other animals entering any airport building must be on a leash or confined in such manner as to be under control. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-20. - Operation while intoxicated or possessing intoxicants. 
No person shall take any aircraft from the flight area or hangars or operate same while under the influence of or using or having personal possession of intoxicating liquor. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-21. - Duties of instructors. 
All persons instructing student pilots in flying at the airport shall fully acquaint such students with the rules and regulations in effect at the airport and shall be responsible for the conduct of said students while under their instruction. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-22. - Duty of pilots to register, report accidents. 
(a)  Registration. Pilots of itinerant aircraft landing or departing from the airport shall immediately register such arrivals and departures in the airport log which will be found on the operations desk in the lobby of the administration building. 
(b)  Accident reports. The pilot of the aircraft involved in any accident causing personal injury or property damage at the airport shall make a prompt and full written report of said accident and submit same to the airport manager. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-23. - Motorized vehicle and equipment. 
(a)  Parking areas. No automobiles or other motorized vehicles shall be parked on the airport except in areas designated for that purpose by the airport manager. 
(b)  Parking time limit. No automobile or other motorized vehicle shall be left parked on public roads and parking areas of the airport for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours unless prior permission has been obtained from the airport manager or his representative. 
(c)  Promulgation of parking, speed regulations. The board of airport commissioners has full authority to establish rules and regulations for use of the public parking areas and to set speed limits for public and service roads at the airport. 
(d)  Operation in certain areas. No automobiles or other motorized vehicles shall be allowed on flight areas service roads, flight area or ramps, with the exception of vehicles regularly employed servicing of aircraft and maintenance of the airport. 
(e)  Operation in, around hangars. No automobiles, motor trucks, or tractors shall enter hangars except in connection with operations on the airport, and then only with permission of manager, and hangar entrances shall be kept clear at all times. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-24. - Gliders prohibited. 
Airplane tow and other glider flight operations are not permitted at the airport.  
Sec. 4-25. - Repair areas. 
All repairs to aircraft and engines shall only be made in the spaces designated by the airport manager for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-26. - Parking of aircraft. 
(a)  Location; compliance with regulations. Unhoused aircraft shall be parked in areas designated for such purposes and shall be left in a manner which fully complies with existing airport aircraft parking regulations as established by the board of airport commissioners. 
(b)  Designation of ramp plane lines. The ramp plane lines shall be designated by the airport manager. 
(c)  Designation of dead line. A dead line shall also be designated by the airport manager, and no person, excepting the pilot or mechanic attached to the airport or employed by the owner of a plane or an operator on said airport or an owner of such a plane, or such an operator, or duly authorized officers or officials charged with the duty of enforcing local, state, or federal laws or regulations shall cross the dead line or enter upon the flying field unless he is to participate in a flight. If such person is to participate in a flight he shall not cross the dead line until the plane in which he is to fly has come to a full stop and the pilot thereof has signalled that he is ready. Such person shall, upon alighting from the plane, leave the landing area by the shortest possible route. 
(d)  Dead line marking. The dead line will be indicated by suitable markers and may be changed from time to time as conditions require. 
(e)  Parking near administration building. Unless prior permission is obtained from the airport manager or his authorized representative, no aircraft shall be left parked on the ramp area in the vicinity of the gate positions of the administration building for a period longer than necessary to load or discharge passengers, baggage or cargo. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-27. - Regulations governing running engines. 
(a)  Wheel blocks. Blocks, equipped with ropes or other suitable means of pulling them, shall always be placed in front of the wheels before starting the engine, or engines, unless the airplane is provided with thoroughly adequate brakes. 
(b)  Operation in control. No aircraft engine shall be started or run unless a licensed pilot or competent mechanic is in the cockpit attending the controls. 
(c)  Running in hangars. No aircraft engine shall be run in hangars. 
(d)  Fueling. No aircraft on the airport shall be fueled while the engine is running. 
(e)  Location. Aircraft shall be started and warmed up only in the places designated for such purposes by the airport authorities. At no time shall engines be tuned up in such position that hangars, shops, or other buildings, or any group of people in the observation area, shall be in the path of the propeller stream. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-28. - Standing on runways. 
No aircraft shall remain standing directly on the end of any runway for pre-flight procedures or other reasons.  
Sec. 4-29. - Taxiing. 
(a)  No taxiing is permitted on runways except straight ahead to the next taxi-strip exit from the active runway used for landing. Taxi-strips shall be used only for taxiing of aircraft. 
(b)  Aircraft using taxi-strips shall come to full stop at yellow cross line markers before crossing any runway. 
(c)  No aircraft shall block other aircraft from use of taxi-strip entrance to active runway for an excessive period of time. 
(d)  All aircraft taxiing shall be done in a careful manner and at slow speed. On taxiing from flight area all taxiing shall stop at ramp plane line. 
(e)  No taxiing is permitted in or out of hangars. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-30. - Takeoffs, landings. 
(a)  All aircraft landings and take-offs shall be made on or from an airport runway. All take-offs shall be started directly from the end of runway in use at time of departure. No aircraft landings or take-offs until active runway is clear of other aircraft. No 180 degree turns on active runway by a landing aircraft. Landing aircraft shall immediately clear active runway via next taxi-strip exit ahead. 
(b)  A landing aircraft has the right-of-way over aircraft moving on the flight area or taking off, but this shall not excuse the pilots of either or both aircraft from the exercise of due care and diligence. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-31. - Flights conflicting with routine operations. 
Prior permission must be obtained from the airport manager or his authorized representative before engaging in any aircraft flight operation which will in any way conflict with aircraft traffic on the runway in active use by other aircraft for routine flight operations.  
Sec. 4-32. - Direction of air traffic. 
The direction of air traffic around the airport shall be counter-clockwise and shall conform to requirements of the established flight pattern for the airport. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-33. - Circling required. 
All aircraft shall circle field 360 degrees before landing. During the hours of daylight aircraft in Unicom or airline company radio contact with ground stations at the airport shall circle the field at least 180 degrees before landing. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-34. - Night lighting. 
Flight area night lighting facilities are only available on advance request or to an aircraft which enters the airport traffic pattern and circles the field 360 degrees or more.  
Sec. 4-35. - Duty of users to guard against fire, injury. 
All persons using in any way the airport area or the facilities of the airport shall exercise the utmost care to guard against fire and injury to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-36. - Smoking. 
No person shall smoke in any hangar or building unless smoking is specifically authorized by airport manager. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-37. - Fire appliances required. 
All buildings on the airport shall be provided with first-aid fire appliances as required by the National Board of Fire Underwriters. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-38. - Heating, fuel-burning appliances. 
All heating equipment and fuel-burning appliances installed on the airport shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-39. - Repairs on storage floors. 
Repairs on storage floor of hangars shall be limited to inspection and replacement of parts and repairs incident thereto, provided such repairs do not involve appliances using open flames or highly heated parts other than electric soldering irons. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-40. - Maintenance of floors. 
Floors shall be kept clean and free from oil. The use of volatile flammable solvents for cleaning floors is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-41. - Use, handling of flammable liquids. 
(a)  Fueling, draining. No airplane shall be fueled or drained while in a hangar or other enclosed place. 
(b)  Heating of oil. The heating of oil shall be restricted to steam, hot water, hot air, or approved electric heaters. 
(c)  Cleaning parts. The cleaning of motor parts or other parts of the airplane shall preferably be with noninflammable liquids. If volatile flammable liquids are employed for this purpose, cleaning operations shall be carried on in the open air or in a separate room located in the repair shop section and separated therefrom by fire-resistive partitions and complying with the requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters. 
(d)  Doping. No doping shall be carried on in any hangar. Where a separate building is not feasible, the process may be carried on in a room located in the repair shop section of the hangar. Such building or room shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and shall be protected with either a system of automatic sprinklers or a system employing a fire-retardant chemical or gas, which system shall meet the requirements of said board. 
(e)  Storage of flammable liquids. Gasoline, kerosene, ethyl, ether, or other flammable liquids, including those used in connection with the process of "doping" shall not be stored in hangars. The storage of such liquids shall be in compliance with the regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the construction and installation of containers for flammable liquids. Lubricating oils may be kept within hangars when stored in containers and provided with draw-off devices, both approved for this purpose by said board. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-42. - Flammable gases. 
No cylinders or flasks of compressed flammable gases shall be stored in hangars, without consent of airport manager. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-43. - Clothes lockers. 
All clothes lockers shall be constructed of metal or other suitable fire-resistive materials. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-44. - Rubbish, trash disposal. 
(a)  Receptacles. Suitable metal receptacles with self closing covers shall be provided for the storage of oily waste, rags, and other rubbish. The contents of these receptacles shall be removed daily. 
(b)  Empty oil, paint containers. All empty oil, paint, and varnish cans, bottles, or other containers shall be immediately removed from the premises and not allowed to remain on the floor or wall stringers. 
(c)  Litter. No boxes, crates, rubbish, paper, or litter of any kind shall be stored in or about hangars. 
(Ord. of 9-8-30)  
Sec. 4-45. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall forfeit the privilege of using the municipal airport until reinstatement by the board of airport commissioners, and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. of 9-8-30; Ord. of 12-1-30)  
Secs. 4-46—4-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLICY FOR TAXICAB OPERATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions of an ordinance enacted May 3, 1982, approved by the mayor May 4, 1982, and effective May 14, 1982, relative to operation of taxicabs at the airport, being nonamendatory of the Code, have been codified as Art. III, §§ 4-51, 4-52 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4-51. - Passenger dispatch; fare list; violation and penalty. 
(a)  It is a policy of the airport that no cab company or driver shall directly solicit business within the airport terminal building, on the aircraft ramp area, or in the passenger loading gate area. 
(b)  All taxis must line up in a queuing area designated by the airport manager and passengers needing a cab will be directed to the first cab in the line. Cab drivers must remain close to or in their vehicles while awaiting a customer. In addition, each cab company doing business at the airport must submit a list of representative fares to the airport manager on request; i.e., a trip to Park Plaza, City Hall, Long Wharf, etc. 
(c)  Violation of said policies will subject a cab company and/or driver to fine and/or prohibition of doing business on the airport for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days as determined by the board of airport commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82)  
Sec. 4-52. - Driver identification required; penalty for violation. 
(a)  All cab drivers shall wear some type of identifying apparel while in the terminal building; i.e., a uniform jacket or shirt, i.d. badge or patch, cap, or other item clearly identifying the individual's name and taxi company. 
(b)  Violators will be served a notice by the airport manager to appear before the board of airport commissioners for a hearing to determine circumstances and appropriate penalties consistent with this article. 
(c)  The maximum fines shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first offense and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82)  
Secs. 4-53—4-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE AND SAFETY STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 4, 1985, amended the Code by adding provisions which pertain to airport noise and safety standards, and which are designated as Art. IV, §§ 4-61—4-74, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Statement of purpose. 
The goal for aircraft noise abatement shall be to reduce the area within the residential community which is exposed to aircraft noise in excess of Ldn 65, by implementing noise abatement actions that: 
(1)  Do not shift the burden of noise from one part of the surrounding community to another; and 
(2)  Do not inappropriately curtail operation of the airport. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-62. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Advisory circular means the following publication by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration: Advisory Circular, AC No. 36-3C, Appendix 1, dated September 28, 1983, and future amendments to or replacements of such advisory circular. For aircraft based at Tweed-New Haven Airport, the applicable advisory circular shall be the advisory circular in effect as of the date such aircraft was based at the airport. 
Airport means Tweed-New Haven Airport. 
Day-night sound level (Ldn) means the twenty-four-hour equivalent sound level in decibels (dB) from midnight to midnight, obtained after the addition of ten (10) dB to sound levels from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Equivalent sound level means the level of a constant sound which, in a given situation and time period, has the same sound energy as does a time-varying sound. Technically, equivalent sound level is the level of the time-weighted, mean square, A-weighted sound pressure. The time interval over which the measurement is taken should always be specified. 
Maximum A-weighted sound level means the highest sound level of an event, as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or DBA. 
Engine run-up means any aircraft engine operation above an rpm setting required for forward movement of the aircraft at five (5) m.p.h., or any aircraft engine operation above idle RPM for more than one (1) minute duration. 
Auxiliary power unit (A.P.U.) means a generating device installed in an aircraft which provides electrical power for that aircraft while on the ground. 
Ground power unit (G.P.U.) means a mobile generating device to provide electrical power for an aircraft while on the ground. 
Flight means a takeoff and a landing, in either order. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-63. - Prohibited noise levels of aircraft taking off or landing. 
No person shall take off or land an aircraft at the airport if the "takeoff" noise level for that model of aircraft exceeds the following noise levels, as set forth in the advisory circular in the column entitled "EST DBA," for the following time periods: 
Time Period 	Maximum A-Weighted Sound Level 
12:00 a.m.—6:00 a.m. 	68.0 dB(A) 
6:00 a.m.—7:00 a.m. 	73.0 dB(A) 
7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	78.0 dB(A) 
10:00 p.m.—12:00 a.m. 	73.0 dB(A) 
 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-64. - Categorically exempt aircraft. 
The following categories of aircraft shall be exempt from the provisions of section 4-63: 
(1)  Aircraft operated by the United States of America or the State of Connecticut, including law enforcement, emergency, fire or rescue aircraft operated by any county or city of said state. 
(2)  Aircraft used for emergency purposes during an emergency which has been officially proclaimed by competent authority pursuant to the laws of the United States, said state or the city. 
(3)  Civil Air Patrol aircraft when engaged in actual search and rescue missions. 
(4)  Aircraft engaged in landings or takeoffs while conducting tests under the direction of the airport manager in an attempt to rebut the presumption of aircraft noise violation pursuant to the provisions of section 4-67. 
(5)  Aircraft involved in a bona fide emergency which requires a landing and/or takeoff for the preservation of life or property. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-65. - Exemptions due to circumstances. 
(a)  If an airline flight scheduled to land by or at the end of the time period during which it is permitted to do so under section 4-63 is delayed due to circumstances beyond the airline's control, such aircraft on such occasion shall be exempt from section 4-63 so long as such aircraft can land and take off again, if scheduled to do so, within one (1) hour from the end of such time period. 
(b)  If an aircraft owner believes that he or she is aggrieved in that during certain time periods section 4-63 operates in a manner to prevent an aircraft landing when such landing would otherwise be permitted based upon information contained in the advisory circular, said aircraft owner may appeal to the airport manager who may issue a waiver of section 4-63 based upon written evidence presented to his satisfaction. 
(c)  An aircraft which used the airport during calendar year 1984 (the "base year") but which exceeds the noise limits of section 4-63 may operate flights from the airport only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and only in accordance with the following schedule, based upon submission of written records to the airport manager substantiating the number of flights made by such aircraft at the airport during the base year: 
Calendar 
Year 	Permissible Flights 
1985 	2/3 times number of substantiated base year flights, or 12, whichever is less. 
1986 	1/3 times number of substantiated Base Year flights, or 12, whichever is less. 
1987 and following: 	-0- 
 
(d)  An aircraft taxable by either the City of New Haven or the Town of East Haven which, as of January 21, 1985, was based at the airport and complies with the noise limits of section 4-63 between the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. may also operate flights from the airport between the hours of 6:00 a.m. until 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-66. - Violation by aircraft owner/lessee. 
For purposes of this article, the pilot of an aircraft shall be deemed to be the beneficial owner or lessee thereof, and any violation of the provisions hereof shall be charged to said beneficial owner or lessee. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-67. - Presumption of aircraft noise violation. 
In the event that the airport manager determines to his reasonable satisfaction that the noise level indicated in the applicable advisory circular for the particular type or class of aircraft does not meet the noise levels set forth in section 4-63, it shall be presumed that operation of such aircraft will result in violation of the provisions of section 4-63, and said aircraft will not be permitted to land on, tie down on, be based at or take off from the airport, except in emergencies as set forth in section 4-64; provided, however, that the owner or operator of such aircraft shall be entitled to rebut such presumption to the reasonable satisfaction of the airport manager by furnishing written evidence to the contrary. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-68. - Appeals from decisions of airport manager. 
Any aircraft owner or lessee, or any member of the general public (including legal entities of any nature) may appeal an action of the airport manager under sections 4-65 or 4-67, or a penalty imposed under any provision of this article, in writing within seven (7) calendar days of notice of such action, or imposition of such penalty, to the board of airport commissioners. The board of airport commissioners shall meet within seven (7) calendar days to review such appeal, and shall issue a ruling thereon within ten (10) calendar days thereafter. Rulings of the board of airport commissioners hereunder are final and conclusive. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-69. - Run-ups, ground power units, auxiliary power units. 
(a)  Engine run-ups shall be conducted only at locations designated for such purpose in duly adopted airport rules and regulations. 
(b)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., engine run-ups, use of G.P.U.'s, and use of A.P.U.'s are prohibited except for those essential to the operation of a scheduled flight. 
(c)  At such time as the city has installed noise barriers around a designated engine run-up area, or after January 1, 1986, whichever occurs sooner, the following noise limits shall prevail, measured at the property line between the airport and any residential use: 
Time Period 	Equivalent Sound Level For One Hour 	Maximum A-Weighted Sound Level 
7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	60.0 dB(A) 	70.0 dB(A) 
10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 	50.0 dB(A) 	60.0 dB(A) 
 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-70. - Aircraft weight restriction. 
No fixed wing aircraft with a maximum certificated gross takeoff weight greater than one hundred sixty thousand (160,000) pounds shall land at the airport other than a landing necessitated by an inflight emergency. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-71. - Conflicts. 
Any provisions of the Code or regulations issued thereunder or any other ordinances of the city inconsistent herewith, to the extent of such inconsistencies and no further, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-72. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the article. The board hereby declares that it would have passed this article and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-73. - Penalties. 
The following shall be the penalties for violation of this article: 
(1)  First violation: Written warning by certified mail to aircraft owner or lessee. 
(2)  Second violation: Fine of the maximum dollar amount permitted by City Charter imposed on aircraft owner or lessee. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violations: Impoundment of aircraft by the airport manager for seven (7) calendar days and fine of the maximum dollar amount permitted by City Charter imposed on aircraft owner or lessee. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Sec. 4-74. - Notification. 
(a)  The standards and prohibitions set forth herein shall be posted in such format as may be designated by the airport manager in at least two (2) prominent locations at the airport. 
(b)  Copies of the advisory circular and any determinations on noise level of aircraft pursuant to section 4-65 hereof shall be maintained in the office of the airport manager and shall be supplied to the Federal Aviation Administration tower operators at the airport. 
(c)  Requests for waivers, where such requests are expressly provided for by this article, and actions of the airport manager in response to such requests, shall be transmitted promptly to the board of airport commissioners and to the board of aldermen, and shall be posted in at least two (2) prominent locations at the airport. 
(Ord. of 2-4-85)  
Chapter 4½ - BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1607, adopted Nov. 16, 2009, amended former Ch. 4½, §§ 4½-1—4½-13, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 3-22-82, §§ 1—13; Ord. of 6-18-84; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-89; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 3; Ord. of 1-3-00, §s;; 1—3; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4½-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter is intended to enhance emergency preparedness planning and facilitate timely and effective responses by the New Haven Police Department in order to protect the life and property of resident citizens and make New Haven a safer city. This article is further intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of persons who purchase, rent or use, and persons who own or conduct the business of selling, leasing, renting, installing, maintaining or monitoring alarm systems, devices or services. The provisions of this ordinance will provide a framework for the collaborative effort among the entities involved that encourages the improvement in reliability of these systems, devices and services and reduces the diversion of police resources resulting from responses to false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-2. - Scope. 
(a)  This chapter governs alarm systems intended to summon New Haven Police Department response, and requires registration for alarm subscribers and verification of compliance with state licensing regulations for alarm businesses, establishes fees, provides penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension of police response or revocation of registration. This article specifically encompasses audible and inaudible (silent) "burglary alarms," "robbery alarms," "holdup alarms," "duress alarms," "panic alarms" and similar devices. The provisions of this article shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles, audible [fire alarms] and, alarm systems that are operated by the federal, state, and city government or their departments and agencies, and installed on premises which such entity occupies or uses for governmental purposes. 
(b)  Unless otherwise authorized by the chief of police, no alarm system shall use a direct wire connection to a city communication console. Any alarm system that is unauthorized, and is presently directly or indirectly connected to a city communication console by a telephone line on or after the date of enactment of this chapter, shall be in violation of it. The chief of police or his/her designee shall issue the telephone number for an authorized communication console connection upon registration of an alarm. 
(c)  Any automatic tape/dialing device installed on any alarm system prior to, on or after the date of enactment of this chapter shall be in violation of it. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-3. - Interagency communications. 
All central stations or other answering services shall provide the police department's dispatch, at the time of filing the alarm report with the alarm subscriber's registration number, and with a toll-free telephone number for contacting the central station dispatchers. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-4. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply: 
Alarm business shall mean any person(s) engaged in the business of selling, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving or removing, alarm systems in the city, and shall include the designee(s) of such person(s). 
Alarm administrator shall mean the person designated by the chief of police to perform administrative functions relating to the registration of alarms, and verification of the appropriate state licenses as required by this chapter. 
Alarm appeal hearing officer shall mean the person appointed by the chief of police, who conducts proceedings pertaining to false alarm charges and other alleged violations of this chapter, and assesses false alarm penalties. 
Alarm dispatch request shall mean a notification by the alarm business to the police dispatch operator that a manual or automatic alarm has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
Alarm site shall mean a single premise or location served by an alarm system or systems. If each tenancy in a multi-tenant building complex is served by a separate alarm system, each tenancy shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
Alarm subscriber shall mean a person or entity that buys, leases or otherwise obtains an alarm system, and thereafter installs it or has it installed. Additionally, the term "alarm subscriber" shall mean a person who has control of a premise in which an operable alarm system exists. 
Alarm system shall mean any mechanism, equipment, or device which is designated to detect an unauthorized entry into any building or onto any property, or to direct attention to a robbery, burglary, or other emergency in progress, and to signal the above occurrences either by a local or audible alarm or by a silent or remote alarm. The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the meaning of this subsection: 
(1)  Fire alarm systems; 
(2)  Devices that are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of reporting an emergency to the police department; and 
(3)  Alarm devices that the New Haven Department of Police Service Family Services Division, such as the Emergency Notification System (ENS /Domestic Violence Alarm link, etc., temporarily installed. 
Alarm tape/dialing device shall mean a telephone device or attachment that is mechanically, automatically, or electronically connected by a telephone line to the city's public safety answering point. 
Apartment building shall mean any building containing two or more rental units. 
Burglary alarm shall mean an audible or silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to direct attention to a wrongful entry, robbery, burglary or attempted criminal act, requesting law enforcement response. 
Central station shall mean an office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits continuously, and where a live voice subsequently relays messages to the police department. 
Common cause shall mean a common technical difficulty or malfunction that causes an alarm system to generate a series of false alarms, all of which occur within seventy-two (72) hours. The series of false alarms shall be counted as one (1) false alarm only if their cause is repaired before it generates additional false alarms, documentation of the repair is provided to the police chief, and the alarm system generates no additional false alarms within thirty (30) days following the repair of the documented cause. 
Communication console shall mean the locations in the city used to receive and/or dispatch requests for emergency service. 
Direct wire connection shall mean the connection between any alarm system from any specific location through a direct leased telephone wire to a city communication console or to a private alarm contractor. 
Duress alarm shall mean an alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an alarm system in order to signal that the alarm subscriber is being forced to turn off the system, and needs law enforcement response. 
Electrical surge shall mean an increase in voltage significantly above the designated level in a flow of electricity. In normal household and office wiring the standard voltage is 120 volts. 
False alarm shall mean there is no evidence of a crime, or other activity that warrants the assistance of the New Haven Police Department on the premises, as indicated by the investigation of a police officer on the scene, or by the lack of a police report filed by the property owner, and no individual who was on or near the premises, or who had viewed a video communication from the premises, called for the dispatch or confirmed a need for police response. 
The following causes shall be excluded from the finding of a false alarm: 
(1)  Damage, testing or repair of a malfunction of telephone company equipment or line provided that such incidents are promptly reported to the telephone company; 
(2)  Extraordinarily violent conditions of nature including, but not limited to, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods or other acts of God; 
(3)  An attempted and unauthorized or illegal entry, of which there is visible evidence; 
(4)  When the resident intentionally activates the alarm while acting under a reasonable belief that a need exists to call the police department; 
(5)  When an alarm is followed by a call to the police department canceling the alarm by giving proper information, prior to its arrival at the source of the alarm; 
(6)  When there is a failure in the electrical power to the alarm or other condition beyond the control of the alarm user. This condition does not encompass electrical surges as defined herein; 
(7)  When an alarm is activated during an alarm system testing procedure, provided that the alarm subscriber first notifies and receives permission from the appropriate local authority to test the system; 
(8)  An alarm activated as a result of a common cause as defined herein; 
(9)  An alarm activated by a power outage lasting longer than the life of a fully charged battery. 
(10)  The false alarm for which the penalty has been assessed did not originate at the premises of the alarm subscriber who has been assessed the fee. 
(11)  Other extraordinary causes not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm business or alarm subscriber. 
Holdup alarm shall mean a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery or other criminal act in progress. 
Intrusion alarm system shall mean an alarm system not manually activated signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system, i.e., motion detector. 
Local alarm shall mean any alarm device audible at the alarm site. 
One Plus duress alarm shall mean the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code at a keypad. [e.g. normal code = 1234; One Plus duress code = 1235] 
Panic alarm shall mean an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring law enforcement response. 
Vision obscuring device shall mean an alarm system or device that emits or produces real or simulated smoke, fog, vapor or any substance that obscures vision. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 4½-5. - Chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police or his/her designee shall administer and enforce this chapter. 
(b)  The police chief shall have power to make such reasonable rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary and which may be amended from time to time to implement the provisions of this chapter, subject to the board of aldermen's approval. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-6. - Administrator. 
(a)  There shall be in the city an alarm administrator for alarm systems, who is appointed by the chief of police, and has the power and duties, granted to him/her under this chapter. 
(b)  The alarm administrator shall be responsible for verifying the existence and validity of licenses of alarm businesses as set forth in this chapter, maintaining records of alarm subscribers provided by the alarm businesses, issuing decals to alarm subscribers to verify that their alarm system is registered, monitoring false alarm responses, billing for false alarms, issuing reports and collecting all fees and penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The alarm administrator shall prepare and file an annual fiscal year report after enactment of this chapter delineating false alarms and fines imposed for the prior year. The report shall be filed with the boards of police commissioners and aldermen no later than October 1 of each year. 
(d)  The alarm administrator shall take such action as he/she deems necessary to collect any penalty due under this chapter including, but not limited to, conveying such penalty to a collection agency for collection. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-7. - Alarm appeal hearing officer. 
(a)  There shall be an alarm appeal hearing officer in the city, who is appointed by the chief of police, and has the powers and duties granted to under this chapter. 
(b)  The alarm appeal hearing officer conducts proceedings pertaining to false alarm charges and other alleged violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
ARTICLE III. - ALARM BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 4½-8. - Alarm business; in general. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, lease, install, service, maintain, repair, replace, move, remove, or cause such action concerning an alarm system in any building or other property within the city unless such person or entity has been issued a current state license and/or a registration card therefore, granted and subsisting in compliance with the provisions of Title 20 Chapter 393 of Connecticut General Statutes, Section 20-334. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter, alarm systems shall include, but are not limited to, burglary alarms, intrusion or duress alarms, holdup alarms and panic alarms. 
(c)  Automatic tape/dialing devices installed on any alarm system, and vision-obscuring smoke vapor devices are expressly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-9. - Alarm businesses; verification required. 
Before selling, leasing, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, moving, removing, or otherwise engaging in alarm system work in the city, an alarm business owner or his/her/its designee must verify compliance with all relevant current state licenses and regulations with the alarm administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-10. - Alarm business, duties. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the installation of an alarm system, the alarm business shall inspect and test all equipment and take or cause to be taken corrective action necessary to prevent the occurrence of false alarms. 
(b)  Each alarm business shall install an alarm system compatible with the environment, to take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms, and, if it has agreed to provide maintenance or repair service to the system, to service the system within seventy-two (72) hours of a request for service. The alarm business shall not install a single action non-recessed button as a device to activate a holdup or panic alarm. 
(c)  An alarm business shall provide an alarm subscriber with a written report any time the alarm business performs any type of service, maintenance or inspection to the alarm system. The report shall describe the reasons for the service, maintenance or inspection, any problems diagnosed and actions taken. 
(d)  An alarm business that installs an alarm system shall provide the alarm subscriber with complete instructions, including specific written operating instructions, or a videotape or DVD or digital video presentation of the same, that provides reasonable guidelines to aid the alarm subscriber in correctly using the alarm system installed by the alarm business. 
(e)  The alarm business shall provide the alarm subscriber with a method of prearranging burglar or fire alarm system tests. 
(f)  Upon leasing or renting an alarm system, an alarm business must inactivate, or cause to be inactivated, the audible alarm within fifteen (15) minutes of the notification of its activation in the event the alarm subscriber and alternates cannot be contacted or do not respond. 
(g)  As of the date of passage of this article, no alarm business shall program alarm systems so they are capable of sending One Plus duress alarms. Alarm businesses may continue to report such alarms received from alarm systems programmed with this feature prior to the date of passage. However, after such date, an alarm business shall remove the One Plus duress alarm capability from the alarm system after taking it over or converting it. 
(h)  As of the date of passage of this article, alarm businesses shall not install a device for activating a duress alarm, which has a single action, non-recessed button. 
(i)  An alarm business and/or technician shall prevent false alarms during installation, system repairs, or system service. Proper notification shall be made to the monitoring company that the system is in a test mode to avoid dispatching of law enforcement. 
(j)  Each alarm business and monitoring facility shall comply with Enhanced Call Verification making at least the minimum of two (2) verification calls each time one of their alarms is activated prior to notifying police. 
(k)  Each alarm business shall annually on June 30 provide the alarm administrator with a list of their alarm subscribers. 
(l)  In between annual submissions of the list of alarm subscribers during the course of each year each alarm business shall provide any new customers with registration forms and instruct them to complete the form and submit it to the alarm administrator. 
(m)  Alarm businesses that request police response to an alarm signal, shall maintain for a period consistent with alarm industry standards but at least five (5) years, a record of all police calls, stating the time, date and location of the alarm and the name, address and phone number of the alarm subscriber. The records shall indicate the cause of the alarm, if known. The records shall also indicate all numbers called to verify each alarm prior to contacting the police. This record shall be current and shall be made available to the chief of police or his/her designee at any time during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-11. - Noncompliance; fine; assessment. 
(a)  Any existing alarm businesses registered with the city as of the effective date of this chapter as amended must comply with this section within ninety (90) days of such date. Thereafter, assessment of penalties shall accrue until paid, as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  If the alarm business owner fails to comply with any of the above listed duties, he/she shall be liable for a fine up to the maximum authorized by state statutes per incident. Each noncompliance shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Such noncompliance or other wrongful conduct, as determined by the alarm administrator, may be reported to the Connecticut Department of Consumer Protection. Such complaints may result in discipline in accordance with Title 20 Chapter 393 of Connecticut General Statutes. 
(d)  The alarm business owner may appeal from the assessment of a fine, penalty, or other adverse decision issued against him/her to the alarm appeal hearing officer in accordance with section 17-1.16 of the licenses and permits chapter of this Code as amended from time to time. Any alarm business shall have ten (10) business days from the date of the city's written notice of a penalty assessment under this chapter to request in writing an appeal hearing before such hearing officer. The filing of an appeal with the alarm administrator shall stay the assessment of additional penalties for that violation until the hearing officer makes a final decision. The burden to prove any matter shall be upon the alarm business raising such matter. 
(e)  If the hearing officer finds that no violation of this chapter occurred, or that a noncompliance occurred, but one or more of the defenses set forth in this section is applicable, the hearing officer may dismiss the penalty and release the alarm business from liability there under, or may reduce the penalty associated therewith as he/she shall determine. 
(f)  If the hearing officer finds that a noncompliance occurred, and no applicable defense exists, the alarm administrator may, in the interest of justice and on behalf of the city, enter into an agreement for the timely or periodic payment of the applicable fees and penalties. 
(g)  All penalties assessed under this chapter shall be due and payable on the date that written notice of any penalty due is issued. If any penalty is not paid within sixty (60) days of the due date, the amount of the penalty shall be doubled, and the city may use such lawful means as are available to collect such penalties. The city, upon notification by the alarm administrator or designee, may institute civil proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  In the event the city files an action in court to recover such penalties, the city may be entitled to recovery of its costs and attorney's fees in addition to the penalties due and owing. 
(i)  The alarm administrator or his/her designee shall collect all charges for offenses, and place them in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM BUSINESSES; REGISTRATION OF SUBSCRIBERS 
 
Sec. 4½-12. - Alarm businesses: registration of subscribers required. 
(a)  Effective ninety (90) days after the enactment of this chapter [enacted on Nov. 16, 2009], every alarm business shall provide the alarm administrator with a list of their alarm subscribers so that owner registration numbers can be assigned by the alarm administrator. 
(b)  Thereafter, each June 30 the alarm businesses shall provide the alarm administrator with an updated list of their alarm subscribers. 
(c)  During each year the alarm businesses shall provide a registration form to any new subscribers and/or alarm sites prior to operation of new alarm systems, or prior to taking over an existing system from a different alarm user or alarm company, and instruct the subscriber to complete the form and submit it to the alarm administrator. 
(d)  Failure by the alarm business to provide the annual list of alarm subscribers shall result in a fine of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) for each customer not registered. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-13. - Alarm registration; term. 
(a)  Once registered by the alarm business, the alarm administrator shall issue a registration number to each alarm subscriber. An alarm subscriber's registration shall continue in effect until there is a change in ownership of the alarm system and/or change of the alarm business associated with the alarm system, at which time the registration shall expire. Alarm registrations shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
ARTICLE V. - ALARM SUBSCRIBERS 
 
Sec. 4½-14. - Alarm subscriber; duties. 
(a)  Once the alarm businesses have registered their subscribers with the alarm administrator the alarm administrator will provide each subscriber with a registration number. The alarm administrator will also provide each subscriber with information on their responsibilities for operation of the alarm system. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of each alarm subscriber to notify the alarm administrator in writing of changes in registration information. 
(c)  Failure by the alarm subscriber to provide notification in writing of changes in registration information shall result in a fine of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00). 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-15. - Alarm owners who do not subscribe to alarm companies; duties. 
(a)  Alarm owners who do not subscribe to alarm companies shall be responsible for registering their alarm systems with the alarm administrator. 
(b)  Failure by any alarm owner not subscribing to an alarm company to register their alarm system shall result in a fine of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00). 
(c)  Failure by any alarm owner not subscribing to an alarm company to provide notification in writing of changes in registration information shall result in a fine of ninety-nine dollars ($99.00). 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-16. - Apartment building alarm systems. 
(a)  If an alarm system installed, or caused to be installed, by any tenant in an apartment building is monitored by an alarm business, the tenant shall provide the name of a representative of the apartment building owner or property manager, who can grant access to the rental unit by police officers responding to an alarm dispatch, to the alarm administrator. Such tenant shall obtain an alarm permit from the alarm administrator before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's rental unit. 
(b)  A tenant who has contracted with an alarm business to monitor an alarm system at the tenant's alarm site shall be responsible for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm system at such alarm site. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-17. - False alarms; alarm subscriber liability. 
(a)  The alarm subscriber shall be responsible for the maintenance and service of his/her alarm system, and shall be responsible for all malfunctions of alarm equipment. As such, unless otherwise provided, he/she shall be liable for false alarms. 
(b)  The alarm subscriber shall have ten (10) business days from the date of the city's written notice of a penalty assessment under this chapter to request an appeal hearing in writing before such hearing officer. The alarm subscriber may appeal from the assessment of a fine, penalty, or other adverse decision issued against him/her to the alarm appeal hearing officer in accordance with section 17-1.16 of the licenses and permits chapter of this Code as amended from time to time. 
(c)  The filing of an appeal with the alarm appeal hearing officer shall stay the assessment of additional penalties for that violation until the hearing officer makes a final decision. The burden to prove any matter shall be upon the alarm subscriber raising such matter. It shall not be a defense to any penalty assessment that: 
(1)  The false alarms were the result of faulty or malfunctioning equipment; 
(2)  The false alarms were caused by electrical surges; or 
(3)  The false alarms were caused by the fault of another person during a non-criminal incident. 
(d)  The following causes shall be deemed affirmative defenses, and be excluded from the finding of a false alarm: 
(1)  Damage, testing or repair of a malfunction of telephone companyequipment or line, provided that such incidents are promptly reported to the telephone company; 
(2)  Extraordinarily violent conditions of nature including, but not limited to, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods or other acts of God; 
(3)  An attempted and unauthorized or illegal entry, of which there is visible evidence; 
(4)  When the resident intentionally activates the alarm while acting under a reasonable belief that a need exists to call the police department; 
(5)  When an alarm is followed by a call to the police department canceling the alarm by giving proper information, prior to its arrival at the source of the alarm; 
(6)  When there is a failure in the electrical power to the alarm or other condition beyond the control of the alarm user. This condition does not encompass electrical surges as defined herein; 
(7)  When an alarm is activated during an alarm system testing procedure, provided that the alarm subscriber first notifies and receives permission from the appropriate local authority to test the system; 
(8)  An alarm activated as a result of a common cause as defined herein; 
(9)  An alarm activated by a power outage lasting longer than the life of a fully charged battery; 
(10)  The false alarm for which the penalty has been assessed did not originate at the premises of the alarm subscriber who has been assessed the fee. 
(11)  Other extraordinary causes not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm business or alarm subscriber. 
(e)  The city's corporation counsel may approve such other mitigating circumstances as deemed necessary in the interest of justice. 
(f)  False alarms caused by the actions of on-scene employees of an alarm business shall not be credited against the alarm subscriber, but shall be the responsibility of the alarm business. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-18. - Penalties, false alarm. 
Upon the finding of a false alarm, the responsible party shall pay in accordance with the following fine schedule: 
First false alarm: ..... No charge 
Second false alarm ..... $75.00 
Third false alarm ..... 150.00 
Fourth and subsequent false alarms ..... 250.00  
Sec. 4½-19. - False alarm prevention program. 
(a)  The police department shall provide an educational program for the prevention of false alarms. Each alarm subscriber who attends the false alarm prevention program shall pay a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee. The police department shall collect the fee before or at the time of a person's attendance in the program. 
(b)  If an alarm subscriber successfully completes the false alarm prevention program, the police department shall issue a certificate to him/her. The certificate may be used to satisfy the payment of a single false alarm fine. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-20. - Penalty assessment. 
(a)  All penalties assessed under this chapter shall be due and payable on the date written notice of any penalty due is issued. If any penalty is not paid within sixty (60) days of the due date, the amount of the penalty shall be doubled and the city may use such lawful means as are available to collect such penalties. Upon notification by the alarm administrator or his/her designee, the city may institute civil proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In the event the city files an action in court to recover such penalties, the city may be entitled to recovery of its costs and attorney's fees in addition to the penalties due and owing. 
(c)  The alarm administrator or his/her designee shall collect all charges for offenses, and place them in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-21. - Exculpatory clause. 
(a)  The city shall be under no duty or obligation to any alarm business or alarm subscriber to maintain a communication console receiving module or other specialized equipment for the monitoring for alarm systems. The installation and maintenance of alarm systems permitted by this chapter shall be made at no cost to the city. 
(b)  Each alarm business and alarm subscriber shall be deemed to hold and save harmless the city, its departments, officers, agents and employees from liability in connection with any alarm system as provided by this chapter. The city shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of any alarm system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon the receipt of an alarm, nor for the failure or neglect of any alarm business in connection with the installation, operation or maintenance of the equipment, or incident concerning the operation of such system. In the event the city finds it necessary to order the system disconnected, the city shall inure no liability for such action. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-22. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion thereof, or the invalidity of the application of any portion of this chapter to any person or circumstances, shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Sec. 4½-23. - Confidentiality of records. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to preserve and enhance the security of persons and property within the city. Because public release of any information provided by alarm subscribers and alarm businesses may jeopardize public safety, it is the city's intent to preserve the confidentiality of this information to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1607, 11-16-09)  
Chapter 5 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 5 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Secs. 5-1—5-4. - Reserved.[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 5-1—5-4 have been repealed by § 42.1(f) of the Zoning Ordinance, codified as Vol. III, Title VI. Said sections regulated the distance between package liquor outlets and were derived from ordinances of Dec. 6, 1948, Jan. 7, 1952, and Oct. 1, 1956. 
 
Sec. 5-5. - Hours of sale of package liquors. 
The hours of sale of alcoholic liquors in places operating under package store permits, package store beer permits and grocery store beer permits for off-premise consumption shall be as provided for by the Connecticut General Statutes, except that on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of each week the lawful hours of sale of alcoholic liquors for off-premise consumption shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. only. 
(Ord. of 8-6-62, § 1) 
Editor's note— Secs. 5-5—5-8 are derived, respectively, from an ordinance enacted August 6, approved August 13 and effective August 20, 1962, which also repealed previously codified §§ 5-5—5-8, derived from §§ 1—4 of an ordinance enacted June 3, 1946 and regulating the same subject matter.  
Sec. 5-6. - Exceptions to limitation for evenings prior to days prohibited for sale. 
When the evening before any of the days on which the sale of Alcoholic Liquors for off-premise consumption is prohibited by state statue falls on one of the excepted days as provided in section 5-5, then the lawful hours of sale for that holiday eve shall be as provided for by the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-6-62, § 2) 
Note— See editor's note following § 5-5.  
Sec. 5-7. - Times to be standard or daylight saving. 
All times prescribed in sections 5-5 through 5-6 of this chapter shall be eastern standard time, except that when daylight saving time is being observed, said times shall be daylight saving time. 
(Ord. of 8-6-62, § 3) 
Note— See editor's note following § 5-5.  
Sec. 5-8. - Penalty for violating hours regulations. 
Any person who shall sell any packaged alcoholic liquor in violation of the provisions of sections 5-5 through 5-7 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for any offense other than the first offense. 
(Ord. of 8-6-62, § 4) 
Note— See editor's note following § 5-5.  
Sec. 5-9. - Sales by the drink permitted on Sundays in hotels, restaurants, clubs. 
The sale and consumption, and the presence in glasses or other receptacles suitable to permit the consumption of liquor by an individual, of alcoholic liquor, in places operating under hotel permits, restaurant permits and club permits, in the city shall be lawful on Sunday from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to nine o'clock (9:00) in the evening, with meals. 
(Ord. of 9-16-35)  
Chapter 7 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1400, adopted Jan. 3, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 7 in its entirety. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
State Law reference— Regulations concerning dogs, §§ 22-327—22-367, Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958) 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, words have their common meaning and in addition the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations have the following meanings: 
Animal means any brute creature including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, monkeys, guinea pigs, hamsters, rabbits, birds and reptiles. It shall also include quadrupeds and amphibians. 
Animal control officer means any such officer and assistants appointed under the provisions of C.G.S. Section 22-331, as amended from time to time. 
At large means any animal off the owner's premises and not under the control of the owner, a member of the owner's immediate family, the owner's authorized representative, or keeper. 
Bite injury means any contact between an animal's mouth and teeth and the skin of a bite victim which causes visible trauma, such as a puncture wound, laceration, or other piercing of the skin. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that has caused a bite injury and is not a vicious dog. 
Domestic animal means an animal of a tamed species commonly kept as pets and includes livestock. 
Enclosure means a fenced or walled area having a fence or wall height suitable to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to confine a dog. 
Farm animal means any animal or fowl kept or harbored for the production of food, breeding, transportation, or pelts. It shall include, but not be limited to, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, pigs, cattle, sheep, raccoons, mink, chickens, roosters, ducks, geese, pheasants, game hens, turkeys, and pigeons. 
Impoundment means seizing and confining a dog by any police officer, animal control officer, or any other public officer under the provisions of this chapter and C.G.S. Section 22-331. 
Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or metal designed to fasten over the mouth of a dog that prevents the dog from biting any person or other animal, and that does not interfere with its respiration. 
Owner means any person, partnership, firm, association, or corporation having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has an animal in his or her care, or acts as the animal's custodian, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on any premises occupied by him or her. 
Potentially dangerous dog means a dog that while at large: 
(1)  Behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person or domestic animal; or 
(2)  Causes injury to a domestic animal. 
Provocation means any action or activity, whether intentional or unintentional, which would be reasonably expected to cause a normal dog in similar circumstances to react in a manner similar to that shown by the evidence. 
Sanitary condition means a condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
Serious physical injury means disfigurement, protracted impairment of health, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Service dog means a dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities and is duly certified to do such work. 
Wild animal means any animal which is ferae naturae or wild by nature. It shall include, but not be limited to, snakes, alligators, raccoons, other large or dangerous reptiles, tigers, lions, monkeys, apes, bears, large or dangerous birds, large or dangerous fish, deer, elk, moose, and antelope. 
Vicious dog means a dog that without provocation or justification bites or attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death or is declared vicious under this title. 
(Ord. of 1-3-77; Code of 1985, § 7-1; Ord. of 12-7-87, § 1; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 1; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-2. - Unlawful possession of potentially dangerous animals. 
Unless otherwise authorized, no person shall possess a potentially dangerous animal, such as a bear, alligator, monkey, wolf, coyote, or others as defined in C.G.S. Section 26-40a, as amended from time to time. Any such animal illegally possessed may be seized and disposed of as determined by the commissioner of energy and environmental protection or other lawfully authorized federal, state, or municipal authority. Any person who violates this provision shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each violation shall be a separate and distinct offense and in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-3. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 53-247, as amended from time to time, and unless otherwise exempted, any person who overdrives, drives when overloaded, overworks, tortures, deprives of necessary sustenance, mutilates, cruelly beats, kills, or unjustifiably injures any animal; or who, having impounded or confined any animal, fails to give proper care to such animal; or neglects to cage or restrain any such animal from doing injury to itself or to another animal; or fails to supply any such animal with wholesome air, food, and water; or unjustifiably administers any poisonous or noxious drug or substance to any domestic animal; or unjustifiably exposes any animal to any such drug or substance, with intent that the same shall be taken by an animal or causes it to be done; or having charge or custody of any animal inflicts cruelty upon it; or fails to provide any animal with proper food, drink, protection from the weather, or abandons it; or carries it or causes it to be carried in a cruel manner; or fights with, baits, harasses, or worries any animal for the purpose of making it perform for amusement, diversion, or exhibition, shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per day per offense. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly: 
(1)  Owns, possesses, keeps, or trains an animal engaged in an exhibition of fighting for amusement or gain; 
(2)  Possesses, keeps, or trains an animal with the intent that it be so engaged; 
(3)  Permits an act described in subdivision (1) or (2) of this subsection to take place on premises under his or her control; 
(4)  Acts as judge or spectator at an exhibition of animal fighting for amusement or gain; or 
(5)  Bets or wagers on the outcome of an exhibition of animal fighting for amusement or gain; 
shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per offense. 
(c)  No person shall commit any other act of cruelty against an animal as proscribed by C.G.S. Section 53-247, as amended from time to time, or other federal, state, local law, or regulation. Failure to comply with this subsection shall result in a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per day per offense. 
(Code of 1985, § 7-2.2; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 3; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-4. - Animals not to be permitted at large; fouling of public places; removal of feces. 
(a)  No person shall allow any animal under his or her control to deposit feces on any public place, including, but not limited to, a sidewalk, street, gutter, park, playground, beach, or footpath of the city. 
(b)  Any owner or keeper of an animal shall not appear with it at any public place, including, but not limited to, a sidewalk, street, gutter, park, playground, beach, or footpath of the city without the means of removal of any feces left by such animal. For the purposes of this section, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement, or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces. 
(c)  If any animal deposits feces on any public space, the person having control of such animal shall remove the feces immediately including, but not limited to, a sidewalk, street, gutter, park, playground, beach or footpath of the city and dispose of said feces in the manner prescribed by health department regulations. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to fail to keep his or her animal under his or her control with a leash or other methods designed for such purposes, or to permit any animal to run at large upon the streets and public ways of the city or upon property other than that of the owner or keeper, except designated dog parks. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a trained, duly certified service dog. Dogs whose sole function is to provide comfort or emotional support do not qualify as service animals. 
(f)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per offense. 
(Ord. of 1-3-77; Code of 1985, § 7-3; Ord. of 2-17-87; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-5. - Keeping nuisance animals; animals roaming at large; penalty for violations. 
(a)  No person shall keep, harbor, or cause to be kept or harbored, any animal in any place or manner within the city, so as to cause a nuisance by reason of such animal's vicious disposition or other disturbance. Any animal that disturbs the peace and quiet of neighbors or the public is deemed to be a nuisance. 
(b)  No person having custody of any animal shall permit it to roam at large. Such action is deemed to be a nuisance and a danger to the public health and safety. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense, and on conviction shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Code of 1985, § 7-2.1; Ord. of 12-7-87, § 2; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-6. - Dog licenses, fees. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-338, as amended from time to time, and unless otherwise exempted, each owner or keeper of a dog that is kept in the city must obtain a license for it at the city clerk's office, if the dog is six (6) months or older. Such license must be obtained on or before June 30, annually, or at such time as such dog becomes six (6) months old, and annually thereafter, on or before June 30. The owner or keeper shall pay a license fee for each dog as required under state or local laws. Additionally, the owner or keeper of said dog must pay a fee for the city clerk's issuance of a tag and license as provided in C.G.S. Section 22-340, as amended from time to time, or other amount required by state or local law. A certain sum from each license fee collected for a neutered or spayed dog shall be deposited into the state animal population control fund. If an owner or keeper of a dog fails to procure a license as required by this section, such owner or keeper shall pay the appropriate license fee, the city clerk's fee, and a penalty for each month or fraction thereof that the dog remains unlicensed. 
(b)  Any owner or keeper applying for a license for a dog under subsection (a) of this section shall submit to the city clerk a rabies and parvovirus certificate signed by a veterinarian, or a copy thereof, stating that such dog has been vaccinated against rabies and parvovirus, the date of the vaccinations, and the duration of the immunity provided by the vaccines. No license shall be issued unless the certificate indicates that the immunity provided by the vaccines is effective at the time of licensing. 
(c)  Parvovirus required vaccination for all dogs. Effective July 1, 2019, all dogs that are to be licensed within the city per C.G.S. Section 22-338, shall receive the parvovirus (parvo) vaccination and state-mandated rabies vaccination per C.G.S. Section 22-339b. The owner or keeper of such dog shall submit to the city clerk a vaccination record by a licensed veterinarian, or a copy thereof, stating that such dog has been vaccinated against parvovirus and rabies, the date of the vaccinations, and the duration of the immunity provided by the vaccines. Failure to have the required vaccination for parvovirus will be a city ordinance violation and shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be enforced by the animal control division of the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-7. - Licenses; city clerk. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-340, as amended from time to time, the city clerk shall provide a license and tag to each person licensing a dog in the city. The license shall be set forth on a form prescribed by the commissioner of agriculture and contain a description of the dog and the number under which such dog is licensed. The city clerk shall issue a tag or plate of material prescribed by the commissioner, containing the city's name, the license number, and the year of license. The city clerk shall not issue a license or tag to any person for any neutered male or spayed female dog not previously licensed as such unless the person causing the dog to be licensed exhibits to the city clerk a certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that such veterinarian has neutered or spayed the dog, or after examining the dog, the veterinarian finds that the dog has been neutered or spayed. 
(b)  The city clerk shall provide a mailing system regarding the issuance and renewal of licenses issued under C.G.S. Sections 22-338 and 22-339, as each is amended from time to time. The city clerk may make applications for such licenses available at such facilities as kennels, pet stores, veterinarian offices, humane society offices, and pet grooming establishments. 
(c)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-341, as amended from time to time, each owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall keep around its neck or body a collar or harness of leather or other suitable material, to which shall be securely attached a tag or plate issued to such person by the city clerk. If any such tag or plate is lost, the owner or keeper of such dog shall forthwith secure a substitute tag or plate from the city clerk, at an additional cost. 
(Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-8. - Municipal animal control officers; assistants. 
Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-331, as amended from time to time, the chief of police or his or her designee shall appoint a full-time animal control officer and such assistants as are deemed necessary to administer and enforce the laws relating to dogs or other domestic animals. Such animal control officer and assistants shall have such qualifications as the commissioner of agriculture may prescribe and shall serve for a term of at least one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-9. - Unlicensed dogs—Regulations; impoundment. 
Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-349, as amended from time to time, on or before July 1 of each year, the city clerk shall provide the animal control officer with a copy of each dog license issued by such clerk. The animal control officer shall thereupon make diligent search for any unlicensed dog that state law requires to be licensed. If the owner or keeper of such unlicensed dog is not known, the animal control officer shall impound such dog. The owning or keeping of an unlicensed dog and the failure to purchase a license and pay the advertising and redemption fee within one hundred twenty (120) hours from the time the dog was impounded shall be an offense, and the offender may be subject to a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-10. - Dangerous dogs, cats, wild or farm animals. 
(a)  Active situations involving dangerous or vicious animals. If any animal is found acting in a dangerous, fierce, or vicious manner, and a police officer believes that such animal presents a clear and present danger to the public's general health and welfare, and an animal control officer cannot safely capture and impound it in a timely manner, such officer, or any other duly authorized person may euthanize the animal. 
(b)  Classification of potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious dogs. The animal control officer or such designee may find and declare a dog potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious, if the officer has probable cause to believe that the dog falls within the definition of a potentially dangerous dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog with supporting evidence including but not limited to witnesses, police reports of potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious dog behavior, or one-on-one observation of the dog in question. 
Any dog that has bitten or otherwise attacked a human or has behaved so as to impose a threat of imminent bodily harm by high risk behavior towards a human who is behaving peacefully and lawfully shall be prima facie evidence of a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious dog. No dog shall be declared dangerous or vicious, if any injury or damage caused by a dog is sustained by a person who, at the time of the injury (1) was found to be committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or (2) was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or (3) was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No dog shall be declared dangerous or vicious, if the dog was protecting or defending a human within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack. 
(1)  Potentially dangerous dogs. No person shall maintain a potentially dangerous dog without a license or otherwise in violation of this section. 
a.  Signs. "Beware of dog" signs shall be posted on the residence where the dog is located. Signs shall be posted in a manner as to be highly visible to the public from the street, at all angles. 
b.  The dog must be registered with the animal control division of the city police department as a potentially dangerous dog. 
c.  No person owning, harboring, or having the care or custody of a potentially dangerous dog shall permit the dog to go at large or leave the owner's or keeper's property unless the dog is securely leashed and muzzled. 
d.  Spaying/neutering. All owners of potentially dangerous dogs must spay or neuter the dog and provide proof of sterilization to the animal control officer within fourteen (14) days of the animal control officer declaring the dog as a potentially dangerous dog. 
(2)  Dangerous dogs. No person shall maintain a dangerous dog without a license or otherwise in violation of this section. 
a.  The dog must be registered with the animal control division of the city police department as a dangerous dog. 
b.  Keeping of a dangerous dog. Once a dog has been declared dangerous, it shall be kept in a secure enclosure subject to the following requirements: 
c.  Leash. No person having charge, custody, control, or possession of a dangerous dog shall allow the dog to exit its enclosure unless such dog is securely attached to a leash not more than four (4) feet in length and walked by a person who is both over the age of eighteen (18) and who has the physical ability to restrain the dog at all times. No owner or keeper shall keep or permit a dangerous dog to be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash outside its enclosure unless a person capable of controlling the dog is in physical control of the leash. 
d.  Muzzle. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dangerous dog to allow the dog to be outside of its proper enclosure unless it is necessary for the dog to receive veterinary care or exercise. In such cases, the dog shall wear a properly fitted muzzle to prevent it from biting humans or other animals. Such muzzle shall not interfere with the dog's breathing or vision. 
e.  Confinement. Except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section, a dangerous dog shall be securely confined in a residence, locked pen, or other secure enclosure that is suitable to prevent the entry of children and is designed to prevent the dog from escaping. The enclosure shall include shelter and protection from the elements and shall provide adequate exercise room, light, and ventilation. The enclosed structure shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The structure must be of such material and closed in such a manner that the dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own. 
f.  Indoor confinement. No dangerous dog shall be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of the house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such dog shall be kept in a house or structure when the windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
g.  Signs. "Beware of dog" signs shall be posted on the residence where the dog is located. Signs shall be posted in a manner as to be highly visible to the public from the street, at all angles. 
h.  Identification photographs. All owners of dangerous dogs must within ten (10) days of determination provide the animal control officer two (2) colored photographs of the registered dog clearly showing the color and approximate size of the dog. 
i.  Microchip. All owners must within ten (10) days of determination microchip the dog and provide microchip information to the animal control division of the city police department to register the dog as dangerous. 
j.  Spaying/neutering. All owners of dangerous dogs must within ten (10) days of determination spay or neuter the dog and provide proof of sterilization to the animal control officer. 
k.  Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited. Sale—No person shall sell, barter, or in any other way dispose of a dangerous dog registered with the city to any person within the city unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the owner or keeper of such dog, provided that the owner or keeper of a dangerous dog may sell, barter, or otherwise dispose of a registered dog to persons who do not reside within the city. Owner or keeper must disclose dog's status as a dangerous dog to anyone to whom the owner transfers custody or care of the dog. 
l.  Notification of escape. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer immediately if such dog escapes from its enclosure or restraint and is at large. Such immediate notification also shall be required if the dog bites or attacks a person or domestic animal. 
m.  Failure to comply. It shall be a separate offense to fail to comply with the restrictions in this section. Any dog found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-358. In addition, failure to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in state law and this chapter shall result in the revocation of the dog's license and the permit providing for the keeping of such dog. 
(3)  Vicious dogs. It shall be unlawful to keep, possess, or harbor a vicious dog within the city limits. 
a.  The provisions of this article shall not apply to a police dog being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers acting in an official capacity. 
b.  The animal control officer may order a dog euthanized that has been declared vicious. 
c.  The owner or keeper of a dog that the animal control officer declares to be vicious may appeal that determination to the commissioner within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of such order pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-358. 
d.  The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall be liable for and shall pay all costs associated with the seizure, impoundment, removal, or euthanasia of said animal. The owner or keeper shall pay any other associated costs incurred. 
(4)  Continuation of dangerous dog declaration. Any dog that has been declared dangerous or vicious by any agency or department of this city, another municipality, county, or state shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. The person owning or having custody of any dog designated as potentially dangerous or dangerous by any municipality, county, or state government shall notify the animal shelter division of the city police department of the dog's address and conditions of maintenance within ten (10) days of the dog moving into the city. The restrictions and conditions of maintenance of any dog declared dangerous by this city, another municipality, county, or state shall remain in force while the dog remains in the city. No dog declared a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious dog by any other designation agency or department of another municipality, county, or state based solely on size, breed, mix of breeds, or appearance shall be subject to this section. 
(Ord. of 1-3-77; Code of 1985, § 7-6; Ord. of 12-7-87, § 3; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-11. - Seizure of abandoned or abused animals. 
Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-329, as amended from time to time, the commissioner of agriculture, the chief animal control officer, any animal control officer or assistant, or any law enforcement officer may interfere to prevent any act of cruelty upon any animal, and any person who interferes with, obstructs, or resists the commissioner or any such officer in the discharge of his or her duty, shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(1)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-329a, as amended from time to time, the chief animal control officer or any animal control officer may lawfully take charge of any animal found neglected or cruelly treated in violation of federal, state, or local law and shall thereupon proceed as provided in subsection (2) of this section, except that if in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian such animal is so injured or diseased that it should be euthanized immediately, such officer may humanely euthanize or cause such animal to be humanely euthanized. 
(2)  Such officer shall file a verified petition with the superior court for the judicial district of the city. The petition shall plainly state such facts as to bring such animal within the jurisdiction of the court and pray for appropriate action by the court in accordance with the provisions this section's provisions. 
(Code of 1985, § 7-2.3; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 4; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-12. - Impounding. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-332, as amended from time to time, the chief animal control officer or any animal control officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and shall make diligent search and inquiry for any violation of any of its provisions. Any such officer may take into custody: 
(1)  Any dog found roaming in violation of federal, state, or local law; 
(2)  Any dog not having a tag or plate on a collar about its neck or on a harness on its body, as provided by law, or which is not confined or controlled in accordance with the provisions of any order or regulation relating to rabies issued by the commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(3)  Any dog found injured on any highway, neglected, abandoned, or cruelly treated. 
The officer shall impound such dog at the city's animal shelter unless, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, the dog is so injured or diseased that it should be euthanized immediately, in which case the city's animal control officer may cause the dog to be mercifully euthanized by a licensed veterinarian or disposed of as the state veterinarian may direct. The animal control officer shall make a complete registry pertaining to the impounded dog, entering its breed, color and sex, and indicate whether it is licensed. If licensed, the officer shall enter the owner's name and address and the number of the license tag. Licensed dogs shall be kept separated from unlicensed animals whenever possible. 
(b)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-332d, as amended from time to time, any city animal control officer may take into custody any cat found to be damaging property other than that of its owner or keeper, or causing an unsanitary, dangerous, or unreasonably offensive condition, unless such cat can be identified as under the care of its owner or keeper, or a registered keeper of feral cats. The officer shall impound such cat at the city's animal shelter unless, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, the cat is so injured or diseased that it should be euthanized immediately, in which case the animal control officer may cause the cat to be mercifully euthanized by a licensed veterinarian or disposed of as the state veterinarian may direct. 
(c)  The animal control officer is authorized to take any other animal that is found to be roaming, abandoned, or abused and impound it in accordance with the directives of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-3-77; Code of 1985, § 7-3; Ord. of 12-7-87, § 3; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-13. - Notice to owner; impoundment fees. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall notify an identified owner or keeper of the impoundment of his or her animal. Such notice shall be given no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the impoundment. If such owner is unknown, the animal control officer shall employ means of identifying the animal and promptly cause a description of it to be published once in the lost and found column of a newspaper having general circulation in the city by describing the impounded animal and the place and time of taking. The owner shall redeem the animal in the lawfully prescribed manner. 
(b)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-333, as amended from time to time, an owner of an impounded animal may redeem it upon proper identification, payment of a legally imposed redemption fee, and a per diem fee for each day that the animal has been impounded. When the impounded animal is a dog, the owner must present a license and tag for such animal to the animal control officer. Additionally, the owner must also pay advertising costs when newspaper publication was provided. The animal control officer's written order must be rendered before the release of an impounded animal that has done damage in violation of C.G.S. Section 22-355, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  When the owner of an impounded animal fails to redeem it within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving notice to do so or within twenty-four (24) hours after newspaper publication of such notice, the owner shall pay the full cost of the animal's impoundment and care besides the aforementioned costs. 
(d)  Any owner of an animal who fails to redeem it within one hundred twenty (120) hours after receiving notification to do so shall have committed an offense subject to a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day that the owner has not redeemed the animal shall constitute a separate offense. All other fees and fines, if any, shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. of 1-3-77; Code of 1985, § 7-4; Ord. of 12-7-87, § 3; Ord. of 3-7-88; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 5; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-14. - Unclaimed or infected dogs, cats, wild or farm animals. 
(a)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-332, as amended from time to time, if an impounded animal's owner does not redeem it within seven (7) days of such notice of the impoundment, and the animal control officer finds that it is in satisfactory health, the officer may have a licensed veterinarian spay or neuter such animal, and sell it to any person who satisfies such officer that such animal is being purchased as a pet and will be given the animal a good home and proper care. The animal control officer may retain possession of such animal for such additional period of time as such officer deems advisable in order to place it as a pet. 
(b)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-380f, as amended from time to time, and unless otherwise provided, the animal shelter shall not sell or give away any unspayed or unneutered dog or cat to any person unless the person buying or adopting such animal provides a lawfully authorized amount to such shelter. The city shall apply all funds received pursuant to this section into the state animal population control account established under C.G.S. Section 22-380g, as amended from time to time. Upon receiving such payment, the animal shelter shall provide a voucher for the purpose of sterilization and vaccination benefits to the person buying or adopting such animal. Such voucher shall be on a form provided by the commissioner and signed by the eligible owner. Such voucher shall become void after sixty (60) days from the date of adoption unless a participating veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat is medically unfit for surgery. Such certification shall be on a form provided by the commissioner and specify a date by which such dog or cat may be fit for sterilization. If the surgery is performed more than thirty (30) days after such specified date, the voucher shall become void. In the case of a dog or cat that has been previously sterilized or is permanently medically unfit for sterilization as determined by a participating veterinarian, the voucher shall be void, and the eligible owner may apply to the commissioner of agriculture for a refund. 
(c)  Pursuant to C.G.S. Section 22-332, as amended from time to time, if within such period any animal is not claimed by and released to the owner or purchased as a pet, the animal control officer shall cause such dog or other animal to be mercifully euthanized by a licensed veterinarian or disposed of as the state veterinarian may direct. 
(Ord. of 1-3-77; Ord. of 12-7-87, § 3; Code of 1985, § 7-5; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-15. - Penalties. 
Except as otherwise specified, any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction, up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per day per offense. 
(Ord. of 1-3-77; Code of 1985, § 7-7; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 6; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-16. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. If any section, sentence, clause of phrase of the chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clause, and phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part. 
(Code of 1985, § 7-7.1; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 7; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-17. - Humane commission. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby created a humane commission consisting of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of alders. No more than five (5) of these members shall be affiliated with any one (1) political party. All such members shall be and shall during the term of office remain residents of the city. Three (3) of the members first appointed shall serve for one (1) year, two (2) shall serve for two (2) years, and two (2) shall serve for three (3) years. Upon the expiration of such initial terms, members shall be appointed to serve three (3) year terms. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. Each member shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. Members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of her/his official duties. The members shall elect from among their numbers a chairperson, who shall serve for a term of one (1) year. All actions taken by the commission shall be by majority vote, with four (4) members constituting a quorum. 
(b)  Powers and duties. The humane commission shall have the power to adopt such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the state statutes, the City Charter, or other ordinances, as in its judgment are required for the operation of the animal shelter and related activities, and for the proper care and treatment of animals within the city limits. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as city ordinances and shall be enforced in the same manner after being published at least four (4) times in a newspaper printed and circulated in the city. 
(c)  Chief of police. The chief of police or his or her designee shall be secretary (ex-officio) to the humane commission and shall attend its meetings. The chief of police shall keep the humane commission apprised of the activities of the animal shelter and shall render an annual report to the commission and to the mayor on or before March 1 of each succeeding year. Subject to the approval of the humane commission, and in accordance with those articles of the city charter pertaining to personnel, the chief of police shall appoint and remove employees of the animal shelter and shall be responsible for the employees' efficiency, discipline, and good conduct. The chief of police shall annually prepare a budget for the animal shelter activity, subject to review and approval of the humane commission. The chief of police shall be responsible for the care and custody of all property, including materials, supplies, and equipment used by the animal shelter activity. 
(d)  Authority to accept grants and gifts of property. The humane commission is authorized and empowered to accept, receive, and administer any and all grants or gifts from any source, public or private, including without limitation the municipal government, state government, or federal government, and any devises, legacies, or gifts of real or personal property for the purpose of carrying out its power and activities under this section. Any such funds, and any bonds, mortgages, and securities so donated shall be deposited with the city controller and held in a special account established for the humane commission's activities. 
The controller shall give bond for the safekeeping thereof, provided that the humane commission, or any trustee so designated by a donor thereof, may administer any funds or property donated in trust, and in such case the humane commission or other trustee so designated shall have all the powers accorded to fiduciaries under state law. 
(e)  Budget and funds. The budget and funds for the humane commission and for the animal shelter, its facilities, employees, programs, materials, supplies, and other related items, shall be within the jurisdiction of the city police department. 
(Ord. of 3-26-80, sects. 1-4; Code of 1985, § 7-8; Ord. of 5-28-91; Ord. of 10-19-92; Ord. No. 1400, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Secs. 7-18—7-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOG BREEDING 
 
Sec. 7-31. - Breeders permit required. 
(a)  Effective July 1, 2019, any person wanting to breed a dog within the city must obtain a breeding permit from the animal control division of the city police department prior to breeding his or her dog. No person, as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall breed any dog, at any place within the city without a breeder's permit. "Breeding" shall be deemed to have occurred upon the production of offspring, whether such offspring result from sexual activity or artificial insemination and whether such sexual activity was intentional or the result of improper confinement. 
(b)  Each completed application for a breeder's permit must be submitted to the animal control division of the city police department. 
Each application for a breeding permit shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and no breeding permit shall be issued until the application fee is paid. 
(d)  Each breeding permit is issued to the person, not the dog, and, therefore, a breeding permit cannot be sold, purchased, traded, or otherwise conveyed from the person to whom the breeding permit was initially granted. 
(e)  No breeding permit shall be granted to a person until the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant has submitted the appropriate forms required by the supervisor of animal control for a breeding permit. 
(2)  The applicant has an indoor space and outdoor space in which to breed the dogs and raise the offspring that will contain the dogs, as well as, provide safe, sanitary, and humane conditions, appropriate for breeding a specific breed, which satisfies all applicable provisions of the City Code of Ordinances and state animal welfare laws. 
(3)  The animal control division has evaluated the physical and behavioral characteristics regarding the suitability of the dogs to be bred. 
(4)  The dogs that the application identifies as being used for breeding must be microchipped. 
(f)  The animal control division may deny any application for a breeding permit if it finds that one (1) or more of the following has occurred: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to appropriately license the pet to be bred. 
(2)  The applicant has a history of allowing dogs to run loose or escape, has otherwise been found to be neglectful, has had a dog identified as a nuisance, or has previously been determined to have violated the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The applicant has applied for a breeding permit within the last ten (10) months. 
(Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-32. - Inspection of premises to be used for breeding purposes. 
(a)  The animal control officer or such designee shall inspect the premises to be used for breeding purposes and conduct the evaluation set forth in the above section. The animal control officer or a designee shall give the applicant twenty-four-hour notice of the inspection and shall conduct such inspection at a reasonable time when the applicant or a representative is present. 
(b)  If the applicant refuses to allow the animal control officer or a designee to conduct such inspection or cannot be contacted by the animal control officer or a designee to give notice of the inspection within two (2) weeks of an initial attempt, the application shall be denied. 
(1)  Up to one (1) year after issuing the breeding permit, the animal control officer or a designee shall have the option on one (1) or more occasions to inspect the premises being used for breeding purposes to ensure that the conditions required to receive a permit are continuing to be met. The animal control officer or a designee shall give the permit holder twenty-four-hour notice of the inspection and shall conduct such inspection at a reasonable time when the permit holder or a representative is present. 
(2)  If the permit holder refuses to allow the animal control officer or a designee to conduct such inspection or cannot be contacted by the animal control officer or a designee to give notice of the inspection within two (2) weeks of its initial attempt, the animal control officer or a designee will determine that the permit holder is conducting breeding activities in violation of this chapter, and the breeding permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-33. - Litter permits. 
(a)  Breeding permit holders must apply for and obtain a litter permit for every litter produced by the breeding permit dogs. Breeding permit holders should apply to the animal control division of the city police department for a litter permit, before the dogs are bred. A litter permit application shall be accompanied by a litter permit fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A litter permit shall be applied and granted for every litter to be produced by any animal owned, held, or maintained by the permit holder. 
(b)  In the event that a permit holder or an individual breeder fails to apply for a permit, before the female dog enters its gestation period, the animal control division may issue the litter permit without penalty if it determines that the failure to acquire a permit was not in bad faith. 
(c)  No more than two (2) litter permits will be issued to breeding permit holders within one (1) years' time unless the permit holder also holds a kennel license under C.G.S. Section 22-342. 
(d)  All puppies from each litter shall be microchipped. 
(Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Sec. 7-34. - Enforcement of breeding and litter permit requirements. 
(a)  Any person found breeding dogs without the required breeding and/or litter permits shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Each dog involved in illegal breeding activities in violation of the preceding sections shall be impounded and held at the city animal shelter or another suitable boarding facility until any applicable licenses are issued or the applicable fines have been paid. The owner of the involved dog shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or the state maximum fine whichever is higher and shall be responsible for all boarding fees, while the dog is impounded at the city animal shelter. 
(2)  Each person, who breeds a litter of puppies without a litter permit in violation of the preceding sections, shall be fined in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each puppy in the litter. 
(3)  The fines imposed under this chapter are in addition to any other fines that may be levied against the person under other ordinances pertaining to the illegal breeding of dogs. 
(b)  No dogs will be returned to any premises which are in violation of the zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1849 , 11-8-18)  
Chapter 9 - BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1401, adopted Jan. 3, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 9 in its entirety. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Regulation of use of private property on, near streets, sidewalks, squares. 
(a)  Erecting fences. Every owner of a lot of land abutting upon any street in the city shall have a suitable fence erected and maintained on the line of such abutting property when the board of aldermen or other city authority or his/her designee(s) orders the owner(s) to do so. The fence shall be constructed of rails, boards or other statutorily prescribed materials. The director of the department of public works, the director of the Livable City Initiative and their designees are hereby authorized to erect such a fence when the owner(s) neglects to comply with such order, and the owner(s) shall be charged with the costs of erection. 
(b)  Rainwater spouts, drains. No person shall construct, or have a rainwater leader, spout or drain constructed or maintained from a roof, awning, marquee, canopy or mansard, which discharges upon, over or above any street or sidewalk in the city. 
(c)  Window washing. No person shall wash the windows of any store or mercantile building adjoining the sidewalks in such a manner that causes water to splash or flow on or over the sidewalk. No person shall wash the sidewalk in front of the lot on which such store or building stands except between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. 
(d)  Cellar, basement stairs. When any entrance or flight of steps that descends immediately from or near the line of any street or sidewalk into a cellar or basement of any building is deemed unsafe, it shall be enclosed with a permanent railing on each side, or other means in which to protect the public's safety. The director of the department of public works shall have the authority to approve of whatever means is used to ensure the safe travel of the public over the right of way. 
(e)  Cellar doors, trap doors, coal holes. The upper surface of every coal hole cover, and all iron plates on cellar doors or trap doors in any sidewalk in said city, shall be made and kept roughed and studded over at all times, so as to prevent danger or injury to pedestrians. No person shall construct any cellar door or cellar doorway in any sidewalk, or projecting into any sidewalk, beyond the street line in the city, without the board of aldermen's permission, which can be revoked at any time. The top of cellar doors shall have no obstructions. The director of the department of public works shall approve the material and construction of such cellar doors. No person shall leave any trap door or coal hole open in any city sidewalk. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 732, 733, 753, 766-768, 770, 774; Code of 1985, § 9-1; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-2. - Encroachments on streets. 
(a)  Every person who places any goods, wares or merchandise for show or sale upon any street or sidewalk in the city without a permit shall be guilty of an offense, and shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each offense. Each day a person, firm or corporation fails to remove his/her goods, wares and merchandise from a street or sidewalk after being notified by the director of the department of public works or his/her designee to remove the same shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, no goods, wares, merchandise or other thing shall project into any street beyond the street line. 
(1)  Fire escapes. The building inspector and fire inspector shall regulate all fire escapes in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(2)  Signs. No sign shall be made of wood or combustible material if it is higher than thirty-five (35) feet above the ground. A wooden or metal stationary sign that is attached to a building, in which its lowest part is not less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk, may extend into the street beyond the street line at a distance not exceeding three (3) feet from such line, provided that the director of the department of public works approves of its construction and secured position. For the purposes of this section, a stationary sign is one that does not swing or turn. 
(3)  Clocks. A clock without names or advertisements painted or affixed to it, that does not exceed three (3) feet in diameter, in which its lowest part is not less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk, may be attached to an iron post placed next to and along the inside of the curbstone, provided that the director of the department of public works approves of its construction, secured position and manner of operation. 
(c)  Banners. 
(1)  Application. Before a banner is suspended across any street or sidewalk, the requesting person or entity must obtain a permit from the director of the department of traffic and parking. Before the director issues a permit, the petitioner must provide him/her with a statement describing the purpose for said banner(s), the wording and/or logos to be displayed on said banner(s), the location, material of said banner(s) and date(s) of display. The banner(s) shall give notice only of qualifying events. 
(2)  Qualifying events. For the purposes of this section, a "qualifying event" means one that is: 
(i)  Open to the general public; 
(ii)  Sponsored by at least one (1) nonprofit agency; and 
(iii)  An event other than a meeting or rally. 
No more than eight (8) square feet or ten (10) percent of said banner, whichever is less, shall be covered by for-profit names, representations or logos. 
(3)  Insurance. Every person, agency or organization shall supply the department of traffic and parking with a public liability insurance policy before suspending a banner. The policy shall specifically protect the full interest of the City of New Haven against any and all loss cost and damages, in limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)/two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for bodily injury, and in limits of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damages. The insurance policy shall be issued by an insurance company authorized to write public liability insurance in Connecticut. The petitioner and his/her successor(s) and assign(s) shall maintain the policy in force as long as the banner(s) remain suspended over city streets. 
(4)  Administrative procedures. Each application shall be immediately referred to the city plan department for an advisory report. This report shall concern each banner's prospective location and public nature, and be rendered within ten (10) working days of its referral. The director of traffic and parking shall establish administrative procedures for the implementation of this subsection. 
Pole and street banners must comply with the following construction standards: 
(i)  Material: The material for banner assembly shall be nylon reinforced vinyl banner fabric not less than sixteen (16) ounces per square yard. Thread shall be nylon same as Mil-T-7807 (Federal Standards V-T-295 Type II size E). 
(ii)  Construction: Banner edges shall be trimmed per Federal Standard stitching Class EFA using a double row of locking stitch type 301. Brass grommets shall be three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch ID, spaced every eighteen (18) inches apart on the top and bottom edges. Corner brass grommets shall not be less than one (1) inch from the edges. Air vents shall be installed per the city standard drawing (Typical Detail Street and Pole Banner, City of New Haven Department of Engineering, Feb. 22, 1999, Drawing No. STD-NH-30). 
The department of traffic and parking shall reserve the right to make final determinations of all banner locations and methods of suspension as required for public safety and traffic. 
The department of traffic and parking shall notify each alderman within whose ward such proposed banner shall be placed of each application. 
(5)  Time of display. Generally, banners for given events may be displayed for up to two (2) weeks. However, the department of traffic and parking may, at its discretion, extend such display for an additional two (2) weeks per event. An additional fee will be charged for such an extension. 
(6)  Fees. The director of the department of traffic and parking shall provide for the collection of appropriate fees pursuant to this subsection, and shall generally conform to the informational and record keeping requirements of this Code. A fee as set out in the Licenses and Permits chapter of this Code will be charged per banner for each event, and for each two-week extension relating to an event, shall be charged. 
Exception: No banner fee shall be charged if the event being advertised on the banner will be free and open to the public, and if the sole sponsor of the event is a non-profit New Haven community-based organization. The proceeds from the collection of said fees shall be applied first to the costs incurred by the department of traffic and parking in putting up said banners. 
(7)  Penalty. Any person, agency or organization that violates this section will be assessed a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code, and be foreclosed from applying for and receiving a permit to display banner(s) for one (1) year. 
(8)  Reporting. Pursuant to this Code, the department of traffic and parking shall provide information pertaining to the number of banners requested, the number of banners approved, and the total fees collected pursuant to this section in its annual report within the annual city budget document. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 740, 741; Ord. of 8-1-83, § 1; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 1; Ord. of 11-21-83, § 2; Ord. of 12-15-83, § 1; Ord. of 6-18-84; Code of 1985, § 9-2 (c)(1)—(c)(6); Ord. of 10-17-88, § 3; Ord. of 1-3-89, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 4-23-90, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 4; Ord. of 5-30-01; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-3. - Requirements for awning supports. 
All posts fixed in any street for the purpose of supporting any awning, and the railing crossing the same, shall be made of iron. The post shall not exceed four (4) inches in diameter, and be placed next to and along the inside of the curbstone. The cross rail, which is extended to support the awning, shall be at least eight (8) feet and no more than ten (10) feet in height above the sidewalk. The cross rail shall be strongly secured to the upright posts. 
(Code of 1928, § 739; Code of 1985, § 9-2.1; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-4. - Outdoor swimming pools to be fenced. 
(a)  All outdoor private swimming pools that have been operated and maintained before the effective date of this section shall be provided with barriers that comply with the law in effect at the time of installation. 
(b)  All outdoor private swimming pools that are installed after the enactment date of this section shall be provided with a barrier that complies with the State Building Code in effect at the time of the installation. 
(Ord. of 7-12-65; Code of 1985, § 9-2.2; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-5. - House numbers—Required; assignment by the director of the department of public works. 
The director of the department of public works or his/her designee shall assign serial numbers at regular intervals to all buildings, parts of buildings and house lots fronting on any street, alley or public court in the city. All odd numbers are to be assigned on the easterly or northerly side, and all even numbers are to be assigned on the westerly or southerly side. The office of city engineer shall keep all such numbers on record on maps kept for that purpose, which will be open for public inspection. 
(Code of 1928, § 781; Code of 1985, § 9-3; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-6. - Same—Notice of assigned numbers to property owners; installations. 
After the director of the department of the department of public works or his/her designee assigns house numbers, he/she shall mail notice of the assigned number(s) to the property owners or their agents and its occupants. The owners, agents or occupants shall affix the assigned number(s) to said property, or to an appurtenant object of it. All assigned numbers shall be at least three (3) inches high, and so placed as to be legible from the highway. No certificate of occupancy will be issued for a new structure until the address number has been so installed on the front of the building. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 282, 783; Code of 1985, § 9-4; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-7. - Same—Penalty for failure to install. 
Each owner or occupant of any building, or part thereof, and his/her agent, who fails to affix the number assigned by the director of the department of public works or his/her designee for sixty (60) days, or who affixes or retains a contrary number to the same for more than one (1) day, shall be guilty of an offense. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each offense. Each day thereafter that a person fails to comply with such directions, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code of 1928, § 784; Code of 1985, § 9-5; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-8. - Building lines. 
(a)  Required. Whenever any new street is laid out, or the lines of any existing street are changed, the board of aldermen shall establish or designate building lines for said street. Until such line is so established, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or to place, or cause any building or structure to be erected or placed, upon the property abutting said street. 
(b)  Effect; procedure. Whenever any building line has been established in any street, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place, or cause to be erected or placed, any building, structure, or portion thereof closer to the established street line. Likewise, it shall be unlawful for a person to act in such manner with regard to street lines for which a petition is pending. The building inspector shall not issue a permit for the erection of any such building, structure, or portion thereof nearer to the street than said line or proposed line. In order to establish a proposed building line, or effectuate a change, an applicant must submit a petition to the city plan commission for its review and approval. The commission's recommendation is transmitted to and reviewed by the board of aldermen. Upon said board's approval, the petitioner would bring the petition and the approval of the city plan commission to the building official. This section does not apply to petitions pertaining to proposed building lines that have been pending for a period exceeding four (4) months. 
(c)  Penalty. Every person who violates this section shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each offense. Each week that the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 779, 780; Code of 1985, § 9-6; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 9-9—9-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING DIVISION OF THE LIVABLE CITY INITIATIVE 
 
Sec. 9-41. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established the building division of the Livable City Initiative, hereinafter referred to in this article as the "building division." The Livable City Initiative is more fully described in this Code in the chapter entitled "Planning and Development." 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-21; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-42. - Powers and duties of division. 
The building division is authorized to engage in services related to building inspection and enforcement of the city as it pertains to the State Building Code including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Inspection services, administration and enforcement activities related to the building code, including plumbing, electrical and heating; 
(2)  Administration of zoning ordinances; 
(3)  Permit administration; and 
(4)  The performance of all other functions concerning property inspection and enforcement as they relate to construction or reconstruction, except for those functions exercised by the director of public health or fire marshal under federal, state or local laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-22; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-43. - Appointment of building official; administrative powers and duties. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 29-260, as amended from time to time, there shall be a building official, who is hereby designated as the deputy director of the building division of the Livable City Initiative, and hereinafter referred to in this article as the "building official". 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint the building official, who shall only be removed for cause. 
(c)  Each appointment shall be for a four (4) year term. 
(d)  The building official is responsible for the administration of the building division, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Personnel selection, supervision and management subject to restrictions of this chapter; 
(2)  Personnel training and development activities; 
(3)  Budget development and administration; 
(4)  Program planning, policy and execution; 
(5)  Oversight of office operations and procedures; and 
(6)  Other related administrative and managerial functions. 
(e)  The building official may appoint employees and staff, hire consultants with the approval of the appropriate entities, and purchase supplies, services, and construction necessary for the discharge of the office's duties within appropriations for those purposes. 
(a: Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-24; b—e: Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-23; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-44. - Building official—Other powers and duties. 
The building official is responsible for: 
(1)  The administration and enforcement of the State Building Code; 
(2)  All other duties required by federal and state law, or assigned by the director of the Livable City Initiative in accordance with local law; and 
(3)  Specialized non-technical inspection functions related to supporting programs of other city entities. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-25; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-45. - Zoning unit. 
There is established a zoning unit in the building division of the Livable City Initiative. This unit is responsible for: 
(1)  The administration of zoning ordinances; and 
(2)  Coordination with other city entities regarding matters of zoning review. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Ord. of 12-7-87, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-26(c); Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-46. - Establishment of board of appeals. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 29-266, as amended from time to time, a municipal board of appeals (hereinafter referred to as "the board") is hereby established. It is composed of five (5) members, appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. Board members shall have the qualifications required by the State Building Code, serve without compensation, and be resident electors in the City of New Haven. Board members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred within the board's appropriations. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-27; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-47. - Municipal board of appeals—Duties. 
The municipal board of appeals shall address all appeals properly brought before it as they relate to the State Building Code. The board shall comply with the procedures set forth in this code. An aggrieved party can properly appeal a decision of the building official to the board in circumstances including, but not limited to: 
(1)  When the building official rejects or refuses to approve the proposed mode or manner of construction, or the materials to be used in the erection or alteration of a building or structure; 
(2)  When it is claimed that the code does not apply, or that an equally good or more desirable form of construction can be employed in a specific case; 
(3)  When it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the code and regulations have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, and the building official or other authorized person has partially or wholly refused issuance of the permit; or 
(4)  When the building official issues a written order under Conn. General Statutes section 29-261(c) as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 9-28; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-48. - Demolition of unsafe buildings. 
(a)  If the building official finds an unsafe condition, he/she shall serve a written notice on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure. This notice shall describe the condition deemed unsafe, and specify the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate it, or require the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. The building official shall have discretion to determine whether the structure should be rehabilitated or demolished. An "unsafe condition" shall be deemed as one that is dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involves illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance. This includes all structures or existing equipment which are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe. Notice shall be served in compliance with the State Building Code. 
(b)  Once the above notice is issued, and the person served with such notice has refused or neglected to comply with the requirements, the building official shall determine whether such structure should be demolished or rehabilitated and pursue such action. 
(c)  When the building official finds that there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure, or any part thereof, which endangers life, or when any structure or part of it has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or structure, the building official is authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate such structure, and shall cause a notice in conformance to the State Building Code to be posted at each entrance to such structure. The building official may cause the demolition of such structure or any part thereof. 
(Code of 1985, § 9-28.1; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 1; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-49. - Recovery for abatement of nuisances; liens on real estate and fire insurance proceeds. 
Whenever the city is required to inspect, repair, demolish, remove or, to the extent allowed by law, otherwise dispose of any real estate in order to secure it or make it safe, the condition of the underlying defect resulting in such action shall be deemed to be a public nuisance that is detrimental to the human life and public welfare, and is hereby prohibited in accordance with Conn. General Statutes section 7-148(7)(E) as amended from time to time. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 49-73b, as amended from time to time, the city may file a lien in accordance with Conn. General Statutes section 49-34, as amended from time to time, and recover any expenses relating to the abatement from the real estate owner. If the property owner fails to reimburse the city for such expenses, the city may subsequently foreclose on said lien. Insurance proceeds shall be subject to said lien in accordance with Conn. General Statutes section 49-73b as amended from time to time. 
(Code of 1985, § 9-28.2; Ord. of 12-21-98; Ord. of 6-7-99; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-50. - Delay of demolition of historic resources. 
(a)  Title, authority and purpose: 
(1)  This section shall be known as the city's "Delay of Demolition Ordinance" as is herein referred to as "this section." 
(2)  This section is adopted in accordance with Conn. General Statutes sections 29-406 to 29-408 as amended from time to time. 
(3)  This section is designed to further the preservation, rehabilitation and reuse of historic resources to promote the city's cultural, economic, social and general welfare, and improve property values in all districts. This section is specifically intended to provide adequate time for all parties to consider and put forth appropriate development alternatives to demolition of such resources where they are not otherwise protected. 
(b)  Review process. 
(1)  No person shall demolish any building, structure or part thereof without obtaining a demolition permit from the building official or his/her designee. The building official or his/her designee shall review and determine whether a permit may be issued in accord with this section, or such other ordinances as may restrain issuance of such permit. 
(2)  A building, structure or part thereof which is proposed to be demolished is subject to delay of demolition if it is listed in any of the following: 
(i)  Historic resources inventory; 
(ii)  List of individual properties on the National Register of Historic Places; or 
(iii)  A contributing property located within a National Register Historic District. 
If it is determined that the proposed demolition is subject to delay, the building official or his/her designee shall inform the applicant in writing that a waiting period of ninety (90) days from the date of receipt of the application will be imposed before granting the demolition permit, in accord with Conn. General Statutes section 29-406(b) as amended from time to time. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to a building, structure, or part thereof, if: 
(i)  An authorized federal, state or local official has ordered demolition because of a threat to public health or safety; 
(ii)  Its demolition has been specifically considered and approved within the following public procedures, which must include at least one (1) public hearing, and an application must have been filed indicating that a specific notice of an intention to demolish was given: 
1.  It is a part of a project or planned development district containing a specific list of properties to be demolished, as approved by the board of aldermen, redevelopment agency or city plan commission; or 
2.  It is part of a planned development unit containing a specific list of properties to be demolished, as approved by the board of zoning appeals. 
(iii)  It is a non-documented outbuilding or ancillary structure located on a property where the primary structure is included in a document listed in subsection (b)(2) above; or 
(iv)  It is located in a local historic district, where a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained in accord with section 54 of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended from time to time. 
(4)  Any applicant for the demolition permit shall give written notice to abutting property owners, and those individuals and parties on the delay of demolition notification list, which will be furnished by the city plan department. Such notice must be given within ten (10) days of the filing of the application for such permit. Additionally, the applicant must post an on-site sign as specified below. 
(i)  In accordance with Conn. General Statutes section 29-407, as amended from time to time, the applicant shall provide written notice of intent to demolish, on a form to be furnished by the city plan department. This notice shall be given to each abutting property owner at his/her last address according to the tax records of the City of New Haven. Notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. In order for the demolition permit application to be considered complete, a copy of the return certified mail receipt shall be furnished to the city plan department. 
(ii)  The applicant shall provide written notice of intent to demolish by regular mail to individuals and parties on the demolition notification list furnished by the city plan department. 
(iii)  The notice of intent to demolish shall state that a request for a permit has been filed, the date of the filing, the location of the property, the identity of the property owner(s), and a statement that the application is on file with the building division of the Livable City Initiative and is available for inspection. 
(5)  Sign to be posted: The city plan department shall furnish the applicant with a notice of intent to demolish sign. The applicant shall post the sign in a conspicuous place on site that is viewable from a public street. The posting shall be done within ten (10) days following the filing of a permit request. The sign shall be posted for the entire ninety (90) day period from the date of the demolition permit application. 
(6)  Certification of notification and posting required: 
(i)  In order for the demolition permit application to be considered complete, the applicant shall certify that notice of intent to demolish has been furnished, and the applicable sign has been posted in accordance with this section's requirements. 
(ii)  If the certification required above is not filed with the city plan department within fourteen (14) calendar days of the initial filing of the demolition permit application, the building official shall deem the filing incomplete and deny the application. A new application may be filed. 
(c)  Delay of demolition notification list to be maintained: 
(1)  The city plan department shall maintain a list of parties who have made a written request to receive notices of demolition permit applications. The notification list will remain in effect for one (1) year commencing each January. 
(2)  The city plan department shall notify parties by November 30th of each year to file a written request to receive such notices, which will be maintained on the notification list. The request must contain the name and mailing address to which notices are to be sent. In order to be maintained on the notification list, a person must annually submit his/her request to the city plan department before December 31st. 
(d)  Violation and fines; lapse of permit: 
(1)  Besides other lawfully authorized penalties and remedies, each violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code, with each day of such violation constituting a separate offense. 
(2)  If demolition is not commenced within six (6) months after issuance of a permit to demolish, the building official shall declare the permit null and void. 
(e)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence or other portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the viability of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Code of 1985, § 9-29; Ord. of 10-16-89; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 9-51. - Anti-blight and property maintenance ordinance. 
Declaration of Policy. 
This section is to be known as the Anti-Blight and Property Maintenance Ordinance and is enacted and authorized pursuant to Conn. General Statutes, Section 7-148(c)(7)(H)(xv), as amended from time to time. 
It is hereby found and declared that a large number of real properties containing blighted lots and blighted buildings exist within the City of New Haven, and that the continued existence of such blighted lots and buildings contributes to the decline of neighborhoods. 
It is further found that these blighted lots and buildings adversely affect the city's economic well-being, and are inimical to the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents. 
It is further found that there are many instances where property maintenance of real properties in the City of New Haven is deficient or lacking leading to progressive deterioration of such properties and the creation of blighted conditions. Accordingly, it is in the best interests of the citizens of the City of New Haven that the city set minimum standards for property maintenance so as to assure that properties within the city be maintained in conformity with such standards and so as to assure that none of these structures and properties will deteriorate and adversely affect their surrounding neighborhoods. 
It is found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration, certain structures and properties have the further effect of creating blighted conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the expenditures of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate the same. By reason of timely regulations and restrictions, as herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and neighborhood and property values may thereby be maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced, and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Blighted shall mean deteriorating, in a state of ill repair, filthy or decaying. 
(2)  Building official shall mean the building official as defined in Conn. General Statutes, Section 29-260, as amended from time to time. 
(3)  Capable individual shall mean a person that can be reasonably expected to perform maintenance of a building and/or yard work around a property or premises. This shall include children above sixteen (16) years of age who is not a disabled individual as defined herein. 
(4)  City shall mean the City of New Haven. 
(5)  Dilapidated shall mean a building or structure or part thereof that would not receive a certificate of occupancy if it were applied for. 
(6)  Director shall mean the Executive Director of the Livable City Initiative, or any successor agency to the Livable City Initiative. 
(7)  Disabled individual shall mean, in the case of an owner-occupied residence, an individual who has a disability meeting the definitions for a mental or physical disability as defined under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and does not have other household members capable of providing the necessary maintenance, nor the financial resources sufficient to hire someone to provide the necessary maintenance. 
(8)  Dwelling, dwelling unit or unit shall mean any space within a building that is or can be occupied or rented by or to a single person or entity for his/her/its sole use, and is intended to be a single and distinct space. 
(9)  Elderly individual shall mean, in the case of an owner-occupied residence, an individual over the age of sixty-five (65), who does not have a household member capable of providing the necessary maintenance, nor the financial resources sufficient to hire someone to provide the necessary maintenance. 
(10)  Enforcement officer(s) shall mean an employee or employees of the city designated by the mayor to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(11)  Exempt property shall mean any city-owned property, and any building or structure undergoing remodeling, restoration, repair or renovation under a current building permit, provided that the violations will be corrected thereby and that the building official determines that the work is proceeding in a reasonably expeditious timeframe. 
(12)  Hearing officer(s) shall mean the anti-blight and property maintenance hearing officer(s) designated by the mayor to hear and adjudicate appeals from citations for violation(s) of this ordinance. 
(13)  Livable City Initiative shall mean the city's Livable City Initiative, or any successor agency to the Livable City Initiative, as established in this Code. 
(14)  Low-income individual shall mean, in the case of an owner-occupied residence, an individual, or when more than one person resides on the premises, a family unit, that has an income below the highest level of income established by the State of Connecticut's Elderly Tax Relief Program. This level is the upper limit of step 5 as set forth in the Connecticut General Statutes, Section 12-170aa(c). It is immaterial that a person is not elderly with regards to this section because the reference to Section 12-170aa(c) is only for the purpose of providing a guideline with regard to income levels for this section. 
(15)  Mayor shall mean the mayor of the City of New Haven. 
(16)  Owner shall mean any owner, agent, tenant or person in control of real property situated in the city. 
(17)  Real property or premises shall mean: 
(i)  Any dwelling or dwelling unit including one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, whether vacant or occupied; 
(ii)  Any lot, plot or parcel of land, whether vacant or occupied; 
(iii)  Any building of non-dwelling use, including commercial properties, whether vacant or occupied; 
(iv)  Any mixed use, commercial and residential building, whether vacant or occupied; 
(v)  Any accessory structure accessory to any building, whether vacant or occupied; and 
(vi)  Any apartments, boardinghouses, group homes, lodging homes, rooming houses, tenement houses or dormitories, or other similar buildings, whether vacant or occupied. 
(b)  Prohibition on creating or maintaining anti-blight violations and/or property maintenance violations. No person, firm or corporation, including any owner of real property within the city shall cause or allow any such real property or premises to exist or be created or maintained in a manner that constitutes an anti-blight violation and/or a property maintenance violation as defined in this section. 
(c)  Anti-blight violations. The following conditions existing on any real property within the city shall constitute anti-blight violations under this section: 
(1)  It is determined by the building official or by health department reports that existing conditions pose a serious or immediate danger to the community (i.e. a life-threatening condition, or a condition which poses a health or safety risk to the public). 
(2)  It is becoming dilapidated as documented by the building division of the Livable City Initiative's housing code inspection reports. 
(3)  It is attracting illegal activity as documented in police department reports. 
(4)  It is a fire hazard as determined by the fire marshal, or as documented in fire department reports. 
(5)  It constitutes a health or sanitary problem, as determined by the health director. 
(6)  It contains unauthorized storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish, litter or refuse of any kind; the parking of inoperable vehicles (unless the premises is a legally licensed junkyard) or the presence of any inoperable machinery and equipment. 
(7)  It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with the lawful use and enjoyment of other space within the building, or of other premises within the vicinity of the building, structure or lot, as documented by complaints or cancellation of insurance on nearby properties. 
(d)  Property maintenance violations. 
(1)  Property maintenance violations shall mean the violation of the following standards with respect to lots or parcels: 
(i)  All premises shall be graded, drained, kept free of persistent standing water and maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to prevent the development of stagnant ponds. 
(ii)  No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or standing, and the baskets, carts or wagons shall be collected as often as necessary and removed to an appropriate enclosure intended for such purpose or to the interior of the building or buildings from which they were taken. 
(iii)  All fences shall be maintained. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting as needed, removal or covering of graffiti, and the replacement or repair of fences, which may become in disrepair. 
(iv)  All landscaping shall be maintained so that lawns, hedges, bushes and trees shall be kept neatly and free from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same may have a tendency to depreciate adjoining property. The maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, the replacement of trees and shrubs, which may die or otherwise be destroyed. Grass, weeds or similar growths shall not reach a height greater than one (1) foot on any premises. Front yards shall not be allowed to deteriorate into unattended bare, dirt patches; 
(v)  The planting strip fronting the premises shall be maintained in a safe condition, neat, mowed as necessary, and free of litter, poison ivy, ragweed, and other noxious plant. 
(vi)  Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall be maintained to afford safe passage under normal use and weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be filled and necessary repairs and replacement accomplished. All off-street parking facilities shall be swept as often as necessary in the determination of the enforcement officer. 
(vii)  Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, and shall be maintained in a manner that will prevent accumulations of trash, garbage, litter, debris and rubbish. The owner of the property shall maintain the premises litter-free, and shall remove discarded or inoperative appliances, furnishings or machinery. 
(viii)  All signs exposed to the public view shall be maintained in good repair. Excessively weathered or faded signs shall be removed or put into good repair. A non-operative or broken electrical or other sign shall be repaired or removed. 
(ix)  Trash receptacles shall be emptied on a regular basis. 
(x)  All places of business that serve food or drink to patrons (e.g., restaurants, cafes, bars, etc.) shall maintain receptacle(s) for the disposal of cigarettes on their premises and shall empty the receptacle(s) on a regular basis. 
(2)  Property maintenance violations shall also mean the violation of the following standards with respect to buildings and structures: 
(i)  The exterior of buildings and structures shall be maintained so that it is not dilapidated or decaying, not open to the elements, and so that its appearance shall not have a tendency to depreciate adjoining property. The following factors may be considered in determining whether a building or structure is being maintained: missing or boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor; exterior walls which contain holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials or the presence of graffiti, or exterior walls which are not properly surface-coated to prevent deterioration; siding that is seriously damaged or missing; foundation walls which contain open cracks or leaks or are structurally faulty; overhang extensions, including but not limited to canopies, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts which contain rust or other decay; chimneys and other appurtenances which are in a state of disrepair; and insect screens which contain tears or ragged edges. 
(ii)  The foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good repair, free of graffiti and in structurally sound condition. 
(iii)  Foundations, floors, and walls shall be in good painted or finished condition without peeling. 
(iv)  Exterior walls (including doors and windows), roofs, and the areas around doors, windows, chimneys and other parts of a building shall be maintained as to keep water from entering the building and to prevent undue heat loss from occupied areas. Materials which have been damaged or show evidence of dry rot or other deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and refinished in a workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and other parts of the building shall be free from, loose and unsecured objects and material. Such objects and materials shall be removed, repaired or replaced. 
(v)  Buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect, vermin, pigeon and rodent harborage and infestation. 
(vi)  Buildings and structures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from health, safety and fire hazards. 
(vii)  All storefronts, both occupied and non-occupied, and their walls exposed to public view shall be kept in a good state of repair and free of graffiti. 
Property maintenance violations shall also include any conditions which unreasonably hinder the use of adjacent properties, block or interfere with the use of the public sidewalk and/or public or private street or right of way, or obstruct the sighting of any road sign, obstruct utility lines or other cables to or around the premises, or extend or infringe beyond the boundaries of the premises. 
Property maintenance violations shall also include situations in which the overall condition of the premises causes an unreasonable impact on the enjoyment of or value of neighboring properties as expressed by persistent complaints from adjoining and nearby property owners. 
Property maintenance violations shall not include the violation of any of the above standards when they exist on exempt property. 
(e)  Penalty for violation. Violation of this section shall result in a fine up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) or the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each day that said violation continues. 
(f)  Enforcement. The director and/or other official designated by the mayor shall be charged with supervising the enforcement of this ordinance. The mayor shall also designate an enforcement officer or officers to carry out the enforcement of this section. It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this section and any rules or regulations promulgated under this section. The enforcement officer shall undertake inspections of complaints for the purpose of documenting violations of this section. The enforcement officer may order any owner who violates this ordinance to abate such violation, and shall be hereby authorized and empowered to issue citations for violations of this section. The enforcement officer shall also be authorized and empowered to effectuate the removal or abatement of the anti-blight violation and/or property maintenance violation under the procedures set forth in this section. 
(g)  Inspections and investigations: reports. The enforcement officer shall initiate inspections and investigations and shall receive information and complaints, concerning violations of the provisions of this section. The enforcement officer shall provide the director with monthly written status reports indicating the number of complaints, violations identified, active and closed cases and other information as requested. 
(h)  Special consideration. Special consideration shall be given to any individual who is an elderly individual or a disabled individual, if such individual is elderly or disabled and no capable individual resides in the residence. In such cases, the enforcement officer may give such elderly individual or disabled individual additional time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to correct the violation, and at the expiration of any additional time granted by the enforcement officer, the director may grant such elderly individual or disabled individual additional time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to correct the violation. 
Where the owner of a premises where an anti-blight violation and/or property maintenance violation is found to be a low income individual under this section, the enforcement officer may give special consideration to such individual by providing additional time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to correct the violation, and at the expiration of any additional time granted by the enforcement officer, the director may grant such low income individual additional time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to correct the violation. 
However, in the case of an owner who is an elderly individual, a disabled individual or a low-income individual, if the violations have to do with lawn, brush, weeds and shrub maintenance or keeping the grounds free from rubbish and debris, or if the violations constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, neither the enforcement officer nor the director shall grant additional time to correct the violation. 
(i)  Notice of violation. The city shall serve a written notice to an owner of a premises of the violation(s) of this section by personal in-hand service or delivery, or by mailing such notice to the owner's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall direct the removal, correction or abatement of the violation within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the written notice and shall notify the owner that failure to remove, correct or abate the violation shall result in the issuance of a citation in accordance with this ordinance. Such notice shall further inform the owner that failure to remove, correct or abate the violation will result in fines being imposed which can be enforceable subsequently as a lien on the owner's property, and may be also converted into court judgments, or the city may cause the removal or abatement of the violation at the expense of the owner. 
(j)  Citation/Penalties. If the owner fails to remove, correct or abate the violation within ten (10) calendar days after receiving a notice of violation, as provided in subsection (i) above, the city shall serve a written civil citation on the owner of the premises. However, if the owner, within that ten (10) day period, demonstrates to the enforcement officer that he/she intends in good faith to rehabilitate or demolish the premises, or that the violation has occurred as a result of a casualty loss for which insuance is available, but the owner needs additional time to remove, correct or abate the violation, then the enforcement officer, in his/her discretion, may issue a written stay of the enforcement of the citation and the enforcement of any fines imposed against the owner. Said stay shall be expressly conditioned upon the rehabilitation or demolition of the premises within a specified period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days, unless the owner requests in writing to the director within the time specified by the enforcement officer that the stay should be extended for an additional period of time, in which case, the director may extend such stay in writing for an additional time not to exceed sixty (60) days. If the conditions of the stay have not been met within the specified time period, or the time period as it may be extended, as provided above, the stay will be terminated and all fines assessed against the owner shall be enforced against the owner in accordance with this section. 
The citation shall be served upon the owner by personal in-hand service or delivery, or by mailing such citation to the owner's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested. The civil citation shall provide the owner with the following information: 
(1)  The allegations made against him/her and the amount of the proposed fines per day of continued violation of the ordinance; 
(2)  That he/she may contest his/her liability before the city's duly appointed hearing officer by delivering written notice in person or by mail to said Hearing Officer c/o the Director, Livable City Initiative, City Hall, 165 Church Street, 3rd floor, New Haven, CT 06511 within ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt of the citation(s); 
(3)  That if he/she does not demand such a hearing within such ten (10) calendar days in accordance with this ordinance, he/she shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the hearing officer may assess a fine without further notice; 
(4)  That the city may file a lien against said real property in accordance with Conn. General Statutes, Section 7-148aa as amended from time to time, for the amount of any unpaid fine for an anti-blight violation and/or property maintenance violation imposed by the city in accordance with this section; 
(5)  That said lien may be enforced in the same manner as a property tax lien. Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes Section 7-148aa, as amended from time to time, any unpaid fine imposed pursuant to this citation hearing procedure shall constitute a lien upon the Real Property against which the fine was imposed from the date of the fine. The lien shall be continued, recorded, released and enforced as provided for by said statute. Such liens shall take precedence over all other liens and other encumbrances, except taxes, filed after July 1, 1997; 
(6)  That fines imposed may be converted to a court judgment for money damages with additional court cost imposed; and 
(7)  That in the case of violations which pose a danger to the public health, welfare and safety, the city may cause the conditions to be corrected, removed or abated at the expense of the owner, and that the amount of such costs for correction, removal or abatement may also become a lien against the owner's real property. 
(k)  Hearing officer. The mayor shall appoint one or more hearing officer(s), who shall not be a city employee, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section. Such hearing officer shall serve without pay. The mayor may remove any such hearing officer at any time for whatever reason he/she deems sufficient. 
(l)  Appeal; hearing procedure for citations. If an owner who is sent notice pursuant to Section (i) above wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine(s) admitted to, in person or by mail to the city by delivering it to the director. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any owner who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of receipt of the notice of violation provided for in subsection (i) above, shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated hearing officer shall certify such Owner's failure to respond to the enforcement officer. said enforcement officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fine(s) so provided for, and shall follow the procedures set forth in this ordinance for placing a lien on the real property, or obtaining a court judgment. 
Any owner who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, unless the owner requesting the hearing agrees to an earlier date. The hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. The city shall present at the hearing the original notice of violation, a certified copy of such notice, the violator's copy or a certified copy of the violator's copy issued by an enforcement officer, and such original or certified copy shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Connecticut General Statutes, Section 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The Enforcement Officer may, but is not required, to appear at the hearing, but shall be required to appear if the owner specifically requests the enforcement officer's presence. An owner who wishes to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing, and may present evidence on his/her behalf, or the owner may request that the hearing be conducted by mail, and may submit documents and copies of reports for the hearing officer's review. The hearing officer may grant a request for a hearing by mail, or may determine at any time (including after a hearing by mail has been granted and undertaken) that a hearing in person is necessary to fairly adjudicate the matter, and that the owner must appear in person at a hearing. If the enforcement officer is not able to attend the hearing, and his/her presence has not been specifically requested by the owner, a designated city official, other than the hearing officer and other than the enforcement officer, may present evidence on behalf of the city. 
If the owner fails to appear, or fails to request a hearing by mail within the timeframe set forth herein, the hearing officer may enter a default upon finding of proper notice and liability under applicable law. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form, and with such methods of proof as he/she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of the hearing. If the owner demonstrates that he/she intends to rehabilitate or demolish the premises, by the submission of documentation such as construction plans, permits and the availability of sufficient funds to pay for such work satisfactory to the hearing officer, then the hearing officer shall stay the matter and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. Said stay shall be expressly conditioned upon the rehabilitation or demolition of the premises within a specified period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, unless the director requests in writing to the hearing officer within the time specified by the hearing officer that the stay should be extended for an additional period of time, in which case, the hearing officer shall extend such stay for the additional time requested by the director. If the conditions of the stay have not been met within the specified time period, or the time period as it may be extended, as provided above, the hearing officer shall enter and assess the fines against the owner as provided in this ordinance retroactive to the date of the hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, the hearing officer shall dismiss the matter, and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. If he/she determines that the person is liable for the violation(s), the hearing officer shall forthwith enter and assess the fines against such owner, and levy such fines as provided for herein. The hearing officer shall forward a notice of assessment to the enforcement officer for further action. 
If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the enforcement officer shall send by first class mail a Notice of Assessment to the Owner found liable and shall file, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a certified copy of the Notice of Assessment with the Clerk of the Superior Court, Housing Session, 121 Elm Street, New Haven, CT 06510, together with the appropriate entry fee. The certified copy of the Notice of Assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such twelve (12) month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment, in the amount of such record of assessment with appropriate court costs against such owner in favor of the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of the General Statutes, the notice of Assessment, when entered as a court judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such owner. 
An owner against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this ordinance is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal must be instituted within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen the assessment, together with an entry fee with the Clerk of the Superior Court, Housing Session 121 Elm Street, New Haven, CT 06510, which shall entitle such person to a court hearing. 
(m)  Waiver of fines. The director shall waive and release fines and liens if the city acquires the premises. If the premises is purchased by a private third-party buyer, the director may also waive and release part or all of the fines and liens at the time of the sale of the premises, if in the director's opinion, the buyer has the financial ability and intention to immediately rehabilitate the premises, or the director may defer the enforcement of the fines until all rehabilitation work is completed to the satisfaction of the director. 
(n)  Fines collected. All funds collected by the city as fines through the civil citation process shall be deposited into an account to be administered by the director to be used for associated costs in enforcing and administering this ordinance (e.g., court fees, service of notices and citations, copying, postage, etc.). The account shall be a continuing or revolving account. 
(o)  Abatement by city when public health danger 
(1)  Notice to abate public health danger. In addition to the any other actions prescribed and specified in this section, the enforcement officer or other official designated by the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a written notice of public health violationn to the owner of a premises within the city to correct, remove or abate violations which are dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be served by in-hand service or delivery, or shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner at his/her last known address. 
(2)  Actions upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner so notified to correct, remove or abate suc violations which are dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the written notice provided for in subsection (1) above, or within ten (10) days after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the city because of the inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of the owner, the city may cause such abatement by city staff or an independent contractor engaged by the city of such violation(s) at the expense of the owner of the premises where such violation(s) exist. 
(3)  Conference granted to owner. Any owner notified under subsection (1) above shall be granted a conference with the director or his/her designee upon the written request of the owner within such ten (10) calendar day period. Such conference shall be granted as soon as practicable, but the conference shall in no way stay the required abatement of such violations and any accumulation of fines imposed. 
(4)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Upon completion of the abatement of such violation(s) by city staff or by an independent contractor engaged by the city to abate the violation(s), the director or his/her designee shall determine the actual cost of the abatement and shall bill the owner therefor. Upon the failure of the owner to pay the city the amount of such charge within thirty (30) days from the date of such bill, the director or his/her designee shall cause to be recorded in the land records of the city a sworn statement detailing the cost and expense incurred for the abatement work, the date the work was done and the location of the property upon which the work was done. The recordation of the sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property. 
(p)  Rules and regulations. The director may promulgate rules and regulations providing for the reasonable interpretation of the terms of this section, and for the day-to-day conduct of the investigation and enforcement under this section, so long as such rules and regulations do not exceed the scope of this section. 
(q)  Consistency with other enforcement methods. This section is intended to be enforced and applied in a manner consistent with other available administrative remedies for the enforcement of anti-blight violations and/or property maintenance violations, but is not intended to be exclusive of such other remedies, penalties or enforcement actions which may be available to the city. 
(Code of 1985, § 9-30; Ord. of 10-21-91, § 1; Ord. of 5-20-96, § 3; Ord. of 4-17-97; Ord. of 6-7-99; Ord. No. 1266, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1599, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 9-52. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this chapter or the application of such terms and provisions to persons or circumstances other than to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby; and each remaining term and provision hereof shall be deemed valid and be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1401, 1-3-06)  
Chapter 10 - BURIALS AND BURIAL GROUNDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1402, adopted Jan. 3, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 10 in its entirety. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Littering burial grounds. 
Every person who deposits, or causes any natural or artificial substance to be deposited, upon any private lot in any burial ground in the city without the lot owner's permission, or upon any public lot, or any alley, path, border or other part of said burial ground without the permission of the proper authority of the particular place of such deposit, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each offense. Failure or refusal to remove said deposit by the person making or causing it after being given lawful notice for such removal shall result in an offense, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Upon lawful notice, each day of neglect or refusal to remove said deposit shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code of 1928, § 455; Code of 1985, § 10-1; Ord. No. 1402, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 10-2. - Vehicles in burial grounds. 
No person shall operate or cause any vehicle to be operated in any burial ground in the city at a rate of speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour. Violation of this section shall constitute an offense upon conviction, and shall be punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each offense. 
(Code of 1928, § 457; Code of 1985, § 10-2; Ord. No. 1402, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 10-3. - Climbing or damaging fences, walls in burial grounds; damaging plants, monuments therein. 
Every person who climbs upon or over the fence or wall of any public or private burial ground in the city, or upon or over the wall or fence enclosing any lot in such cemetery, or who shall climb or stand upon any of the monuments in such cemetery, except in cases of necessity, or who willfully and maliciously marks, defaces, mutilates, destroys, removes or injures any wall, fence or gateway surrounding or within such burial ground, or any turf, tree, shrub, plant, vault, tomb, tombstone, monument or ornament in such burial ground, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Code of 1928, § 456; Code of 1985, § 10-3; Ord. No. 1402, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 10-4. - Desecration of cemetery. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 46a-58, as amended from time to time, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice to intentionally desecrate any cemetery on account of religion, national origin, alienage, color, race, sex, blindness or physical disability. For purposes of this section, "desecrate" means to mar, deface or damage as a demonstration of irreverence or contempt, and includes, but is not limited to, the placing of a burning cross or a simulation thereof on cemetery property. Such an offense shall be punishable up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1402, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1402, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 10-5. - Unauthorized burials. 
No entity shall bury or allow the use of any land as burial ground which the entity is prohibited from acquiring or holding by corporate grant or such amendment thereto. No person owning or leasing such lot in the prohibited land shall bury or allow the burial of any body in such land. For the purposes of this section, burial shall mean the placing of any body in a vault or tomb within or on any such prohibited land or ground. Every person or entity violating this section, or aiding, abetting or assisting in its violation shall be guilty of an offense, and shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per offense. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 459, 460; Code of 1985, § 10-5; Ord. No. 1402, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 10-6. - Burial of indigents and other persons by city. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 17b-131 as amended from time to time, when a person in the city or sent from the city to any licensed institution or state humane institution dies, or is found dead therein, and does not leave sufficient estate, or has no legally liable relative able to pay the cost of a proper funeral and burial, the Commissioner of Social Services shall give to such person a proper funeral and burial, and may pay a sum not exceeding the statutorily mandated amount as an allowance toward the funeral expenses of such deceased. The allowed sum is to be paid, upon submission of a proper bill, to the funeral director, cemetery or crematory, as the case may be. Such payment for funeral and burial expenses shall be reduced by: (1) the amount in any revocable or irrevocable funeral fund, (2) any prepaid funeral contract, (3) the face value of any life insurance policy owned by the decedent, and (4) contributions in excess of the amount authorized by state statute toward such funeral and burial expenses from all other sources including friends, relatives and all other persons, organizations, veterans and other benefit programs and other agencies. Any person burying or causing any such person to bury in violation of this section shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per offense. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66; Code of 1985, § 10-6; Ord. No. 1402, 1-3-06)  
Chapter 11 - CIVIL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 11 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
State Law reference— For provisions of state law relating to civil defense generally, see §§ 28-1—28-23 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Necessity for emergency management; coordination with other municipalities. 
Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from fire, flood, or other causes, and in order to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary: 
(a)  To establish an office of emergency management. 
(b)  To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other cities and towns of this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency management functions. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § I(1); Ord. of 12-4-89, § 1)  
Sec. 11-2. - Declaration of general purpose. 
It is further declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the city that all emergency management functions of this city be coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of the federal government, of this state, and of other states and localities, and of private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the city's manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur in this or other communities. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § I(2); Ord. of 12-4-89, § 2)  
Sec. 11-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(a)  Emergency management shall mean all activities, other than those for which military forces are primarily responsible, connected with the preparation and execution of measures for controlling or minimizing the effects of disasters caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or by fire, flood or other causes. 
(b)  Emergency management forces shall mean any organized personnel engaged in carrying out emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder. 
(c)  Mobile support unit shall mean an organization of emergency management forces created in accordance with the provisions of the state emergency management act to be dispatched by the mayor upon orders from the governor to supplement emergency management forces in a stricken or threatened area. 
(d)  State of emergency shall mean an emergency declared by the mayor, the governor of the state or other duly authorized authority in the event of a disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or by fire, flood or other causes, or in the event of the imminence thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 2; Ord. of 12-4-89, §§ 3, 4)  
Sec. 11-3.1. - Severability declared. 
It is the intention of the board of aldermen that each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the board of aldermen that if any provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid, all other provisions hereof shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 14)  
Sec. 11-4. - Automatic termination of chapter. 
This chapter shall terminate at such time as the Connecticut office of emergency management shall cease to be legally in existence. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 15; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 5)  
Sec. 11-5. - Authority of mayor to cooperate with other governmental units. 
The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to do any and all things necessary to cooperate with the governor of the state, the state emergency management director, or his agents, the mayors, first selectmen or emergency management directors of other communities within the state and with the government of the United States in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management acts of the United States and of the State of Connecticut and any and all orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated by the government of the United States or by the State of Connecticut pursuant to the provisions of said emergency management acts. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 3; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 6)  
Sec. 11-6. - Rules, regulations—Authority of mayor to promulgate; availability for public inspection required. 
The mayor, or his duly authorized representative or representatives, is authorized to promulgate such orders, rules, and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter in the furtherance of the emergency management plan and program and to protect life and property. All orders, rules, and regulations authorized by this chapter shall be in writing and shall be available for public inspection at the place and during the hours specified by the mayor. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 9; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 7)  
Sec. 11-7. - Same—Supersede other ordinances. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 10)  
Sec. 11-8. - Office of emergency management created; director of emergency management. 
There is established the New Haven Office of Emergency Management which shall be under the direction and supervision of an emergency management director appointed by the mayor. The director of emergency management shall be responsible for the organization, administration, and operation of the emergency management organization within the city, subject to the direction and control of the mayor. He shall devote his full time to the duties of his office. The director shall hold office at the pleasure of the mayor, and may be removed by the state director of emergency management for cause. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 4; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 8) 
State Law reference— Local civil defense organization required by State law, § 28-7 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 11-9. - Advisory council created; appointment, duties. 
There is established the New Haven Emergency Management Advisory Council, appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. Such advisory council shall contain one (1) representative of each of the following interested sectors of the community, including business and industry, labor, health, environmental, minority community, education, veterans, women's groups and peace organizations within the City of New Haven, which are important to the emergency management program; and one (1) member to be elected by the board of aldermen. The council shall elect its own chairman. The city director of emergency management shall be secretary of the council ex officio, and the police chief, fire chief, health director and city engineer shall serve as members ex-officio. The council shall advise the mayor and the director on developing local emergency management priorities and undertaking education activities of the dangers of a nuclear disaster, carrying out national emergency management measures, and other emergency management matters. It shall meet on call of the chairman or any four (4) of its members. Each appointed member of the advisory council shall serve without compensation and shall hold office for two-year terms, beginning January 1, 1986. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 5; Ord. of 10-21-85; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 9)  
Sec. 11-10. - Authority of director to represent city, execute agreements subject to approval. 
With the consent of the mayor, the director of emergency management may represent the city on any regional or state organization for emergency management, and may, on behalf of the city, enter into reciprocal mutual aid agreements with other cities and towns within the state. No such agreements shall be valid until approved by the mayor and by the state director of emergency management. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 10)  
Sec. 11-11. - Director to make studies, prepare plans. 
The director may make studies and surveys of the manpower, industries, resources, and facilities of the city to ascertain the capabilities of the city for emergency management and to plan for their most efficient use in time of emergency. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 11)  
Sec. 11-12. - Comprehensive plan; coordination with other agencies. 
The director shall prepare a comprehensive plan and program for the emergency management of the city and shall present such plan and program to the mayor for his approval. When the mayor shall approve the plan, it shall be the duty of all municipal agencies and all emergency management forces in the city to carry out the duties and functions assigned by the plan and program as approved. The plan and program may, from time to time, be modified in like manner. The director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that they shall be fully integrated with the emergency management plan and program of the federal government, of the State of Connecticut, and of other communities within the state. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 12)  
Sec. 11-13. - Director to institute training, educational, practice programs. 
In accordance with the city emergency management plan and program, the director shall institute such training programs and public information programs and shall take all other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency management forces in advance of actual disaster, as may be necessary to the prompt and effective operation of the city emergency management plan in time of emergency. He may, from time to time, conduct such practice air-raid alerts or other emergency management exercises as he may deem necessary. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 13)  
Sec. 11-14. - Cooperation between director, other city departments. 
The director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies, and facilities of existing departments, offices, and agencies of the city, including the auxiliary police and all other emergency management forces which may be organized, to the maximum extent possible. The head of each such department, office, or agency, in cooperation with and under the direction of the director, shall be responsible for the planning and programming of such activities in the emergency management program as will involve the utilization of the facilities of his department, office, institution, or agency and shall implement and carry out such activities whenever necessary for the welfare and safety of the city, state, and the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 14)  
Sec. 11-15. - Director to organize, recruit needed services. 
The director shall organize, recruit and train air raid wardens, auxiliary police, auxiliary firemen, emergency medical services, mobile support units and any other services which may be required in carrying out the emergency management plans and programs of the city, the state, and the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 15)  
Sec. 11-16. - Director to provide medical, relief facilities. 
When required to do so by the mayor or the state director of emergency management, the director shall provide, establish, maintain, and equip emergency hospitals, casualty stations, ambulances, canteens, evacuation centers, and other facilities, or conveyances for the care of injured or homeless persons. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 16)  
Sec. 11-17. - Duty of director to provide, maintain aircraft observation facilities. 
The director shall erect, maintain, and equip aircraft observation structures in conformity with state and federal plans for aircraft observation and shall give such support to the New Haven Filter Center as may be ordered by the mayor or the state director of emergency management. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 17)  
Sec. 11-18. - Responsibility of director to provide necessary emergency management facilities. 
When required to do so by the mayor or the state the director of emergency management, the director shall provide all necessary buildings, equipment and supplies for the office of emergency management and for emergency management activities, and shall make contracts of lease or bailments with provision for indemnity in case of loss or damage in respect to any buildings, equipment or supplies loaned to the office of emergency management. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 18)  
Sec. 11-19. - General authority of director to further emergency management activities. 
The director shall do all other acts not inconsistent with law which may be required of him in the furtherance of emergency management activities. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 19)  
Sec. 11-20. - Director to follow state and federal orders, rules. 
The director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations that may from time to time be issued by the state director of emergency management, the federal government or any of its agencies. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 6; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 20)  
Sec. 11-21. - Director to submit annual report. 
The director shall, on or before January 15, 1952, and annually thereafter as long as the office of emergency management is continued, submit a written report to the mayor for transmission to the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 11; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 21)  
Sec. 11-22. - Authority of mayor to remove director, other personnel. 
The mayor may remove or suspend the director of emergency management or any officer, member, employee or agent of the office of emergency management or of any emergency or volunteer service organized by said office. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 7; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 22)  
Sec. 11-23. - State of emergency—Authority of mayor to declare. 
In the event of a major disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or by fire, flood or other causes or in the event of the imminence thereof, the mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists, in which he may personally, or through his duly authorized representative or representatives, take direct operational control of any or all parts of the emergency management forces and functions in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 8; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 23)  
Sec. 11-24. - Same—Powers and duties of mayor. 
Upon such declaration the provisions of this section shall immediately become effective and shall continue in effect until the end of such emergency has been declared: 
(a)  The mayor may order into action all or any part of the emergency management forces of the city. 
(b)  The mayor may designate such vehicles and persons as shall be permitted to move and the routes which they shall follow. 
(c)  The mayor shall take appropriate measures for protecting the health and safety of inmates of any institutions within the city and children in the schools. 
(d)  The mayor may order the evacuation of all or part of the population of stricken or threatened areas and may take such steps as are necessary for the receipt and care of such evacuees. 
(e)  The mayor may take such other steps as are reasonably necessary in the light of the emergency to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, and to minimize the effects of actual or imminent disasters, due to hostile action or natural causes. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 8; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 24)  
Sec. 11-25. - Same—Authority of mayor to make expenditures; duty of board of finance. 
Upon declaration of a state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to expend such moneys as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and the board of finance is directed and authorized to provide such sums as may from time to time be authorized by the mayor. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 12; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 25)  
Sec. 11-26. - Same—Termination by mayor or board of aldermen. 
A state of emergency shall cease to exist upon declaration by the mayor to that effect, or by vote of a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority of the board of aldermen, at a regular or special session of that body. 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 8; Ord. of 12-4-89, § 26)  
Sec. 11-27. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. of 12-29-50, § 13)  
Chapter 12 - DETENTION BUILDINGS AND CONVALESCENT HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1403, adopted Jan. 3, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 12 in its entirety. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Detention buildings, convalescent homes defined; inspection, permit required. 
No person or entity shall use any building as a detention building or convalescent home unless the fire marshal and building official have inspected said building, and issued appropriate certificates in accordance with this chapter, the State Fire Safety Code and the National Building Code ("BOCA Code"). "Detention building" or "convalescent home" as used herein shall mean any building(s), including homes for the aged and infirm, wherein persons are housed voluntarily or forcibly detained for observation, care or treatment. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-1; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-2. - Building and fire officials to inspect; standards. 
The building official and the fire marshal and/or their respective designees shall inspect all detention buildings or convalescent homes, as described in this chapter, during construction, alteration, remodeling or other change until the completion thereof, and ascertain whether the same conforms to the requirements of the state fire and building codes, and applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-2; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-3. - Certification of compliance. 
When the building official finds that a detention building or convalescent home complies with the pertinent federal, state and local laws and regulations, and any change, alteration or remodeling fully conforms with the duly issued permit, and once he/she has received certification from the fire marshal that all pertinent fire codes have been met, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy to the fire marshal stating that said official has thoroughly inspected such structure, and that it complies with all federal, state and local laws and regulations concerning construction and public safety. The fire marshal shall accept such certificate as sufficient evidence that all legal requirements have been satisfied concerning construction at the time of the certificate's completion. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-3; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-4. - Periodic inspection by fire marshal. 
The fire marshal or his/her designee shall regularly inspect all detention buildings or convalescent homes to ascertain whether the building continues to comply with all relevant fire codes. The fire marshal or his/her designee shall make such inspection annually, or on an as needed basis. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-4; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-5. - Purpose and scope of the fire marshal's inspection; report. 
To assure that the construction and operation of detention buildings and convalescent homes conform with state fire safety requirements, the fire marshal or his/her designee shall inspect such buildings in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") standards and state requirements. The fire marshal or his/her designee shall issue a certificate of inspection once the establishment has met all requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-5; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-6. - Certificate posted by owner. 
After the inspection of any convalescent home under the provisions of this chapter, the owner or his/her designee shall post a certificate of inspection in conspicuous type in the main entrance thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-6; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-7. - Building code, general statutes—To be applied. 
The use of any building or part thereof as a detention building or convalescent home is hereby declared to be a special use of such character as to require regulation in the interest of public health and safety. The building code provisions concerning said class of buildings and inspection, together with the general statutes concerning licensing of the same and this chapter, are hereby made applicable to all buildings that are being used for such purposes, as well as those subsequently used for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-7; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-8. - Same—Fire marshal to assure compliance; variances authorized. 
If the fire marshal finds that any building being used as a detention building or convalescent home does not wholly conform to the provisions of the fire code, and cannot reasonably be altered or equipped in such manner as to wholly conform to such code, but still finds that said building may continue to be used in such manner without presenting a danger to public safety or the safety of persons employed in such building, or that some other device, method or form of construction, equipment or arrangement, reasonably adequate for public safety is being used, or can reasonably be used or installed in said building in lieu of those required by the fire code, he/she shall allow the owner or operator of said building to request a modification of the fire code. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-8; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-9. - Variances and modifications. 
Certificates issued pursuant to section 12-8 shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The section(s) of the fire and/or building code which said building does not conform to; 
(2)  The fact that said building cannot reasonably be altered or equipped in such manner as to wholly conform to the codes, and the reasons therefore; and 
(3)  The substitute device, method or form of construction, equipment or arrangement, reasonably adequate for public safety, is used or can be reasonably used or installed in said building in lieu of those required by the codes. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-9; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-10. - Same—Fire marshal to recommend. 
If after inspection as provided herein, the fire marshal believes that any detention building or convalescent home as constructed, equipped and arranged, can be continued in such use without danger to the public, he/she may recommend in connection with the aforesaid modification that said building be exempted from the specific section of the code to which it does not and cannot wholly conform, and may recommend by his/her signature that said exemption be conditioned that a substitute device, method or form of construction, equipment or arrangement reasonably adequate for public safety may be provided and used in said building. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-10; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-11. - Same—Not to apply to subsequent construction. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the exemption of any building hereafter erected, or altered or newly devoted to any of the uses hereinbefore referred to from any of the provisions of the building code. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-13; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-12. - Same—Representation of city in hearings. 
The corporation counsel or his/her designee shall appear and represent the city at all public hearings on exemptions under this chapter. The mayor may designate such other city officers to attend such hearings as he/she shall deem proper, and it shall thereupon become their duty to so attend. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-14; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-13. - Scope, general procedure for inspections. 
The inspection of detention buildings and convalescent homes provided for in this chapter shall relate to the condition of such buildings regarding the safety of life and property. The inspection is to ascertain the compliance with pertinent federal, state and local laws and regulations. The fire marshal or his/her designee shall maintain a written report of his/her findings after each building's inspection. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-15; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-14. - Notice of owner of failure to comply. 
If an inspection of any detention building or convalescent home reveals that the same does not conform to the requirements of the building and/or fire codes, or other relevant local, state or federal laws or regulations, the fire marshal shall notify the owner, lessee, or manager of such building, and order him/her to make the same so conform within such time as is reasonably necessary in the judgment of the fire marshal, building official or their designees. The permitted time shall be specified in said order. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-16; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-15. - False statements, reports, records prohibited. 
Every person who has a duty concerning the licensing or inspection of detention buildings or convalescent homes, and who willfully makes any false statement or report, or false record of any statement, report or rating as to any such building, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each offense. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-17; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 12-16. - Interfering with or hindering inspections prohibited. 
Every person, who hinders or prevents, or attempts to prevent, any officer or person from carrying out his/her lawful duty to inspect a detention building or convalescent home, or the premises upon which such building stands, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each offense. 
(Ord. of 5-6-46; Code of 1985, § 12-18; Ord. No. 1403, 1-3-06)  
Chapter 12¼ - SMALL CONSTRUCTION BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1773 , adopted May 18, 2015, amended Ch. 12¼ in its entirety to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 12¼-1. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The City of New Haven is committed to developing and nurturing a competitive local construction industry in which contractors for publicly financed projects provide efficient, high-quality services, pay competitive wages to their employees, and represent New Haven's ethnic diversity. 
(b)  Based on a study of the utilization of construction contractors in New Haven ("utilization study)" and further research, it has been determined that there is a serious need to help small, minority and women owned construction business enterprises to be considered for and awarded city contracts for the construction, reconstruction or rehabilitation of public buildings and the construction and maintenance of highways and other public spaces. This construction business opportunity initiative is intended to ensure that there is no discrimination against small business enterprises or minority business enterprises and that equal opportunities for construction and construction related contracts are available while encouraging competitive practices and long term sustainable small business development. 
(c)  Accordingly, the City of New Haven hereby adopts a program of contractor utilization goals, contractor capability-building measures, internal policy and procedure changes, and monitoring requirements with respect to the participation of small and minority businesses in construction contracts that are financed (in whole or in part) by the City of New Haven. To enable underutilized construction and construction related firms to overcome a history of disadvantages based on race and gender by providing targeted opportunities and support for women and minority firms. 
(d)  All city departments and all contractors shall fully comply with the city's equal opportunity policy, and shall not discriminate against or grant preferential treatment to any contractor on the basis of race, color, religious creed, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, familial status, national origin, ancestry or disability as set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 in the performance of city contracts. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 ; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all contracts for construction and construction related services to which the City of New Haven is a party. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(a)  Affiliated means the relationship in which a person directly, or indirectly through one (1) of more intermediaries, controls or is controlled by or is under common control with another person. 
(b)  City shall mean the City of New Haven, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Connecticut, and shall include any agency, department, board and commission of the City of New Haven. 
(c)  City construction contract shall mean any contract, development agreement, school construction contract, purchase order or other such agreement with the city involving any type of construction work (including demolition, renovation or repair work), or related services (including the different or allied building trades whose work is necessary for the completion of a construction project) where such work is paid for in whole or in part out of city funds or other public funds, or by any developer that has received (or is to receive) any type of subsidy from the city, financial or otherwise. 
(d)  Contractor shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other such business entity that enters into a city construction contract. 
(e)  Control means the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of any person, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or through any other direct or indirect means. Control shall be presumed to exist if any person, directly or indirectly, owns, controls, holds with the power to vote, or holds proxies representing twenty (20) percent or more of any voting securities of another person. 
(f)  Independent business shall mean a business whose viability does not depend on its relationship with another firm or firms. 
(g)  Informal bid shall mean and include a solicitation, request, invitation or advertisement for quotation or bid by the city to perform or provide services on a city construction contract valued at less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and limited to small business enterprises. 
(h)  Joint venture shall mean any arrangement, subject to review by and approval of the city and formalized in writing, whereby two or more persons combine their property, money, efforts, skill, resources or knowledge in a common undertaking without any actual partnership or corporate designation. 
(i)  Minority business enterprise (MBE), for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean any a small contractor with at least fifty-one (51) percent ownership by one or more persons: 
(1)  Who exercise operational authority over the daily affairs of the enterprise; 
(2)  Who have the power to direct the management and policies and receive the beneficial interest of the enterprise; 
(3)  Possess managerial and technical competence and experience directly related to the principal business activities of the enterprise and; 
(4)  Who are members of a minority group that has been identified through a utilization study or other analysis of New Haven contractor utilization records to be the victim of statistically significant underutilization for construction and construction-related services by the city and private contractors. As such, and in accordance with court rulings, the designated minority groups are: 
a.  African American, which shall mean all persons having origins in any Black racial groups of Africa, and not of Spanish culture origin. 
b.  Hispanic American, which shall mean all persons Puerto Rican, Cuban, Mexican, Central American or South American or other Spanish culture origin. 
(j)  Women Owned Business for the purpose of this chapter, shall mean (can be of any ethnic background) a small contractor with at least fify-one (51) percent ownership by one or more women who: 
(1)  Exercises operational authority over daily affairs of the business; 
(2)  Has the power to direct the management and policies and receive the beneficial interests of the business; 
(3)  Possess managerial and technical competence and experience directly related to the principal business activities of the enterprise 
(k)  New Haven Market Area for the purposes of this chapter means the geographic area in which the majority of contractors who perform city construction contracts are physically clustered. Contractors and subcontractors located within New Haven County will be considered part of the New Haven Market Area. 
(l)  Program graduate shall mean a small construction business development program contractor who has completed a two-year period in the program and has earned three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) or more in revenues for any fiscal year. 
(m)  Purchasing agent shall mean the official of the city described in Section 71(a) of the City Charter, or any other person designated to perform the purchasing function. 
(n)  Set aside bid shall mean and include a solicitation, request, invitation or advertisement for quotation or bid by the city to perform or provide services on a city construction contracts that is limited to small business enterprises. 
(o)  Small business enterprise (SBE), for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean any business entity that: 
(1)  Has been doing business as an independent, operating business under the same ownership and management and has maintained its principal place of business in the New Haven Market Area for a period of at least one (1) year immediately prior to the date of application for registration; 
(2)  Has gross revenues not exceeding three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) in the three (3) years prior to application for registration; 
(3)  At least fifty-one (51) percent of the ownership of which is held by a person or persons who exercise operational authority over the daily affairs of the business and who have the power to direct the management and policies and receive the beneficial interests of the business. 
(p)  Subcontractor shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other such business entity that enters into a contract with a contractor to perform a portion of the work specified under a city construction contract. 
(q)  Utilization study shall mean a study commissioned by the city to determine whether there is a historical disparity between the availability and utilization of MBEs as defined in this chapter in the city's market area. Utilization studies are available at the city's economic development small construction business development program office and are incorporated in this chapter for all purposes. 
(r)  Self Perform means that a registered SBE, MBE, WBE whether a Prime Contractor or a subcontractor, performs thirty (30) percent of the value of its work (exclusive of materials and equipment) using its own forces and resources as determined by monthly payrolls. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, §§ 1—3, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-4. - Registration. 
(a)  Registration will enable the city to target enhanced services and opportunities for SBEs, WBEs, and MBEs, and will facilitate utilization goal setting and performance monitoring. 
(b)  SBEs, WBEs and MBEs that wish to take advantage of the opportunities and support services established pursuant to this chapter must qualify as an SBE as defined in section 12¼-3(m) or MBE, or WBE as defined in section 12¼-3(i) of this chapter and be current on all city taxes, loans, and any other obligations to the City of New Haven; and which have not graduated from the economic development small construction business development program; and 
(1)  Must be certified by the State of Connecticut Department of Administrative Services as an SBE, MBE, or WBE pursuant to State of Connecticut Public Act 99-233 as amended; or 
(2)  Must be "pre-certified" by the economic development small construction business development program. A contractor is qualified for pre-certification if the contractor can demonstrate that it is eligible for certification and that it is in the process of becoming certified by the State of Connecticut Department of Administrative Services but needs additional time or assistance to assemble the documentation required for State certification. A qualified contractor shall be pre-certified for a period of no greater than twelve (12) months. After twelve (12) months, the contractor must either be certified by the State of Connecticut or be removed from the city "pre-certification" list. A precertified contractor is entitled to participate in the following programs established pursuant to this chapter: 
a.  City-sponsored training and support programs; 
b.  Bidding on contracts under one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
(c)  The economic development small construction business development program may promulgate additional policies and procedures to facilitate and manage the [pre- certification] registration process. 
(d)  The economic development small construction business development program will coordinate the support services with the State Department of Administrative Services. 
(e)  Registered SBEs, MBEs, and WBEs must comply with all the obligations of the State of Connecticut Certification, including re-certification procedures, audits, penalties, or other requirements as may be established from time to time. 
(f)  There will be no fee for registration. 
(g)  The economic development administrator or his/her designee shall evaluate all registration applications for final determination as to whether the applicant meets the requirements, criteria, and intent of the program. 
(h)  Registration may be denied by the economic development administrator or his/her designee if the applying business or the owners, officers or key personnel are debarred, suspended or have otherwise been denied bidding privileges by any federal, state, or local agency. 
(i)  The economic development small construction business development program shall rescind registration of eligibility to any small business contractor found to have obtained the registration through the use of false information, or misrepresentation, has been denied bidding privileges by any federal, state, or local agency, or which has been found to have participated in any fraudulent, criminal or otherwise illegal activities. 
(j)  When a small business is denied registration it will receive a letter of explanation from the small construction business development program as to why it was denied registration. The business may appeal to the small construction business development program, in writing, for a review of its application. To appeal a decision, the applicant must submit a letter explaining why the applicant considers that it is entitled to registration, which must be received by the economic development administrator or his/her designee within thirty (30) days of the denial. The economic development administrator or his/her designee shall upon receipt of such letter, forward the same to the review committee consisting of the economic development administrator or his designee, corporation counsel, and purchasing agent. 
(k)  The decision of the review committee is administratively final. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, § 4, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-5. - Utilization goals for city construction contracts. 
(a)  Purpose. In accordance with the findings of the utilization study, the evidence supports the conclusion that MBE and WBE firms have been disadvantaged by discriminatory practices when competing for participation as contractors or subcontractors on city construction contracts. In order to eliminate the disparity between the availability and utilization of MBEs, and WBEs the city is establishing goals to achieve an adequate level of MBE participation in city construction contracts. The MBE and WBE utilization goals represent a reasonable expectation of MBE and WBE utilization based on current utilization levels and the availability of MBE and WBE firms as determined by the utilization study. The goals are not quotas, but rather a public statement of the city's aspiration for diversity among its contractors and an approximate benchmark to measure the city's progress in overcoming the disparity. 
(b)  Ethnicity-specific utilization goals. The utilization study identified differences in the level of utilization of contractors and subcontractors from various minority groups as defined in this chapter. The city seeks to achieve MBE and WBE participation in city construction contracts proportionate to the availability of qualified MBE and WBE firms within the construction industry. 
The city hereby establishes the following ethnic specific goals for city construction contracts for the twelve-month period following the effective date of this chapter. 
(1)  For African American firms, ten (10) percent of the total value of city construction contracts and ten (10) percent of the total value of subcontracts on city construction contracts. 
(2)  For Hispanic American firms, two and one-half (2.5) of the total value of city construction contracts and six (6) percent of the total value of subcontracts on city construction contracts. 
(c)  Gender-specific utilization goals. The utilization study identified differences between the level of utilization of women-owned firms and other firms. The city seeks to achieve participation by women-owned firms in city funded contracts proportionate to the availability of such firms within the construction industry. The city hereby establishes gender specific goals for women-owned firms for the twelve-month period following the effective date of this chapter at eleven (11) percent of the total value of city construction contracts and fifteen (15) percent of the total value of subcontracts on city construction contracts. 
(d)  Revision of goals. The goals will be revised on an annual basis in accordance with current utilization and availability data. The goals from any previous year will remain in effect until the economic development administrator approves the new goals. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-6. - Small business enterprise contractor capability-building. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to nurture small and underutilized contractors who have the potential for long-term, sustainable success on a level playing field, by helping them to improve business operations. 
(b)  Outreach. The economic development small construction development program will provide outreach to underutilized firms regarding registration as SBEs and MBEs pursuant to this chapter, bid opportunities, training and other services. Outreach will include a variety of print and electronic media, as well as leveraging local organizations where appropriate. Notification of bid opportunities will be accomplished through a combination of the following: 
(1)  Facsimile broadcast to contractors; 
(2)  E-mail notification to registered contractors within the relevant industry segment; 
(3)  Posting of the information on a publicly accessible website; 
(4)  Posting of the information at a central physical location with after-hours access; 
(5)  Announcement in three (3) relevant targeted publications aimed at underutilized contractors. At the city's discretion, announcement may be consolidated with ongoing permanent advertisements that specifically list upcoming bid opportunities, relevant training opportunities, and the address for the publicly accessible website. 
(c)  Training and support services. 
(1)  In order to facilitate first-time contracts or larger contracts between the city and SBEs, the city may offer seminars to introduce contractors to city personnel and procedures. These seminars would provide an opportunity for SBE contractors to become registered, to learn the requirements for submitting bids, to meet relevant city department heads, to learn how to access city resources, and to learn how to accommodate wage rates and other labor requirements. 
(2)  The city will sponsor construction management training and mentoring programs to assist SBEs in developing and strengthening their management capabilities. The city may also sponsor and/or co-sponsor educational programs for contractors on financial management, business development, technology, and other programs as necessary. 
(3)  The city will coordinate training and support services with other public and private entities that provide services to contractors. 
(4)  The city will encourage and facilitate voluntary mentor-protégé relationships between high-potential, under-utilized firms with larger contractors. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, § 5, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-7. - Set aside opportunities for small business enterprises. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enable SBEs to compete for city construction contracts on smaller projects without being unduly disadvantaged by their size or other diseconomies of smaller scale. 
(b)  Procedure. The city construction managers and prime contractors shall set aside, for award to contractors registered in the small contractor program on the basis of competitive selection procedures, city construction contracts valued at one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) or less. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the following types of city contracts: 
a.  City construction contracts valued at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less for which informal bidding is required. 
b.  City construction contracts valued at more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) dollars and up to a maximum of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for which competitive bidding is required; 
(2)  If the apparent, responsive low bidder for set-aside contracts submits a bid that exceeds one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) the purchasing agent may in his sole discretion accept the bid if it is within ten (10) percent of the set-aside ceiling of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
(3)  If bids for non-set-aside contracts fall below the set-aside limit of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) the purchasing agent in his or her sole discretion may accept the bids or rebid the contract as a set-aside contract. However, the bureau of purchasing shall maintain a record of all such bids and analyze such bids to ensure that the intent of this chapter has not been violated or otherwise defeated. 
(4)  Contracts may be exempted from the set-aside provisions of this chapter if any of the following conditions apply: 
a.  There are fewer than two (2) registered SBE firms for the particular trade or project type; 
b.  Fewer than two (2) registered SBE firms submitted a bid; 
c.  No responsive bids are submitted as determined by the purchasing agent; 
d.  The purchasing agent determines that an exemption should be granted in accordance with section 12¼-11 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, § 6, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-7.1. - Set-aside opportunities—School construction contracts. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enable SBE firms to participate in the school construction program, a major initiative to renovate existing schools and build new schools in the city. The school construction program is a joint program between the city and the New Haven Public Schools that is funded in part by proceeds from the school construction trust fund and with eligible matching grant funds from the State of Connecticut. School construction projects represent a significant portion of the city's construction projects and a major source of construction opportunities for underutilized firms. 
(b)  Procedure. The city, construction managers and prime contractors shall set aside, for award to registered SCD firms, on the basis of competitive selection procedures, school construction contracts valued at ten (10) percent of the total amount expended for school construction contracts. This provision shall include all school construction contracts awarded pursuant to construction management agreements. No single contract awarded to a prime contractor or a first tier subcontractor shall receive more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) credit towards the requirements of this subsection. All subcontractor work awarded to an SCD contractor under the first tier shall receive full credit toward meeting the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, § 6, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-8. - Minority business enterprise requirements for informal bids up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this provision is to increase the utilization of underutilized MBEs and WBEs by facilitating the competitive selection of MBE and WBE contractors for city construction contracts valued at less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
(b)  Procedure. This provision is applicable to city construction contracts under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for which informal bidding is required. 
(1)  Pursuant to New Haven Ordinance 2-151 (as amended), city construction contracts under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be awarded in accordance with the informal quotation and informal bidding procedures established by the purchasing agent. 
(2)  For procurement of construction and construction related services under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the purchasing agent or his/her designee must receive at least three informal bids or quotes from registered SBEs, and at least two (2) of the three (3) bids must be from registered MBEs or WBEs. 
(3)  If the purchasing agent or his/her designee is unable to obtain at least three (3) bids from registered SBEs, or at least two (2) bids from registered MBEs, or WBEs the city construction contract will be re-bid unless small construction business development program agrees that a waiver should be granted. A waiver may be granted if it can be shown that a good faith effort was made to reach a sufficient number of potential set aside bidders or that there are extraordinary circumstances relating to the project such that a waiver is warranted. 
(4)  If under these provisions, the apparent responsive, low informal bidder submits an informal bid that exceeds the limit of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) the bids may be accepted in the sole discretion of the purchasing agent if it is within ten (10) percent of the informal bid limit. 
(c)  Annual limit. To deter program manipulation or dependence upon these provisions, once a contractor has been awarded a contract or contracts in an aggregate amount of one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars ($175,000.00) through the City of New Haven in any one (1) fiscal year, such contractor will not be eligible to participate in additional informal bids in that fiscal year. 
(d)  Audit. The informal bid program shall be audited on an annual basis to ensure compliance with bureau of purchases procedures established for such purchases. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-9. - MBE subcontractor utilization and good faith effort requirements. 
(a)  The city's specific goals for utilization of MBE and WBE subcontractors are defined in section 12¼-5 of this chapter. The city hereby requires that all parties bidding or otherwise seeking to be qualified as a contractor with respect to a city construction contract (a "potential contractor") shall aggressively make every effort to obtain MBE, WBE subcontracting participation in order to achieve the utilization goals. In the case where a potential prime contractor is a MBE contractor, the potential contractor shall make every effort to obtain WBE subcontracting participation to achieve the utilization goals. In the case where a potential prime contractor is a WBE contractor, the potential contractor shall make every effort to obtain MBE subcontracting participation to achieve the utilization goals. 
(b)  The provisions of this section 12¼-9 shall apply to all city construction contracts that are over one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) and that are not bid through the set-aside program. 
(c)  The city intends to award city construction contracts to the lowest responsible bidder that has achieved or made a good faith effort to achieve the MBE, WBE utilization goals. Failure by any potential contractor to demonstrate that they have either achieved the utilization goals, or that they have made good faith efforts to achieve the utilization goals as required hereunder, will result in a determination by the purchasing agent that the potential contractor is not a responsible bidder with respect to the city construction contract in question. 
(d)  In order to achieve the MBE, WBE utilization goals, a contractor may award contracts to subcontractors that are certified as MBEs or WBEs the purpose of this program, or may enter into a joint venture (or other commercially reasonable relationship which is satisfactory to the city for the purposes of this program) with one (1) or more MBEs, WBEs for the purpose of carrying out the city construction contract. The MBEs, WBEs must self-perform actual construction work (or construction-related work such as site preparation, etc.) and not merely act as a passive conduit. 
(e)  A potential contractor shall submit signed contracts or letters of commitment with the MBEs, WBEs that will be utilized by the potential contractor in the carrying out of such city construction contract, together with a list of the respective dollar amounts payable to each such MBE, WBE. For credit to be given, each MBE, WBE must be registered as an MBE, WBE prior to submittal of such list by the potential contractor. 
(f)  A potential contractor will be considered in compliance with the goals if they have achieved at least twenty-five (25) percent overall MBE, WBE utilization for the entire project. 
(g)  If the potential contractor can demonstrate that it has successfully achieved the twenty-five (25) percent overall MBE, WBE utilization goals for the entire project the bureau of purchases is not required to evaluate other efforts the prime bidder made to achieve the goal. If, however, the potential contractor has failed to meet the goals and desires to be considered for the bid, the potential contractor's good faith effort will be evaluated, verified and will generally be recognized if a contractor has accomplished at least four (4) of the following: 
(1)  The submittal of scope specific subcontracting opportunities with the SCD office for distribution; 
(2)  Demonstrate to the SCD office whether the contractor provided relevant plans, specifications or terms and conditions to certified minority- and women-owned business enterprises sufficiently in advance to enable them to prepare an informed response to a contractor request for participation as a subcontractor; 
(3)  Verification of quotes received from subcontractors that were denied because of cost, quality, availability, etc.; 
(4)  Verification of outreach and collaboration with the New Haven Regional Contractors Alliance; 
(5)  The contractor identified economically feasible units of the project that could be contracted or subcontracted to certified minority- and women-owned business enterprises in order to increase the likelihood of participation by such enterprises on the contract; 
(6)  Conducting a networking event with owner, construction manager, and prime contractors; 
(7)  Holding individual trade meetings with construction manager, prime contractors and sub-contractors; 
(8)  Other efforts as determined in advance by the Small Contractor Development Office; 
(9)  The contractor followed-up initial solicitations by contacting the enterprises to determine whether the enterprises were interested in such contracting or subcontracting opportunity; 
(10)  The contractor negotiated in good faith with certified minority- and women-owned business enterprises submitting bids, proposals, or quotations and did not, without justifiable reason, reject as unsatisfactory any bids, proposals or quotations prepared by any certified minority- or women-owned business enterprise. "Good faith" negotiating means engaging in good faith discussions with certified minority- or women-owned business enterprises about the nature of the work, scheduling, requirements for special equipment, opportunities for dividing of work among the bidders, proposers, and various subcontractors and the bids of the minority or women businesses, including sharing with them any cost estimates from the request for proposal or invitation to bid documents, if available; and, 
(h)  The burden of proof is on the bidder. Whether or not any such potential contractor made a good faith effort to achieve the utilization goals shall be a question of fact to be decided by the city, acting in its reasonable discretion. A committee composed of a representative from small construction business development program office, the corporation counsel's office, and the bureau of purchasing will evaluate whether such good faith effort was achieved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  The potential contractor shall be required to document their good faith efforts in the form of an affidavit signed by a principal or other authorized person of the contractor and submitted at the pre-award meeting. If the affidavit or other the documentation submitted by the potential contractor does not provide compelling, verifiable evidence of a good faith effort, the bidder will be considered a non- responsive bidder for failing to meet the city's good faith effort requirements, and the bid may be rejected. If a bidder submits more than one (1) non-responsive bid within a twelve-month period, that bidder will be disqualified from all future bids within the next twelve (12) months. 
(j)  If at least one (1) bidder has met the utilization goal or demonstrated a good faith effort, all non-responsive bids will be rejected, and the contract shall be awarded to the bidder who has demonstrated a good faith effort, so long as rejection of the non-responsive bids, in the discretion of the purchasing agent, will not lead to gross inefficiency of public resources 
(k)  If all potential contractors are non-responsive bidders as defined in the provisions of this section, the purchasing agent will have discretion to reject all bids and to rebid the project, or to accept the lowest, non-responsive bidder. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, § 8, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-10. - Compliance. 
(a)  Bid specifications or requests for proposals shall require potential contractors to do the following: 
(1)  Demonstrate in their bid or proposal that they have made good faith efforts to utilize MBE subcontractors as required in section 12¼-9; and 
(2)  Identify the particular MBE subcontractors to be utilized in performing the contract, including a signed contract or commitment letter specifying for each subcontractor the dollar value of the participation, the type of work to be performed and such information as may be reasonably required to determine responsiveness of the bid or proposal. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter, bidders not meeting the requirements of this subsection shall be declared non-responsive. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-11. - Exceptions. 
(a)  In the event that a city construction contract is funded in whole or in part by the state or federal government or any agency thereof and there is a conflict between the city goals and state or federal goals, the relevant policies and goals of the state or federal government or agency will apply. 
(b)  The utilization goal requirements and set aside provisions will not apply to the following procurements: 
(1)  Construction services that the purchasing agent certifies are available only from a sole source and the prospective contractor is not currently disqualified from doing business with the city or from doing business or with any governmental agency based on a failure to fulfill MBE requirements. Copies of all construction related sole source approvals by the purchasing agent shall be forwarded to the office of economic development small construction business development program and shall serve as the certification of the purchasing agent. 
(2)  Construction contracts certified in writing by the purchasing agent to the office of economic development small construction business development program that are necessary to respond to an emergency situation that is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  Construction contracts certified in writing by the purchasing agent to the office of economic development small construction business development program that are made through cooperative purchasing arrangements with other governmental entities when, in the judgment of the city purchasing agent such contracts are in the best interest of the city and such arrangements involve competitive purchasing procedures. 
(4)  Construction contracts made in a manner approved by the board of aldermen upon the recommendation of the purchasing agent, where the purchasing agent has advised the board of aldermen in writing that in his opinion it would not be practicable or in the best interest of the city to proceed in accordance with provisions of this chapter and where the board of aldermen shall find that the making of such a contract in such manner is in the best interest of the city. The purchasing agent shall notify in writing the office of economic development small construction development program of the purchasing agent's intent to seek such a finding by the board of aldermen. 
(c)  Any certifications or notices submitted to the office economic development small construction development program under this provision shall be made prior to the contract being awarded or submitted to the board of aldermen for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-12. - Prompt payment for registered small business enterprises. 
(a)  To improve opportunities for underutilized firms, it is essential for the city to reduce the firm's costs of doing business with the city as a contractor. The city, through its department of finance, will implement a program for registered SBE and MBE firms that will ensure prompt and faster payment of invoices for work performed and accepted by the city. 
(b)  The goal of the city is to pay registered SBEs within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete and proper invoice. The department of finance is required to track the speed of payment to SBEs and MBEs and maintain a record of payment schedules for all city construction contracts. A monthly record of such payments shall also be forwarded to the office of economic development small construction development program. 
(c)  Non-SBE contractors that have achieved a minimum threshold for MBE subcontractor utilization of twenty (20) percent on a current project will also be targeted for fast payment on that particular project, so as to provide an incentive to contractors to use underutilized subcontractors. 
(d)  Following payment by the city to a contractor for a portion of the work required under a city construction contract where such portion of the work comprises all or a portion of the work carried out by a subcontractor which is an SBE, the contractor must pay the subcontractor for the work in question within ten (10) days of its receipt of such payment. However, a contractor may withhold payment if the contractor has a bona-fide reason for doing so, provided that within said ten-day period, the contractor shall notify the affected subcontractor in writing of the reason for withholding payment and shall deliver a copy of such notice to the purchasing agent and the finance director, and shall thereafter take all reasonable steps to promptly settle the dispute. 
(e)  Subcontractors who believe that they are not being paid according to these requirements may submit an inquiry/complaint to the economic development administrator or his/her designee who will record the complaint and perform an investigation if necessary. If a contractor routinely fails to pay subcontractors promptly, the firm may be deemed non-responsive to MBE goals on subsequent bids. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-13. - Protest procedure. 
(a)  If at the time of a bid opening there is an apparent low responsible bidder that should be awarded a city construction contract in accordance with the provisions of this chapter but an unsuccessful party (a "protesting party") is of the opinion that the apparent low bidder did not comply with the provisions of this chapter, then the protesting party or parties shall have a period of five (5) working days from the date on which the bids were public opened in order to protest such award. 
(b)  Any such protest shall be made in writing and mailed to the purchasing agent by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a post mark no later than five (5) days from the date of the bid opening. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall, upon immediate receipt of such protest letter, forward such protest letter to the contract review committee consisting of a representative from the office of the economic development small construction business development program, the office of corporation counsel, and the department of finance. 
(d)  The contract review committee shall, after notice, convene a meeting within five (5) working days from the date of its receipt of the protest letter to consider the matter. The committee shall consider such documentation or testimonial evidence, or other evidence provided to it by the protesting party and others, including the apparent low bidder, and the purchasing agent. At the conclusion of this meeting, the committee shall consider all the evidence provided to it and reach a decision. 
(e)  Within five (5) working days from the date of its meeting to consider the protest, the contract review committee shall issue a written opinion as to whether the apparent low bid or bidder met the requirements of this chapter. The written opinion shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the protesting party or parties and the apparent low bidder, and a copy of said opinion shall be sent to the purchasing agent. 
(f)  The opinion of the contract review committee shall be binding on the purchasing agent. It shall form the basis of the purchasing agent's decision as to whether to proceed with the award of the contract, to award to the next lowest responsible bidder, or to reject all bids and rebid the contract. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-14. - Administration. 
(a)  The economic development administrator shall be responsible for the overall administration of this chapter. 
(b)  The following city offices and city departments shall have the specific duties and responsibilities described herein: 
(1)  Powers and duties of the office of the economic development small construction business development program. In addition to the duties and powers given to the economic development small construction business development program elsewhere in this chapter, the small construction business development shall have the following duties and powers: 
a.  Coordinate with the State of Connecticut Department of Administrative Services to maintain a list of certified SBI and DAS contractors and manage the registration process consistent with the criteria established in section 12¼-4. 
b.  Establish the necessary programs to provide business assistance, training, support, and other measures for SBEs and MBEs, consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  At the end of the city's fiscal year, and annually thereafter, prepare a report on the utilization of SBEs and MBEs for the previous twelve (12) months and recommend utilization goals for the subsequent twelve-month period. This report shall include an assessment of the small construction development program ordinance and be submitted to the city economic development administrator, the mayor, the board of aldermen and the public. 
(2)  Powers and duties of the bureau of purchases. In addition to the duties and powers given to the bureau of purchases elsewhere in this chapter, the bureau of purchases shall have the following duties and powers: 
a.  Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter, develop and revise purchasing procedures and guidelines as necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. Prepare standard bid documents and templates as appropriate. Train other departments as necessary to ensure compliance with procedures. 
b.  Administer the SBE set-aside bidding process for city construction contracts less than one thousand fifty dollars ($150,000.00). 
c.  Administer the informal bid process, incorporating the MBE quote opportunity requirement as established in section 12¼-8. 
d.  Administer the city construction contracting bid process, incorporating MBE subcontractor utilization goals and the contractor good faith effort requirement as established in section 12-9. 
e.  Collect and maintain contract award data and provide information on a semi-annual basis to the office of economic development small construction business development program and as requested by the department of finance. 
(3)  Powers and duties of the department of finance. In addition to the duties given to the department of finance elsewhere in this chapter, the department of finance shall have the following duties and powers: 
a.  The department of finance shall develop and implement fast payment procedures to enable SBE contractors to be paid within thirty (30) days from the date the city receives a complete and proper invoice, consistent with the provisions of section 12¼-14 of this chapter. 
b.  The department of finance shall prepare a quarterly report for the office of economic development small construction business development program on the performance of the fast payment program. 
c.  Administer an annual audit of city construction contracts to ensure compliance with city policies and the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Powers and duties of the economic development administrator. 
a.  In addition to the powers and duties given elsewhere, the economic development administrator shall promulgate additional regulations, procedures and guidelines necessary to implement or clarify any provisions of this SBE Program. 
b.  The economic development administrator shall review periodic monitoring and compliance reports and recommendations submitted by small construction development program. 
c.  The economic development administrator shall make periodic reports to the mayor and the board of aldermen on the status of the SBE program. 
d.  By July 1 of each fiscal year, the economic development administrator shall issue notices to all city departments informing them of their duties under this chapter. The notice shall contain the following information: 
1.  The citywide MBE participation goals that the departments are expected to attain during the fiscal year. 
2.  The data each department is required to provide the finance department, or any other city department on each contract award. 
3.  The economic development administrator shall coordinate cooperation and compliance by all city departments with this chapter. 
(5)  Powers and duties of the department of engineering and public works. 
a.  Prepare an annual report establishing SBE and MBE utilization goals for engineering and public works for the twelve-month period beginning July 1 of each fiscal year. Each such report shall be submitted to the economic development administrator, the bureau of purchasing, and small construction business development. 
b.  Develop strategies to increase utilization of under-utilized firms by dividing large projects into smaller projects where appropriate. 
c.  Coordinate with the office of economic development small construction development program for outreach and training programs. 
(6)  Powers and responsibilities of developers. Each developer shall have responsibility for monitoring its compliance with the provisions of pertinent sections of this chapter and the rules and regulations implementing this chapter, including obtaining and analyzing reports, conducting preliminary investigations to determine compliance or noncompliance with this chapter, and taking any other action which may be appropriate to assure that all project contractors comply with these provisions. 
(7)  Powers and duties of the department of education. The department of education shall work with the city's purchasing agent and the office of economic development small construction development program to administer the provisions of section 12¼-7.1 and other applicable provisions of this section, as well as other city ordinances and state laws relating to school construction contracts. The department, through the school construction program, shall submit to the office of economic development small construction development program on a monthly basis a written report on contract award data and the utilization of SBE and MBE firms for school construction contracts awarded in the prior three (3) months. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, §§ 9, 10, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-15. - Monitoring compliance. 
(a)  The office of economic development small construction business development shall monitor the city's progress toward achievement of the city's goals set forth in section 12¼-5. 
(b)  Noncompliance by contractors. In cases where the office of economic development small construction business development or the purchasing agent has cause to believe that a bidder, contractor or developer has failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, or contract provisions pertaining to MBE utilization, the office of economic development small construction business development or the purchasing agent shall notify the contract review committee and shall attempt to resolve the noncompliance through conciliation. The contract review committee shall be empowered to require the bidder, contractor or developer to participate in this conciliation process. If the noncompliance cannot be resolved, the contract review committee shall submit a written finding of noncompliance to the economic development administrator and the bidder, contractor or developer. The contract compliance committee in consultation with the affected city department shall take such action as will effectuate the purposes of this chapter, and may impose sanctions as appropriate. Such sanctions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Declaring the bidder, contractor or developer to be nonresponsive and ineligible to receive the award of the contract; 
(2)  Declaring the bidder, contractor or developer to be an irresponsible bidder and disqualifying the bidder, contractor or developer from eligibility for providing goods or services to the city for a period of up to twelve (12) months; 
(3)  Removing the bidder or contractor from the list of registered SBEs or MBEs. 
(4)  Imposing a civil penalty of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in any instance in which the noncompliance is determined to be willful or persistent or with blatant disregard for the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1347, § 11, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-16. - Dissemination of chapter provisions. 
The city/town clerk shall send copies of this chapter, and any amendments thereto, to every city department, agency and the bureau of purchases for the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1292, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-17. - Duration of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter 12¼ shall be reviewed no later than June 30, 2020 for a determination as to whether or not the city should continue, or modify any or all of the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1347, § 12, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 12¼-18. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion of this chapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1421, § 2, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1629, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1773 , 5-18-15)  
Chapter 12½ - EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 12½ was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Small Business Enterprise Construction Opportunity Initiative Ch. 12¼. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12½-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Equal Opportunities Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-1.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Blind refers to an individual whose central visual acuity does not exceed 20/200 in the better eye with correcting lenses, or whose visual acuity is greater than 20/200 but is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than twenty (20) degrees. 
(b)  Commission means the commission on equal opportunities created by this article. 
(c)  Commission counsel means the counsel employed by the commission. 
(d)  Commissioner means a member of said commission. 
(e)  Court means the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven or any judge of said court. 
(f)  Discrimination includes segregation and separation. 
(g)  Discriminatory employment practice means any discriminatory practice specified in G.S. section 46a-60. 
(h)  Discriminatory practice means a violation of C.G.S. section 46a-58, 46a-59, 46a-60, 46a-64, 46a-64c, 46a-66, 46a-68, sections 46a-70 to 46a-78, inclusive, subsection (a) of section 46a-80, or sections 46a-81c- to 46a-81f, inclusive. 
(i)  Employee means any person employed by an employer but shall not include any person employed by his or her parents, parents-in-law, spouse or child, or a person employed in the domestic service of any other person. 
(j)  Employer includes the city and the departments, agencies, commissions and officers thereof, and any person with three (3) or more persons in his/her or its employ. 
(k)  Employment agency means any person undertaking with or without compensation to procure employees or opportunities to work. 
(l)  Labor organization means any organization which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment. 
(m)  Mental retardation means mental retardation as defined in G.S. section 1-1g. 
(n)  Person means one (1) or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and the city and all departments, agencies, commissions and officers thereof. 
(o)  Physically disabled refers to any individual who has any chronic physical handicap, infirmity or impairment, whether congenital or resulting from bodily injury, organic processes or changes or from illness, including, but not limited to, epilepsy, deafness or hearing impairment or reliance on a wheelchair or other remedial appliance or device. 
(p)  Respondent means any person alleged in a complaint filed pursuant to this chapter to have committed a discriminatory practice. 
(q)  Discrimination on the basis of sex includes but is not limited to discrimination related to pregnancy, child-bearing capacity, sterilization, fertility or related medical conditions. 
(r)  Discrimination on the basis of religious creed includes but is not limited to discrimination related to all aspects of religious observances and practice as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he/she is unable to reasonably accommodate an employee's or prospective employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer's business. 
(s)  Learning disability refers to an individual who exhibits a severe discrepancy between educational performance and measured intellectual ability and who exhibits a disorder in one (1) or more of the basic psychological processes involved in understanding or in using language, spoken or written, which may manifest itself in a diminished ability to listen, speak, read, write, spell or to do mathematical calculations. 
(t)  Mental disability refers to an individual who has a record of, or is regarded as having one or more mental disorders, as defined in the most recent edition of the American Psychiatric association's "Diagnostic and statistical Manual of Mental Disorders." 
(u)  Sexual orientation means actual or supposed heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. 
(v)  Gender identity or expression means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or behavior, whether or not that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex at birth. 
(Ord. of 1-8-78; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 2; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-2. - Findings. 
(a)  The population of New Haven is composed of people of diverse races, genders and gender identities, colors, religious creeds and national origins. It is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants that those differences serve only as bases of individual and community strength and integrity and not as causes of discrimination, segregation and restricted opportunities. Discrimination and its consequences cost the city and its people dearly. They cause unsafe and unsanitary housing, unemployment and underemployment, and waste of human potential. They also cause increased crime, juvenile delinquency, disease, fire, public disorder, deficiencies in the city's education system, higher welfare costs, and loss of tax revenue. 
(b)  Denial of equal opportunities to any person on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status or national origin, ancestry, or handicap is against the public policy of the state. Government initiative to repair the consequences of past denials of equal opportunities, and to prevent such denials in the future, promotes the state's public policy. Because New Haven's population is more diverse in race, gender and gender identities, color, religion, creed and national origin than the population of less densely populated areas of Connecticut, and the need for intergroup respect and understanding is therefore greater, it is essential that official local action be taken to promote and assure equality of opportunity for all residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 2; Ord. of 5-6-74; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-3. - Commission on equal opportunities—Composition; appointment; terms. 
There is hereby created a commission on equal opportunities (hereinafter called the "commission") which shall consist of nine (9) members, each of whom shall reside in New Haven. The commission shall have nine (9) members who shall serve without compensation. Eight (8) members shall be appointed by the mayor, and one (1) member shall be elected by the board of aldermen from its number. One (1) member shall be designated by the mayor as chairperson. Of the eight (8) members appointed by the mayor, two (2) commissioners shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year; one (1) commissioner shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; and five (5) commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. The aldermanic representative shall serve for two (2) years continuous with the aldermanic term. In the event of death or resignation of any member, his/her successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term. If the mayor fails to fill a vacancy on the commission within sixty (60) days following the effective date of that vacancy, then the board of aldermen may fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days thereafter by majority vote of those present. If the board of aldermen fails to fill the vacancy, then the remaining members of the commission may fill the vacancy by appointment within thirty (30) days there following. If such members fail to fill the vacancy in that thirty-day period, then it shall remain vacant until the expiration of the term. The city shall appropriate to the commission such funds as shall be necessary to enable the commission to carry out its responsibilities under this chapter; and in this respect, the funds appropriated for the commission's legal counsel shall at all times be at least equal to the amount then being paid to a half-time special assistant corporation counsel (or equivalent position) under the applicable collective bargaining agreement in effect from time to time. Five (5) members shall constitute a quorum in the exercise of any of the commission's powers and duties, but any three (3) or more members may serve as a hearing tribunal. The commission may adopt such rules and regulations, including rules of practice, as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter. These rules and regulations shall be subject to approval of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 3; Ord. of 10-6-69; Ord. of 5-5-80, § 6(c); Ord. of 6-22-82; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ords. (2) of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-4. - Same—Functions; statutory provisions adopted re equal opportunities. 
The function of the commission shall be: 
(a)  To promote mutual understanding and respect among, and encourage and assure equality of opportunity for, all the people of New Haven without regard for their race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, or handicap to conduct such programs of education, study, research, investigation and action, as well as contribute to carrying out the purposes and provisions of this chapter; and to cooperate with governmental and nongovernmental agencies and organizations in the field of intergroup relations and equal opportunities; and 
(b)  To undertake in New Haven through local official action the implementation of G.S. section 46a-58 (prohibiting the deprivation of rights, privileges or immunities secured or protected by the constitution or laws of Connecticut or of the United States on account of religion, national origin, alienage, color, race, creed, sex, marital status, age, lawful source of income, familial status, blindness, or handicap); G.S. section 46a-59 (prohibiting discrimination in association of licensed persons); G.S. section 46a-60 (prohibiting discriminatory employment practices); G.S. section 46a-64 (prohibiting discrimination in places of public accommodation, including housing); or G.S. section 46a-66 (prohibiting discriminatory credit practices), the provisions whereof are incorporated herein by reference. References in this chapter to such sections of the Connecticut General Statutes shall include amendment thereof as may be made from time to time. 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 4; Ord. of 10-6-69, Ord. of 5-6-74; Ord. of 1-8-79; Ord. of 1-21-86; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-5. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the power and duty: 
(a)  To work with federal, state, and city agencies as well as private, civic, religious, business, industrial, labor and other organizations, groups and persons to achieve harmonious intergroup relations in the community as well as to develop and establish positive programs which will help all members of the community enjoy equality of opportunity in all phases of community life. 
(b)  To study and investigate individual or community problems of limited opportunities, prejudice, discrimination, segregation, and disorder and tensions occasioned thereby. 
(c)  To issue reports and publications on its study, research and investigations designed to promote greater understanding of the problems, needs and progress in the field of intergroup relations and equal opportunities. 
(d)  To enter into cooperative working arrangements with the Connecticut Commission on Human rights and Opportunities and other state and federal agencies having related responsibilities when such arrangements will aid in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this chapter and in minimizing the effectiveness of and avoiding duplication of effort by the commission and such agencies. 
(e)  Through cooperation with the Connecticut Commission of Human Rights and Opportunities and other governmental agencies and officers, pursuant to sections 12½-6 and 12½-7 of this chapter, to assist and afford appropriate relief to any person in the city who has been deprived of any constitutional rights, privileges or immunities or any other rights under federal, state and local anti-discrimination laws. 
(f)  To receive, initiate, investigate and mediate discriminatory practice complaints. 
(g)  To issue subpoenas or subpoenas Duces tecum , to compel the attendance of person at hearings and the production of books, documents, records and papers in Connecticut with any hearing or conference held by the commission or by a commissioner or employee thereof; administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath and require the production for examination and keeping of records, correspondence documents or other evidence relating to any matter under investigation or in question. The commission may make rules as to the procedure for the issuance of subpoenas by individual commissioners or employees of the commission. Contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this section shall constitute contempt punishable, upon application of the authority issuing such subpoena, by the appropriate superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven. Said court may, upon application by the authority issuing a subpoena to this section, enforce the same in the manner provided by statute. 
(h)  To issue written interrogatories and require written answers to interrogatories, under oath, relating to a complaint under investigation by the commission. Upon failure of any person to answer such interrogatories, the commission may file a petition with the interrogatories attached with the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven or any judge thereof, requesting that an order be issued requiring that an answer be filed. The commission shall cause a copy of such petition to be sent by registered or certified mail to the person from whom such answers are sought to his/her legal representative. The court shall assume jurisdiction over such proceedings and may, after hearing, or in the absence of objection, enter an order which it deems appropriate. Such proceedings shall conform to the rules of practice of said court. 
(i)  To hold hearings relating to any allegation of discrimination practice which it has found reasonable cause to believe has occurred, and to issue any appropriate orders and to award punitive and compensatory damages, including, but not limited to, damages for emotional distress, where appropriate. 
(j)  To petition the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven for enforcement of any order issued by the commission upon a finding of violation of the discriminatory practices section of this chapter, including the petitioning of the superior court for any temporary or permanent injunction, temporary restraining order or other order it deems appropriate. 
(k)  To appoint an executive director and a legal counsel and such other staff and consultants as are necessary for the commission to carry out its responsibilities under this chapter. 
(l)  Upon the approval of the mayor and the board of aldermen, to accept outside funds, gifts or bequests, public or private, to help finance its activities under this chapter. 
(m)  To recommend to the mayor and the board of aldermen legislation or policies which will aid in carrying out the purposes and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 5; Ord. of 10-6-69; Ord. of 5-6-74, § 6; Ord. of 1-8-79; Ord. of 1-21-86; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 5; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-6. - Procedure for complaints. 
(a)  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged discriminatory practice, or any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur, hereinafter referred to as the "complainant," may by himself/herself or his/her attorney, make, sign and file with commission a complaint in writing under oath, which shall state the name and address of the person, employer, labor organization or employment agency, hereinafter referred to as the "respondent," alleged to have committed the discriminatory practice, and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be required by the commission. 
Upon the filing of a complaint, the commission shall inform the complainant of alternative state and federal agencies where they may file the complaint and seek relief in lieu of filing with the commission, and the commission shall inform the complainant of the time frames required by the other state and federal agencies for filing. 
After the filing of a complaint pursuant to this subsection, the commission shall serve upon the person claiming to be aggrieved a notice that: (1) acknowledges receipt of the complaint, and (2) advises of the time frames and choice of forums available under this chapter. 
(b)  Alternatively, the executive director of the commission, whenever he/she has reasonable cause for believing that a discriminatory practice has been or is being committed, may issue a complaint and file it with the commission. 
(c)  Any complaint filed pursuant to this section must be so filed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the occurrence of alleged discriminatory practice. Prior to commencement of a hearing pursuant to subsection (k) of this section, a complaint may be amended from time to time with the assent of the executive director. 
(d)  The commission shall not receive, or if it has received, it shall cease acting upon, any complaint where a complaint alleging the same discriminatory practice is pending before the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities. 
(e)  Within ten (10) days after the filing of any discriminatory practice complaint, or an amendment adding an additional respondent, the commission shall cause the complaint to be served upon the respondent together with a notice: 
(1)  Identifying the alleged discriminatory practice; and 
(2)  Advising of the procedural rights and obligations of a respondent under this chapter. The respondent may file a written answer to the complaint under oath with the commission within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the complaint. The chairperson of the commission shall refer the same to the executive director of the commission, or an investigator to investigate and determine if there is reasonable cause for believing that a discriminatory practice has been or is being committed. As used in this section, "reasonable cause" means a bona fide belief that the material issues of fact are such that a reasonable person could believe the facts alleged in the complaint. With respect to any complaint alleging the denial of full and equal accommodations, the investigation shall commence within thirty (30) days of receipt of the complaint. 
(f)  Before issuing a finding of reasonable cause or no reasonable cause, the investigator or executive director shall afford each party and his/her representative an opportunity to provide written or oral comments on all evidence in the commission's file, except as otherwise provided by federal law or any other provision of the general statutes. The commission, its executive director or investigator, shall consider such comments in making its determination. 
(g)  Before issuing a finding of reasonable cause or no reasonable cause, the investigator or executive director shall attempt conciliation. But the refusal to accept a settlement shall not be grounds for dismissal of any complaint. Any conciliation agreement arising out of conciliation efforts by the commission shall be signed by the complainant and the respondent and shall be approved by the commission and made public, unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the commission determines disclosure is not necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(h)  The commission, executive director or investigator may call a fact-finding conference during the investigatory process for the purpose of ascertaining facts, clarifying issues and promoting the voluntary resolution of any complaint of a discriminatory practice. Said conference may be continued from time to time. At any such fact-finding conference, the complainant and respondent shall have a right to be present, the right to be represented by an attorney or other representative, and the right to present and examine witnesses. The fact-finding conference shall be recorded. The recording shall be available only to the parties for review at the offices of the commission. 
(i)  If the executive director or investigator issues a finding of no reasonable cause, the complainant may request reconsideration of such finding with the commission not later than fifteen (15) days from the issuance of such finding. The commission shall reconsider or reject within ninety (90) days of the issuance of such finding. 
(j)  If the executive director determines, after preliminary investigation of a complaint alleging denial of full and equal accommodations in any housing or other accommodation filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, that there is reasonable cause for believing that a discriminatory practice has been or is being committed or upon the filing of a complaint pursuant to subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  The executive director may at any time apply to the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven or any judge therefore for a restraining order or temporary injunction restraining the respondent from any conduct tending to render ineffectual any steps that the commission or the courts may take to eliminate such discriminatory practice, including, but not limited to, restraining the respondent from making unavailable in any way, to the person allegedly discriminated against, the housing or other accommodation with respect to which the alleged discriminatory practice has been committed, and the court or judge thereof may grant such restraining order or temporary injunction upon such terms and conditions as it deems just and proper, pending the final determination of the proceeding under this chapter. 
(2)  The executive director may apply to the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven to seek an award of compensatory and punitive damages, which damages shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses incurred by the complainant for obtaining alternative housing, space, storage of goods and effects, moving, attorney's services, compensation for emotional distress and any other costs actually incurred by the complainant as a result of such unlawful practice. 
(k)  In case endeavors at conference, conciliation or persuasion fail to eliminate such alleged discriminatory practice, the executive director shall promptly certify the complaint and the result of the investigation of the commission. The chairperson of the commission shall thereupon appoint a hearing tribunal of three (3) or more members of the commission to hear such certified complaint, and shall cause to be issued and served in the name of the commission a written notice, together with a copy of such certified complaint to be presented and heard at a hearing before the tribunal, at a time and place to be specified in the notice. The respondent may file a written answer to the certified complaint. The complainant and the respondent may appear at such hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, and submit testimony and be fully heard. The tribunal conducting any hearing may permit reasonable amendment to any certified complaint or answer at any time. The tribunal may compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of any evidence relevant and material to the subject matter of the certified complaint. Any endeavors or negotiations for conciliation shall not be received in evidence. The testimony taken at such hearing shall be under oath and recorded. 
(l)  If, upon all the evidence, the tribunal finds that a respondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and file with the commission, and cause to be served on such respondent an order requiring such action, affirmative or otherwise, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Hiring or reinstatement of employees with or without back pay, provided liability for back pay shall not accrue from a date more than two (2) years prior to the issuance of such complaint, and provided further that interim earnings, including unemployment compensation and welfare assistance, shall be deducted from the back pay to which such person is otherwise entitled; or 
(2)  Restoration to membership in any respondent labor organizations; or 
(3)  Offering housing accommodations for sale or rent, as in the judgment of the tribunal will effectuate the purposes of this chapter; and 
(4)  Attorney's fees, compensatory damages, punitive damages and other actual costs incurred by the complainant. 
If, upon all evidence, the tribunal finds that the respondent has not engaged in any alleged discriminatory practice, it shall state its findings and shall similarly issue, file and serve upon the complainant an order dismissing the complaint. Upon the dismissal of a complaint, the commission shall advise the complainant of his/her right to file a complaint seeking relief with the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and the time frame required by the commission on human rights. 
(m)  Any action, including an order, of a hearing tribunal shall be deemed to be an action of the commission. 
(n)  The power granted to the court to issue a restraining order or temporary injunction pursuant to this section is hereby made subject to the same conditions which are set forth in G.S. sections 52-471 and 52-472 for the issuance of restraining orders and temporary injunctions generally; and the commission in making application for such temporary injunction or restraining order shall post bond, with surety satisfactory to the court or judge, which bond shall run in favor of the respondent, to answer all damages in case the commission fails to prosecute the action for which the injunction has been applied; provided a bond need not be required when, for good cause shown, a court or judge is of the opinion that a temporary injunction ought to be issued without bond. 
(o)  With respect to any complaint alleging denial of full and equal accommodations in housing, the complainant shall be informed at the time the complaint is filed of the availability of injunctive relief and may request the executive director to seek same. The executive director shall promptly notify the complainant whether an injunction will be sought. 
(p)  All complaints filed with the commission shall be investigated within one hundred (100) days of filing, and a final administrative disposition shall be made within one (1) year of filing unless it is impracticable to do so. If the commission is unable to complete its investigation or make a final administrative determination within such time frames, it shall notify the complainant and the respondent in writing of the reasons for not doing so. 
(q)  The commission shall adopt rules and regulations governing its process for receiving and acting upon complaints. Such rules and regulations shall be reviewed biennially by the commission, and such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval of the board of aldermen. 
(r)  Nothing in this section limits the applicability of any reasonable state statute or municipal ordinance regarding the maximum number of persons permitted to occupy a dwelling. 
(s)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate or limit any state statute or municipal ordinance that requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords persons with physical or other mental disabilities greater access than is required by this article or C.G.S. section 46a-64b. 
(t)  Nothing in this article prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, lawful source of income, learning disability or physical or mental disability. 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 6; Ord. of 10-6-69; Ord. of 1-8-79; Ord. of 1-21-86; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 2; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-7. - Enforcement of orders; appeals. 
(a)  The commission or the attorney for the complainant may petition the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven or other court of competent jurisdiction (as used in this section, "court" shall mean, if the court is not in session, any judge thereof), for the enforcement of any order issued by tribunal under the provisions of this chapter and for appropriate temporary relief such as a restraining order or temporary injunction, and shall thereafter certify and file in the court a transcript of the entire record of the proceedings, including the pleadings and testimony upon which such order was made and the findings and orders of the hearing tribunal. Within five (5) days after filing such petition in the court, the commission or the attorney for the complainant shall cause a notice of such petition to be sent by registered or certified mail to the complainant or to the commission if the complainant's attorney has filed the petition, and the respondent or their representatives. The court shall have jurisdiction of the proceedings and of the questions determined thereon, and shall have the power to grant such relief by injunction or otherwise, including temporary relief, as it deems just and suitable and to make and enter, upon the pleadings, testimony and proceedings set forth in such transcript, a decree enforcing, modifying and enforcing as so modified, or setting aside, in whole or in part, any order of the hearing tribunal. 
(b)  No objection that has not been urged before the hearing tribunal shall be considered by the court unless the failure to urge such objection is excused because of extraordinary circumstances. The findings of the hearing tribunal as to the facts, if supported by substantial and competent evidence, shall be conclusive. If either the commission, the complainant or the respondent applies to the court for leave to adduce additional evidence and shows to the satisfaction of the court that such additional evidence is material and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the hearing, the court may order such additional evidence to be taken before the same hearing tribunal and to be made part of the transcript. The tribunal may modify its findings as to the facts, or make new findings, by reason of additional evidence so taken; and it shall file with the commission and in court such modified or new findings, which, if supported by substantial and competent evidence, shall be conclusive, and shall file its recommendations, if any, for the modification or setting aside of its original order. 
(c)  The judgment and decree of the court shall be final except that the same shall be subject to appeal by either the commission, complainant or the respondent, irrespective of the nature of the decree or judgment. Such appeal shall be taken and prosecuted in the same manner and form and with the same effect as is provided in other cases of appeal, and the record so certified shall contain all that was before the lower court. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by an order of the commission or hearing tribunal may appeal in accordance with G.S. section 7-148l CGS to the state commission on human rights and opportunities or to the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven for judicial review. Any such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the written decision. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by the dismissal of a complaint by the commission shall have a right to appeal such dismissal to the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven in accordance with statutory and superior court rules provided thereof. 
(f)  Unless otherwise directed by the commission, tribunal or court, commencement of review proceedings under this section shall operate as a stay of any order. 
(g)  Petitions filed under this section shall be heard expeditiously and determined upon the transcript filed, without requirement of printing. Hearings in the court or before any judge thereof under this chapter shall take precedence over all other matters, except matters of the same character, to the extent consistent with the general statutes and the rules of the court. 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 7; Ord. of 1-21-86; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-8. - Cooperation. 
All departments, boards, commissions, agencies, bureaus, officers, officials and employees of the city shall cooperate with the commission in implementing this chapter, and the heads thereof shall furnish the commission information in their possession when the commission upon the approval of the mayor, so requests. 
(Ord. of 5-14-64, § 8)  
Secs. 12½-9—12½-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HIRING PRACTICES IN THE CONSTRUCTION TRADES 
 
Sec. 12½-19. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms mean: 
(a)  Agency: Any agency, authority, board, commission or department of the city. 
(b)  Apprentice: A person employed under a written agreement enrolled in a registered program approved by the state to work at and to learn a specific trade, as defined in Connecticut General Statutes section 31-51a. 
(c)  Bidder: Any person, partnership, corporation, association or joint venture to be awarded a public contract. 
(d)  Building trade or commission: Any of those trades, crafts or occupations normally associated with the preparation for and construction, maintenance or removal of manmade structures or parts thereof, the member of which trades, crafts and occupations include, without limitation, plumbers, iron workers, electrical workers, bricklayers, carpenters, marble polishers, operating engineers, steamfitters, painters, laborers, sheet metal workers, boilermakers, elevator constructors, asbestos workers, lathers, plasterers and roofers. 
(e)  City-related construction contract: Any construction contract toward which the city makes any cash payment, payment of in-kind services, or provision of land for construction thereon and includes any and all contracts involved in any part of an official redevelopment plan of the city where said redevelopment plan requires the city to furnish cash, noncash equivalents or credits, in-kind services, or any other expenditure of city staff, money or material. 
(f)  Construction contract: Any public contract for the construction, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension or repair of buildings, streets or other improvements to real property. 
(g)  Contractor: Any person, partnership, corporation, association or joint venture which has been awarded a public contract, and included is every subcontractor on such a contract. 
(h)  Director: The director of the office of contract compliance. 
(i)  Discriminate, discriminates, and discrimination: Distinguish, differentiate, separate or segregate solely on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, age, national origin, or physical disability. 
(j)  Equal employment opportunity goals: A minimum percentage figure set for each construction trade, craft or occupation established by the director as provided in this article, expressed as a percentage of the total work force in a particular building trade, craft or occupation. 
(k)  Journeyman: A fully-trained and fully-accredited member of a building trade union. 
(l)  Member: Any person who is enrolled with a building trade union at the apprentice level or higher. 
(m)  Minority-group employee: Any minority employee. 
(n)  Minority: (1) Black Americans, including all persons having origins in any of the Black African racial groups not of Hispanic origin; (2) Hispanic Americans, including all persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race; (3) Asian Pacific Americans and Pacific Islanders; or (4) American Indians and persons having origins in any of the original peoples of North America and maintaining identifiable tribal affiliations through membership and participation or community identification. 
(o)  Public contract: Any agreement or formal commitment entered into by the city if the city is authorized to expend or does expend funds in return for work, labor services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing, or any lease, lease by way of concession, concession agreement, permit, or permit agreement whereby the city leases, grants or demises property belonging to the city, or otherwise to grant a right or privilege to occupy or to use said property of the city. The granting of tax abatement agreements shall be included. 
(p)  Referral union: A labor organization under whose normal methods of operation individuals customarily and regularly seek or gain employment through the union or the agent of the union. 
(q)  Subcontractor: Any person, partnership, corporation, association or joint venture which supplies any of the work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing under a contract with the contractor on a public contract. 
(r)  Target minority and women employment goal: A minimum percentage figure set for each construction trade, craft or occupation established by the director as provided in this article, expressed as a percentage of the total work force in a particular building trade, craft or occupation. 
(s)  Union: A building trades referral union. 
(t)  Women group employee: Any female employee. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(a), (j); Ord. of 7-6-99, § 2; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-20. - Office of contract compliance. 
(a)  Contract compliance director. 
(1)  There is hereby established in the New Haven Commission on Equal Opportunities (hereinafter referred to as "the commission") a contract compliance office, headed by a contract compliance director. 
(2)  The contract compliance director shall be subject to the supervision of the executive director of the commission, shall administer and enforce the city's equal contract opportunity programs established by sections 12½-19 through 12½-33, establish procedures to effectuate such sections, make all determinations as to compliance with the program, and shall meet with said contracting parties for such purposes. He shall have at his disposal the resources of all city agencies which may be under contract with the city. 
(b)  Contract compliance officers: Any city agency which has awarded at least four (4) city-related construction contracts each valued at one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more, or at least one such contract valued at two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or more, during a fiscal year beginning no earlier than the effective date of this article, or any agency which solicits bids and contracts directly, shall designate an employee within such agency to act as a contract compliance officer. 
(1)  Each such agency shall propose to the director the name of an employee to be designated as its contract compliance officer. 
(2)  The director shall approve the name so submitted, but shall retain the power to request at any later date the substitution of another employee of said agency in the position of contract compliance officer. Such substitution shall be requested by the director only after an adequate showing by him to the affected agency of the failure of the employee in question to properly discharge his duties as contract compliance officer, as set forth in section 12½-21(b) of this article. 
(3)  Once established, the position of contract compliance officer shall remain filled as long as a city agency shall have in the process of construction any city-related construction contract or so long as such agency continues to award contracts directly. 
(4)  In their capacity as contract compliance officers, all employees so designated shall report to the director. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(b); Ord. of 7-6-99, § 3)  
Sec. 12½-21. - Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the director shall include: 
(1)  The setting of a target minority and women employment goal for each trade or craft at least once every five (5) years, in consultation with the commission, the construction contractors in the New Haven area, and the building trades referral unions in the New Haven area; 
a.  This goal shall be set based on factors such as, but not limited to the percentage of minority and women group population to the total population to the total population in New Haven, the availability of minority group and women group personnel, the training requirements for potential minority group and women group construction trade workers, and conditions of the construction labor market in the New Haven area; 
b.  Under no circumstances, shall the minimum minority employment goal be less than sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of the percentage of minority group population in relation to the total population of New Haven, as derived from the latest available Connecticut Department of Labor figures or working estimates, and the minimum women employment goal shall be not less that six and nine-tenths (6.9) percent of the workforce or as modified by the director upon review of the factors set forth in this section; 
(2)  Establishment of requirements which outline specified percentages of minority and women apprentices, trainees, et al, which have failed to take affirmative action to increase the number of minority and women group members within their ranks; 
(3)  Set equal employment opportunity goals for the occupational groups utilized by supply contractors, vendors, and service contractors doing business with the city. Such ranges shall reflect the following: 
a.  Present minority and women participation in analogous occupational groups within the labor market area; and 
b.  Percent of unemployed which are represented by minority persons and women in the employer's labor market area; and 
c.  Potential for recruitment of qualifiable minority persons, women and physically disabled individuals; 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Final approval, rejection, or modification, after consultation with legal counsel for the commission, of all minority and women personnel plans subject to appropriate judicial review; 
(6)  Assistance to contractor and unions in the implementation and maintenance of minority and women personnel play goals; 
(7)  Supervision of contract compliance officers; 
(8)  Recommendation to the commission of remedial action or penalties in the event of noncompliance, as set forth in section 12½-35 of this article; 
(b)  The duties of the contract compliance officers shall include: 
(1)  Assistance in the negotiation of specific minority and women personnel plans with building trades unions; 
(2)  Liaison activities with building trades referral unions, including assistance in the establishment of recruitment methods for obtaining minority group and women group employees; 
(3)  Obtaining semi-annual minority and women personnel employment data reports from all contractors, vendors and suppliers working under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Assistance to state training council, building trades, referral unions and contractors in meeting the requirements of section 12½-33; monitoring compliance with the requirements of section 12½-33 including obtaining certified payrolls which shall be filed with the board of aldermen as said board may request. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(c)—(e), (j); Ord. of 7-6-99, § 4)  
Sec. 12½-22. - Affirmative action plans. 
(a)  Effective with the date upon which the director sets the target minority and women employment goals, no construction contractor who obtains his labor force through building trades referral unions shall be awarded any city-related construction contract with an estimated total value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, or aggregate total value of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) annually, unless he/she demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that he/she and all subcontractors, with contracts valued at twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more, will obtain all their construction labor force for that project from building trades referral unions which have adopted personnel plans in accordance with this article for the increasing of minority group and women group membership in each trade or craft. All such minority and women personnel plans shall be incorporated in appropriate construction contract document between affected construction contractors and city agencies. 
(b)  (1)  Each building trades referral union having jurisdiction over members of that trade within the city which, on the effective date of this article, has one (1) or more members working on any city related construction contract shall adopt, within six (6) months of the effective date of this article, a minority and women personnel plan after consultation with the director, the contract compliance officers, and the construction contractors in the New Haven area. Each minority and women personnel plan shall describe the market minority and women employment goal for each trade or craft and means by which the union, with the assistance of the contractors in the New Haven area, through existing maximum efforts, shall attempt to meet those goals provided that the minimum goal of minority-group and women-group employees shall not be required to exceed the target minority and women employment range as set by the director. 
(2)  Any building trade referral union which does not, as of the effective date of this article, have one (1) or more members working on any city-related construction contract shall be required to adopt minority and women personnel plan pursuant to this subsection (b) within six (6) months after the date on which one (1) or more of its members begins working on any city related construction contract. 
(3)  In order to achieve the target minority and women employment goals, each building trade referral union, in consultation with construction contractors, the director and the contract compliance officers, shall adopt all necessary policies to promote compliance with the target goals. Such policies may include, without limitation: 
a.  Development of and/or intensification of efforts to obtain minority group and women group membership at the apprentice or higher levels through minority group and women group organizations and informal contracts in predominantly minority communities and women groups. 
b.  Referral of minority group and women group union members to employers without regard to any seniority system imposed by contract or custom; and 
c.  Relaxation of present union requirements to allow contractors to seek qualified minority group and women group employees outside the normal union hiring hall arrangements. 
(4)  Contractors and unions shall make every effort to shorten the period of apprenticeship training required for advancement to full journeyman status in order to help meet the minority group and women group target employment goals, and shall exert maximum effort toward rapid development of alternative means of achieving union entry for unskilled workers. 
(5)  Contractors and unions shall to the extent feasible in light of existing minority and women work force conditions, attempt to achieve the target minority and women employment goal through a balanced minority and women recruitment effort, with the purpose of providing entry into the building trades unions for both experienced nonunion, minority group craftsmen, women group craftsmen, unskilled minority group youth, and unskilled women group youth. 
(c)  Minority/women apprenticeship training programs. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or regulation of the city to the contrary, programs to encourage the advancement of minority and women apprenticeship training, approved and registered by the Connecticut Department of Labor, and filed for monitoring purposes with the city's commission of equal opportunities, shall be in place on all construction projects commenced after the effective date of this section, which meet the following criteria: 
(i)  Construction projects involving city-related construction contracts which are defined in section 12½-19 of this Code as amended from time to time. 
(ii)  Construction projects which are taking place upon land which was sold by the city through a land disposition agreement on or after the effective date of this section [October 18, 1986]. 
(iii)  Construction projects taking place on property: 
1.  Which has received tax abatement and/or assessment deferral on or after the effective date of this section; or 
2.  For which the board of aldermen has, on or after the effective date of this amendment [March 15, 1983], approved a tax abatement and/or assessment deferral. For the purposes of this section, "construction projects" shall include projects which involve a construction contract as defined in section 12½-19 of the Code of General Ordinances as amended from time to time that involve the construction trades. 
(2)  Prior to, and as a condition of, the execution of contracts involving any of the benefits described in section 12½-19 which constitute city assistance, proposed contractors and developers shall submit a written plan for implementation of such programs to encourage the advancement of minority and women apprenticeship training, as described in section (1) above, to begin with the commencement of construction on any project not exempted from the requirements of this section as amended from time to time. The plan shall have specific goals for minorities and women participants in the various trades as set by the commission on equal opportunities pursuant to section 12½-21(a)(1) as amended from time to time, and which may, according to that section, be changed from time to time. 
(3)  The contract compliance officer for each project, under the direction of the contract compliance director, shall monitor all hereinabove described construction projects to ensure the existence and operation of a registered and approved apprenticeship program as required herein. All reports required by the contract compliance officer shall be filed by the contractor. 
(4)  The following contractors shall be required to comply with the requirements of this section regarding submission of plans: 
(i)  Contractors for construction projects, as defined in section 12½-22(c)(1), above, as amended from time to time, with a value of more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(ii)  Contractors for more than one (1) concurrent construction project which have a cumulative value of more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(iii)  Contractors performing services pursuant to city-related construction contracts for which there is no general contractors and having a value of more than one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00); provided that nothing in this subsection (c)(4)(iii) is intended or shall be construed to apply to any contractor covered under subsection (c)(4)(i) of this section as amended from time to time. 
(5)  Contractors for projects exempted, pursuant to section 12½-22(c)(4), above, as amended from time to time from the requirements of this section shall be required to maintain records, in a form prescribed by the commission of equal opportunities, attesting to their hiring practices, and the results of hiring referrals. Said records shall be made available to the contract compliance officer upon written request from that officer. 
(6)  Enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be included with and conducted according to the provisions of section 12½-25 of this Code as amended from time to time. 
(7)  All contractors in compliance with this section 12½-22(c) shall be deemed, without further action, to be in compliance with [sections] 12½-22(a) and 12½-22(b) as amended from time to time. 
(8)  The goals for minorities and women apprentices, as specified in subsection (c)(2) of this section 12½-22 as amended from time to time, shall be the same as those set under the powers and duties as set forth in section 12½-21 of this chapter as amended from time to time, and nothing in this section 12½-22 as amended from time to time shall be so construed as to change, limit or otherwise affect those powers and duties contained in section 12½-21 of this chapter as amended from time to time, as they apply to the commission on equal opportunities or its executive director. 
(9)  All contractors subject to the requirements of section 12½-22(b) as amended from time to time who comply with the requirements of that subsection shall be deemed without further action to be in compliance with section 12½-22(c) as amended from time to time. 
(10)  Subsections (1) through (9) of section 12½-22(c) as amended from time to time shall be reviewed formally by the commission on equal opportunities and the board of aldermen on the third year anniversary of its effective date [October 18, 1986]. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 10-6-86; Ord. of 3-1-93; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1421, § 2, 6-5-06)  
Sec. 12½-23. - Equal employment opportunity clause. 
All public contracts hereinafter entered into by the city shall incorporate an equal employment opportunity clause, which shall read as follows: 
"During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees: 
(a)  To comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246, Executive Order 11375, and Executive Order 12138, the Connecticut Fair Employment Practices Act, and the contract compliance ordinance of the city as all are amended from time to time, including all standards and regulations which are promulgated by the government authorities who established such acts and requirements, and all standards and regulations are incorporated herein by reference; 
(b)  Not to discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, age, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, physical disability or national origin. The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, age, national origin, or physical disability. Such action shall include but not be limited to the following: employment, upgrading, demotion, or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff, or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship; 
(c)  To post notices to be provided by the contracting officer setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment; 
(d)  To state, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, that all qualified applicants will reeive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, gender identity or expression, sexual orientation, age, national origin, or physical disability. 
(e)  To send to each union or representative of workers with whom he/she has a collective bargaining agreement, or other contract or understanding, a notice advising the labor union or worker's representative of the contractor's commitments under the equal opportunity clause of the city, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. The contractor shall register all workers in the skilled trades, who are below the journeyman level, with the Connecticut Department of Labor, Office of Apprenticeship Training; 
(f)  To utilize labor department and city sponsored manpower programs as a source of recruitment, and to notify the contract compliance unit and such programs of all job vacancies; 
(g)  To take affirmative action to negotiate with qualified minority and women contractors for any work which may be proposed for subletting or for any additional services, supplied, or work which may be required as a result of this contract; 
(h)  To cooperate with city departments in implementing required contract obligations for increasing the utilization of minority and women business enterprises; 
(i)  To furnish all information and reports required by the contract compliance director pursuant to section 12 1/2-19 through section 12 1/2-32 and to permit access to his/her books, records and accounts by the contracting agency, the contract compliance officer, and the secretary of labor for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the program; 
(j)  To take such action, with respect to any subcontractor, as the city may direct as a means of enforcing the provisions of subparagraphs (a) through (m) herein, including penalties and sanctions for noncompliance, provided however that, in the event the contractor becomes involved in or is threatened with litigation as a result of such direction by the city, the city will intervene in such litigation to the extent necessary to protect the interest of the city and to effectuate the city's equal employment opportunity program. In the case of contracts funded directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, under one (1) or more federal assistance programs, the contractor or the city may ask the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interest of the United States; 
(k)  To file, along with his subcontractors, if any, compliance reports with the city in the form and to the extent prescribed in the contract by the contract compliance director of the city. Compliance reports filed at such times as directed shall contain information as to the employment practices, policies, programs and statistics of the contractor and his subcontractors, if any; 
(l)  To include the provisions of subparagraphs (a) through (m) of this equal opportunity clause in every subcontract or purchase order so that said provisions will be binding upon each such subcontractor or vendor; 
(m)  That a finding, as hereinafter provided of a refusal by the contractor, or subcontractor, to comply with any portion of this program as herein stated and described, may subject the offending party to any or all of the penalties; 
(1)  Withholding of all future payments under the involved public contract to the contractor in violation until it is determined that the contractor, or subcontractor is in compliance with the provisions of the contract; 
(2)  Refusal of all future bids for any public contract with the city, or any of its departments or divisions, until such time as the contractor, or subcontractor, is in compliance with the provisions of the contract; 
(3)  Cancellation of the public contract; 
(4)  Recovery of specified monetary penalties; 
(5)  In case of substantial or material violation, or the threat or substantial or material violation, or the threat of substantial or material violation, of the compliance procedure or as may be provided for by contract, appropriate equitable or legal proceedings may be brought to enforce these provisions against contractors; subcontractors, or other organizations, individuals or groups who directly or indirectly are not in compliance with the policy as herein outlined. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(f); Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-24. - Contract compliance requirements. 
(a)  All notices to prospective bidders published on behalf of the city shall include, as part of the contract specifications, the conditions that all bidders must be required to comply with the New Haven contract compliance program regarding equal employment opportunity. All reports required herein shall be submitted in duplicate to the agency letting the contract. Each bidder shall file, as part of bid documents, contract employment records with the city contracting agency or as may be directed by the contract compliance director, such employment and subcontracting practices, policies, programs and statistics of the contractor; and shall be in such form as the contract compliance director may prescribe. Subcontractors shall also submit such contract employment and subcontracting reports to the city before approval by the city as subcontractor. 
(b)  Suppliers, vendors and services shall provide an equal opportunity assurance and/or an affirmative action plan which is acceptable to the director of contract compliance. 
(c)  All firms doing business with the city shall utilize city sponsored recruitment and training programs to the most feasible extent in order to ensure the hiring of qualifiable minority, women and physically disabled employees, trainees and apprentices. 
(d)  Any firm which fails to meet compliance requirements as set by the contract compliance director and has failed to furnish evidence of meaningful contact with department of labor sponsored or other recognized sources of minority, women and physically disabled employees shall be deemed in noncompliance with the contract compliance program. 
(e)  Failure of a contractor, or major subcontractor, to file forms prescribed by the contract compliance director shall be cause for determination of noncompliance with the terms of this article. 
(f)  A contractor who refuses to agree to and comply with an affirmative action plan designed to effectuate the purpose of this article is precluded from being a "responsible bidder" as that term is used in the City Charter. 
(g)  Any subcontractor who refuses to agree to or comply with an affirmative action plan designed to effectuate the purpose of this article shall be rejected as a subcontractor by the contracting agency involved. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-25. - Enforcement provisions. 
(a)  Any building trade referral union which fails to reach the target minority and women employment goals shall not automatically be deemed in noncompliance with the terms of this article, provided it affirmatively demonstrates to the office of contract compliance that every effort was made to achieve compliance. 
(1)  If the director determines, after proper investigation, that the union has failed to exert maximum effort to ensure compliance, the director shall order all contractors using that union as their labor source for a building trade or craft to draw from other nonunion resources in order to bring the level of minority group and women group employment in that building trade or craft city-related contract to up to the applicable percentage of the required minority and women employment goals; 
(2)  If in the judgment of the director, any contractor involved does not exert maximum effort to increase minority group and women group employment as per section 12½-21(a)(3), or violates the obligations of section 12½-23, section 12½-22(c) as it applies to apprenticeship training, and section 12½-24, the director shall recommend to the commission that it: 
a.  Recommend to the appropriate city agency that all payments be canceled, terminated or suspended on the contract(s) involved until such time as the contractor provides specific assurances of future compliance and a specific plan of achievement of such compliance; and/or 
b.  Recommend to all city agencies that they refrain from entering into further contracts, or extensions or other modifications of existing contracts, with any noncomplying contractor until such time as such contractor provides specific assurance of future compliance; and/or 
c.  Recommend to appropriate city agencies the recovery by the administering agency, from the general contractor of one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of one (1) percent of the contract award price in the nature of liquidated damages, or if a subcontractor is in noncompliance, the recovery by the administering agency from the general contractor as a back charge against the subcontractor, of one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of one (1) percent of the subcontract price, in the nature of liquidated damages, for each week that such contractor fails or refuses to comply; and/or 
d.  Publish, or cause to be published, the names of contractors or subcontractors or unions which have been found, after appropriate proceedings to be in violation of this article or any rules, regulations, or orders of said office. 
e.  If a majority of the commission so recommends, its findings shall be legally binding on each appropriate city agency, subject to appropriate judicial review initiated by the contractor involved, until such time as the commission shall determine that a satisfactory, specific plan of compliance, using either complying union or nonunion sources, has been given by the contractor and that said plan is being properly pursued. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 10-6-86; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(h), (j); Ord. of 3-12-01) 
Editor's note— Former § 12½-25 was repealed by § 1(g) of an ordinance of June 18, 1990. The repealed provisions pertained to minority and women bidders, vendors and contractors and derived from an ordinance of Dec. 5, 1977 as amended by an ordinance of June 6, 1983. Sec. 1(j) of the June 18, 1990 ordinance then renumbered former §§12½-26—12½-33 as 12½-25—12½32.  
Sec. 12½-26. - Pre-award conference. 
(a)  Following receipt and review of the employment information required by the contract compliance division and prior to award of a contract, the apparent successful bidder and his major subcontractors shall be required to attend a pre-award conference, if called by the contract compliance director, at which time such bidder and major subcontractors shall submit affirmative action programs to promote equal opportunity in employment. At such pre-award conference the contract compliance director shall notify the apparent successful bidder and his major subcontractors about section 12½-31 and the penalties for noncompliance. The contract compliance director shall determine whether or not the apparent successful bidder has complied with sections 12½-22 through 12½-25, and then shall submit his determination and recommendation thereon to the commission and the director of the department involved. After receiving the recommendation of the contract compliance director, the executive director of the commission shall process the award recommendation to the awarding agency. 
(b)  In the event of noncompliance, the executive director shall recommend that the apparent successful bidder be declared nonresponsive. 
(c)  No contract over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be finally awarded until the contract compliance director, or his representative, has had reasonable time to review submissions from contractors, vendors and convene a pre-award conference. The contract compliance director shall notify the awarding department, at once, as to the intention to convene such a conference. 
(d)  No major subcontractor on any construction project over one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) shall arrive on such project until such time as the necessary pre-construction compliance information, as designated by the contract compliance director, has been submitted. Failure to submit such information shall prohibit the awarding authority from authorizing such a subcontractor to begin work. 
(e)  Contractor's affirmative action plans shall address the possibility of inclusion of handicapped persons in their labor forces. The contracting agency shall be responsible for collection necessary information to determine the degree of compliance, if any, and the apparent ability to comply. This data must be submitted to the contract compliance division for review and approval. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(i), (j); Ord. of 1-5-98, § 2; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1292, § 2, 11-19-01 ; Ord. No. 1347, § 13, 5-3-04)  
Sec. 12½-27. - Project site reports. 
Where a construction contract exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), a project site report shall be completed and submitted by both the contractor and subcontractor not more than thirty (30) days from the beginning of work on the site. 
(a)  Such project site reports shall include such information as to employment practices and statistics of the contractor, and each subcontractor, and shall be in such form as the contract compliance director may prescribe. 
(b)  Where the terms of the contract exceed thirty (30) days, a project site report shall be submitted each month, or more frequently if the contract compliance director determines that such additional information is necessary for the continuing evaluation of the work force composition. 
(c)  Subcontractors shall complete and submit such project reports to the contractor for the transmittal to the city. 
(d)  Post-award reports shall be reviewed as one means of determining contract compliance. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 6-18-90, §(j); Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1292, § 3, 11-19-01)  
Sec. 12½-28. - Intergovernmental cooperation. 
In the event that specific discriminatory practices are found in the administration and enforcement of this article, to the sanctions that may be imposed as provided for the terms of the contract, the city may forward all pertinent information to the appropriate federal and state agencies. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(j); Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-29. - Inter-departmental cooperation. 
(a)  The contract compliance director shall conduct periodic reviews of the practices and policies of all city departments which purchase goods and services, and undertake capital projects with respect to equal opportunity in contracting; and shall report to the commission as to their success in promoting the participation of minority and women businesses. In connection with this task, the contract compliance director may require contracting agencies to file pertinent reports with said office. All city departments will cooperate with the commission to promote the participation of minority-owned firms in their purchasing. 
(b)  At the time of preparation and prior to notice to bid or final negotiation for all city contracts, the contract documents prepared concerning equal opportunity provisions shall be forwarded to the commission's legal counsel for review, and shall meet with the approval of the commission to ensure that the purposes of this article are met. 
(1)  All city agencies are to notify the commission in a timely fashion of all notices to bid and the results of all bid openings. 
(2)  All city departments will cooperate with the commission to arrange for the integration of contract compliance procedures into existing departmental procedures. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-6-83; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(j); Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-30. - Contract disposition. 
(a)  In the event a contractor fails to cooperate in reaching mutually satisfactory solutions or to implement contract compliance agreements, the contract compliance director shall review such cases to determine: 
(1)  Whether further efforts or alternative approaches are desirable; (such alternatives may involve contact with industry, related labor unions, or requesting the assistance of the office of federal contract compliance and the particular federal agency involved by further negotiations); or 
(2)  Whether any of the penalties set forth in section 12½-23(m) are appropriate to the case. 
(b)  In the event the contract compliance director determines that the contractor is in violation with the equal opportunity employment requirements of the contract, after affording such contractor a reasonable time to take corrective steps, and where negotiations have been futile, he shall make said findings pursuant to subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section and shall transmit said findings to the commission for appropriate redress. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(j); Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-31. - Minimum wage requirements. 
The minimum wage paid on the following projects shall correspond to the state prevailing wages, or if applicable, the prevailing wages promulgated in accordance with the Federal Davis Bacon Act. The applicable prevailing wages to be paid shall be posted by the contractor in a prominent and easily accessible place at the site of work, and weekly payroll reports shall be submitted therefor: 
(1)  a.  Contracts for the construction, repairing or remodeling of public buildings or public works of any kind by the city or any of its divisions where the contract exceeds one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
b.  For contracts for the construction, repairing or remodeling of public buildings or public works of any kind by the city or any of its divisions where the contract is less than one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) the minimum wage paid shall be no less than the amount specified as the living wage for the city as established by section 2-228 of this Code. 
(2)  Any contracts for projects which are subject to the provisions of section 12½-22 of this Code, except those projects consisting of rental rehabilitation projects administered by the city and consisting of less than twelve (12) units, those projects consisting of residential rehabilitation contracts and/or projects administered by the city and consisting of less than eight (8) units, and those programs which may from time to time be exempted from the provisions of the Federal Davis Bacon Act as published on CFR 24. 
(3)  Payroll reports shall be submitted immediately upon completion of the work week, but in no case later than thirty (30) days from the end of each work week. All notices to prospective bidders published on behalf of the city shall include as part of the contract specifications, the condition that bidders must comply in all respects with this section 12½-31. 
(4)  The office of the commission on equal opportunities shall review all said wage reports on a weekly basis. A finding of late submission or noncompliance with any part of this section 12½-31 shall subject the offending party to any or all of the following penalties: 
a.  Withholding of all future payments under the involved public contract to the contractor in violation until it is determined that the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance; 
b.  Refusal of all future bids for any public contract with the city, or any of its departments or divisions, until such time as the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance; 
c.  Cancellation of the public contract; 
d.  Recovery of specified monetary penalties; 
e.  In case of substantial or material violation, or the threat of substantial or material violation of the compliance procedure, appropriate equitable or legal proceedings may be brought to enforce these provisions against contractors, subcontractors who directly or indirectly are not in compliance with this section 12½-31. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 2-21-84; Ord. of 2-22-89, § 1; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(j); Ord. of 1-5-98, § 1; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1292, § 4, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 1808 , § 1, 10-5-16)  
Sec. 12½-32. - Severability clause. 
Sections 12½-9 through 12½-33, and each part of such sections are hereby declared to be independent sections and parts of sections and, notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, if any provision of said sections, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remaining sections, or parts of sections, and the application of such provisions to any person or circumstances, other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that this article would have been passed independently of such section, sections, or parts of sections so held to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 12-5-77; Ord. of 6-18-90, § 1(j); Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-33. - Apprentice hiring. 
All contractors for construction projects which utilize apprenticeable trades or occupations in the performance of contracts subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  The contractor shall be affiliated with a state certified apprenticeship program for each apprenticeable trade or occupation represented in its workforce. 
(b)  A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the workforce by trade employed by contractors on any and all city contracts subject to the requirements of this section shall be apprentices and, of this number, a minimum of fifty (50) percent shall be in the first year of apprenticeship training. 
(Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1)  
Secs. 12½-34—12½-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RENT DISCRIMINATION AGAINST FAMILIES OR SINGLE PARENTS WITH CHILDREN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fair rent practices, ch. 12¾. 
 
Sec. 12½-41. - Findings. 
Discrimination against families with minor children exists in the leasing of housing accommodations within the city. The existence of such discrimination poses a substantial threat to the health, safety and welfare of a sizable segment of the community, namely families with children, and is detrimental to the natural diversity of young and old which is essential to community well-being. 
A shortage of housing suitable for families with minor children exists in all rental housing throughout the city. A low vacancy rate exists in all rental housing throughout the city. Yet, the escalating costs of ownership of housing are driving more families into rental housing. The addition of discrimination against families with minor children to the above three (3) factors creates a dangerous situation for the health, safety and welfare of minor children in the city. 
The overall effect of such discrimination is to encourage the flight of families from the city and to further diminish family-oriented neighborhoods. It has an overall detrimental effect on the social composition of family life within the city, the living conditions of our children, the quality of our schools, and the viability of children's activities and organizations. 
This discrimination falls most heavily on families of low and moderate income, but cuts across all racial, ethnic and economic levels. 
(Ord. of 5-5-80, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-42. - Definitions. 
(a)  Minor child means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Elderly person means any person who has attained the age of sixty (60) or more years. 
(c)  Lessor means the owner, real estate broker, assignee or other person having the right of ownership, the right of possession or the right to rent or lease any housing accommodation, or any agent or employee of such person. 
(d)  Dwelling means any building, structure, mobile manufactured home park or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residency by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, mobile manufactured home park or portion thereof. 
(e)  Family includes a single individual. 
(f)  Person includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, receivers and fiduciaries. 
(g)  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(h)  Handicap means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
(i)  Aggrieved person includes any person who: 
(1)  Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or 
(2)  Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
(j)  Complainant means the person (including the executive director) who files a complaint under section 12½-6. 
(k)  Familial status means one (1) or more individuals who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person; or 
(3)  Any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
The protection afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(l)  Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by complaint, or by the investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiation involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the chairperson. 
(m)  Conciliation agreement means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation. 
(n)  Respondent means: 
(1)  The person or other entity accused in a complaint of an unfair housing practice; and 
(2)  Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation and notified as required with respect to respondents so identified under section 12½-6(a). 
(o)  Residential real estate-related transaction means: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
(Ord. of 5-5-80, § 2; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-43. - Prohibited activity. 
It shall be a discriminatory practice in violation of this article for the lessor or other person: 
(a)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, creed, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, lawful source of income, handicap or familial status. 
(b)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or lawful source of income. 
(c)  To make, print, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, creed, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, age, lawful source of income, familial status, sexual orientation, handicap, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(d)  (1)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or lawful source of income that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; and 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this subdivision for any person to restrict or attempt to restrict the choices of any buyer or renter to purchase or rent a dwelling: 
(i)  To an area which is substantially populated, even if less than a majority, be persons of the same protected class as the buyer or renter; 
(ii)  While such person is authorized to offer for sale or rent another dwelling which meets the housing criteria as expressed by the buyer or renter to such person; and 
(iii)  Such other dwelling is in an area which is not substantially populated by persons of the same protected class as the buyer or renter. As used in this subdivision, "area" means municipality, neighborhood or other geographic subdivision which may include an apartment or condominium complex; and "protected class" means race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or lawful source of income. 
(e)  To coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of his/her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by G.S. section 46a-64c, as amended by Public Act No. 92-257, section 2. 
(f)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representation regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or lawful source of income. 
(g)  For any person or other entity engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or lawful source of income. 
(h)  To deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him/her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or lawful source of income. 
(i)  To raise rents because of, or in anticipation of, any effect of this article. 
(j)  To evict or attempt to evict any person if a motivating factor for the eviction is the occupancy or potential occupancy of a minor child or children. 
(Ord. of 5-5-80, § 3; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-43.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 26, 1992, added § 12½-43.2. In its complete reenactment of this article, an ordinance adopted June 1, 1992, followed the same procedure. The editor has reserved § 12½-43.1 for the sake of continuity.  
Sec. 12½-43.2. - Handicap. 
(a)  A person may not discriminate in the sale or rental or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
(1)  That buyer or renter; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(b)  A person may not discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provisions of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a handicap of: 
(1)  That person; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with that person. 
(c)  For purposes of this section only, discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwelling for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in a manner that: 
a.  The dwellings have at least one (1) building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. 
b.  With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route: 
(i)  The public use and common use portion of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
(ii)  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
(iii)  All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible route into and through the dwelling, light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations, reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars, and usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. (Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for Building and Facilities Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People ["ANSI A 117.1"] satisfies the requirements of this subsection. 
(4)  With respect to dwellings located above the first floor with at least one (1) elevator as its only handicap accessible means of ingress and egress to any floor above the ground-floor: 
(i)  A failure to provide twenty-four (24) hour advance written notice of scheduled maintenance on the elevators or failure to conduct scheduled maintenances in accordance with industry standards and manufacturer's recommended maintenance; 
(ii)  Improper or inadequate maintenance causes repeated or persistent failures resulting in inoperable or out-of-service elevators; or 
(iii)  Failure to promptly repair elevators and restore elevator service. For purposes of this subsection, an elevator that is the only means of handicap access to a floor above a ground floor shall be deemed in violation of this subsection if it is out of service for more than three (3) days unless: 
(1)  The owner or operator demonstrates that the delay in repair is due to circumstances beyond its control; and 
(2)  The owner demonstrates that it has offered to pay suitable alternative housing for all handicap tenants and their families residing in the dwelling until the repair is complete. 
(d)  As used in this subsection, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if the buildings have one (1) or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground-floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units. 
(e)  Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 2016-0025 , 6-6-16) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 12½-43.1.  
Sec. 12½-44. - Unsuitable dwellings. 
This article shall not require a person to rent housing accommodations in violation of the New Haven Housing Code with respect to the maximum number of occupants per room in dwellings. 
(Ord. of 5-5-80, § 4; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01) 
Cross reference— Housing Code, vol. III, title V.  
Sec. 12½-45. - Requirements of financial obligations not prohibited. 
This article shall not prohibit the lessor of the dwelling from requiring the same obligations of tenants with children as tenants without children. However, no discrimination in the manner or amount of payment of said financial obligations shall be permitted on the basis of the occupancy or potential occupancy of minor children. 
(Ord. of 5-5-80, § 5; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01)  
Sec. 12½-46. - Fair housing commission. 
(a)  Established. The Livable City Initiative of the city, as presently constituted, is hereby designated the fair housing commission of the city as authorized by Public Act 79-531. 
(b)  Duties and powers. The fair housing commission shall make studies relative to complaints of discrimination in dwellings within its jurisdiction, and shall receive complaints relative to discrimination in dwellings within its jurisdiction, and shall have all powers and duties authorized pursuant to Public Act 79-531. 
(Ord. of 5-5-80, § 6(a), (b), (d); Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 6; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1375, § 1, 5-16-05)  
Sec. 12½-47. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fair housing commission shall enforce the provisions of this article. The functions, powers and duties of the commission with respect to the provisions of this article shall be the same as those set forth in article I of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who claims to have been injured or is about to be injured by any violation of the provisions of this article may file a complaint with the livable city initiative board. The commission shall commence action within thirty (30) days of receipt of the complaint. The procedure for the complaints filed under this section shall be the procedures as set forth in sections 12½-6 and 12½-7 of article I of this chapter for complaints under this article. 
(c)  In addition to any other action taken hereunder, upon a finding of a discriminatory practice prohibited by this article, the commission: 
(1)  Shall award and determine the damage suffered by the complainant, which damage shall include but not be limited to the expense incurred by the complainant for obtaining alternate housing or space, storage of goods and effects, moving costs and other costs actually incurred by him/her as a result of such discriminatory practice and compensation for emotional distress and reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(2)  May seek relief from the superior court in the Judicial District of New Haven including any temporary or permanent injunction, temporary restraining order or other order it deems appropriate. 
(d)  Whenever a complaint is filed with or by the commission pursuant to sections 12½-6 and 12½-7 alleging a violation of this article concerning the sale or rental of a dwelling or commission property, the executive director may bring a petition in the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven. Following a finding of reasonable cause, parties to housing complaints have the right to elect judicial determination, and once a party makes such an election, the commission shall pursue said action at its expense. 
(1)  The petition shall: 
a.  Seek appropriate injunctive relief against the respondent, including orders or decrees restraining and enjoining the respondent from selling or renting to anyone other than the complainant or otherwise making unavailable to the complainant any dwelling or commercial property with respect to which the complaint is made, pending the final determination of proceedings on such complaint; and 
b.  Seek an award of damages based on the remedies available under subsection (c) of C.G.S. section 46a-89, including, but not limited to, compensation for emotional distress and an award of punitive damages not to exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), payable to the complainant. 
(2)  Upon service on the respondent of notice pursuant to subsection (d), the respondent shall be temporarily restrained from selling or renting the dwelling or commercial property which is the subject of the complaint to anyone other than the complainant until the court for the Judicial District of New Haven or judge has decided the petition for temporary injunctive relief, and the notice shall so provide. 
(e)  (1)  The court for the Judicial District of New Haven or any judge of the court when such court is not actually in session, may grant an injunction forthwith, if the circumstances of the case demand it, or the court or judge may cause immediate notice of the petition to be given to the adverse party, that the adverse party may show cause why such injunction should not be granted; but no temporary injunction may be granted without notice to the adverse party unless it clearly appears from the specific facts shown by affidavit or by verified complaint that irreparable loss or damage will result to the complainant before the matter can be heard. 
(2)  The court for the Judicial District of New Haven or any judge thereof, after hearing, shall issue a temporary injunction upon finding that irreparable loss or damage will result to the complainant in that: 
i.  There is substantial probability of loss of meaningful relief, including but not limited to the availability of an employment opportunity or the rental or sale of a housing accommodation or commercial property; or 
ii.  There is a substantial probability of interference with the ability of the commission to provide meaningful relief as authorized by this chapter. 
(3)  Upon rendering a decision in favor of the commission on the petition for temporary injunctive relief, the court for the Judicial District of New Haven or judge shall simultaneously enter an order granting temporary injunctive relief and such other relief as deemed necessary and remand the complaint to the commission for further proceedings pursuant to this chapter. 
(4)  Upon rendering a decision in favor of the respondent on the petition for temporary injunctive relief, the court for the Judicial District of New Haven or judge shall simultaneously enter an order dissolving any injunctive relief, order, decree, temporary relief or restraining order theretofore issued against the respondent in the matter and remand the matter to the commission. 
(5)  Commencement of proceedings pursuant to subsection (d) of this section or section 12½-6(i)(2)(i) shall not bar the commission from processing the complaint pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(f)  Except with respect to complaints alleging prohibitions contained in sections 12½-43 (c), Discrimination in advertising; 12½-43 (e), Coercion, intimidation, threats and interference; 12½-43 (g), Residential real estate transactions; the provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling unit if the owner actually maintains and occupies part of such living quarters as his/her residence; or 
(2)  A unit in a dwelling containing units for no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner of such dwelling resides in one of the units. 
(g)  The provisions of this article with respect to the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of marital status shall not be construed to prohibit the denial of a dwelling to a man or woman who are both unrelated by blood and not married to each other. 
(h)  The provisions of this article with respect to the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of age shall not apply to minors, to special discount or other public/private programs to assist persons sixty (60) years of age or older to housing for older persons as defined in G.S. section 46a-64b, provided there is not discrimination on the basis of age among older persons eligible for such housing. 
(i)  The provisions of this article with respect to the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of familial status shall not apply to housing for older persons as defined in G.S. section 46a-64b. 
(j)  The provisions of this article with respect to the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of lawful source of income shall not prohibit the denial of full and equal accommodations solely on the basis of insufficient income. 
(k)  The provisions of this article with respect to the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of sex shall not apply to the sleeping accommodations to the extent they utilize shared bathroom facilities when such sleeping accommodations are provided by associations and organizations which rent all such sleeping accommodations on a temporary or permanent basis for the exclusive use of persons of the same sex based on considerations of privacy and modesty. 
(l)  Any person who claims to be aggrieved by a violation of the provisions of this article by a breach of a conciliation agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter, may bring an action in the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven, or the housing session of said court if appropriate within two (2) years of the date of the alleged discriminatory practice, or of a breach of a conciliation agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter. No action pursuant to this section may be brought in the superior court for the Judicial District of New Haven regarding the alleged discriminatory practice after the commission has obtained a conciliation agreement or commenced a hearing except for an action to enforce the conciliation agreement. The court for the Judicial District of New Haven may grant, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction or other order, and may award to the plaintiff compensatory and punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees. Compensatory damages are intended to include, but are not limited to damages for emotional distress. The commission, through its counsel of the office of the corporation counsel, may intervene as a matter of right in any action brought pursuant to this section. 
(m)  In any action for summary process, it shall be an affirmative defense that a motivating factor for the bringing of such action is the occupancy or potential occupancy of a minor child or children. 
(n)  All lessors who rent dwellings in the city shall post in a conspicuous place at their place of business a notice which states that they do not discriminate in the rental of dwellings on the basis of the occupancy or potential occupancy of children. 
(Ord. of 5-5-80, 7; Ord. of 1-6-92; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-12-01; Ord. No. 1375, § 2, 5-16-05)  
ARTICLE IV. - CONTRACTS AND PROCUREMENT, PAYMENT OR REIMBURSEMENT OF EMPLOYEE EXPENSES ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE OF EXCLUSIONARY PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS PROHIBITED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to provisions of an ordinance adopted Sept. 26, 1983, art. IV, §§ 12½-48—12 1/2-52, has been included to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 12½-48. - Definitions. 
In this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
City : The City of New Haven. 
City contract : Any contract between the city and an employer to be paid in whole or in part by public funds or in kind contributions from the city. 
Commission : Commission on equal opportunities of the City of New Haven. 
Employer : Any person who is a party to a city contract and who employs three (3) or more employees exclusive of parents, spouse or children. 
Person : One (1) or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, legal representatives, trustees or other legal entities. 
Employees : All individuals employed by an employer including those working full- or part-time and executive and administrative officers and personnel. The term "employees" shall extend to all such employees and shall not be limited to those performing or doing work under the city contract. 
Exclusionary private organization : Any organization, club or association which bars, restricts or limits membership or use of its dining or recreational facilities on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, or handicap. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-49. - Contract requirements. 
(a)  Each city contract shall provide that payment or reimbursement by the employer of membership fees or other expenses associated with participation by its employees in an exclusionary private organization, insofar as such participation confers an employment advantage or constitutes or results in discrimination with regard to hiring, tenure or employment, promotions, terms, privileges, or conditions of employment on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, or handicap constitutes a substantial breach of such city contract entitling the city to all rights and remedies provided in the city contract or otherwise available in law or equity. The city contract also provides that the employer will require like covenants in all subcontracts which are entered into by the employer under such city contract. 
(b)  Each city contract also require the employer to cooperate with the commission in any manner which the commission deems reasonable and necessary for the commission to carry out its responsibilities under this article and that failure to so cooperate constitutes a substantial breach of the city contract entitling the city to all rights and remedies provided in the city contract or otherwise available in law or equity. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-50. - Prima facie presumption of discrimination. 
The fact that an employer does pay or reimburse membership fees or other expenses associated with participation by its employees in an exclusionary private organization establishes prima facie that such participation confers an employment advantage or constitutes or results in discrimination in a term, privilege or condition of employment on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, sex, gender identity or expression, marital status, sexual orientation, age, familial status, national origin, ancestry, or handicap. The employer shall have the opportunity of demonstrating to the commission that such an employment advantage or discrimination does not exist. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83; Ord. No. 1666, 11-10-11 )  
Sec. 12½-51. - Rights of religious institutions. 
Nothing in this article IV is intended to, or shall be construed as, proscribing, affecting, or infringing upon the rights of any bona fide religious institution or organization to restrict its activities to members of such religion nor shall any such religious institution be considered an "exclusionary private organization" within the meaning of this article IV. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83)  
Sec. 12½-52. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The commission shall have the responsibility of administering this article and in connection therewith shall: 
(1)  Require each employer to demonstrate compliance with the city contract provisions required by section 12½-49 prior to the execution of the city contract; 
(2)  Receive and investigate and seek to adjust complaints that an employer has violated a provision of a city contract required by section 12½-49; 
(3)  After investigation and upon a determination that there is reasonable cause to believe that such a complaint is true, issue and cause to be served on such employer a complaint stating the charges and a notice of a public hearing before the commission to be held upon such complaint; 
(4)  Conduct a public hearing before the commission on such complaint and make findings. 
(b)  After a hearing before the commission and upon a finding by the commission that an employer has violated a provision of a city contract required by section 12½-49 hereof, the city shall have the right to all remedies provided in the city contract or otherwise available in law or equity. 
(c)  The commission shall conduct an annual survey pursuant to appropriate regulations promulgated by the commission, of organizations, clubs or associations in New Haven and its thirteen (13) surrounding towns to determine whether such organizations, clubs or associations are governed by charter provisions, bylaws or policies which constitute such organizations, clubs or associations exclusionary private organizations as defined hereunder. The commission shall publish the results of such survey which publication shall be for informational purposes only and shall not be evidence in any proceeding brought hereunder before the commission that a particular organization, club or association is or is not, in fact, an exclusionary private organization. The commission shall submit this survey annually to the city purchasing agent. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83)  
Secs. 12½-53—12½-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AIDS DISCRIMINATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of Jan. 3, 1989 amended Ch. 12½ by adding thereto a new art. V. Designation of §§ 1—4 of such ordinance as §§ 12½-61—12½-64 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 12½-61. - Findings. 
(a)  The medical condition described as acquired immune deficiency syndrome and commonly known as AIDS is a deadly disease which has the potential to affect every segment of our city's population. 
(b)  AIDS was first recognized in 1981 by the federal centers for disease control, based on the study of a pattern of unusual illnesses among the young single men. The opinion of the scientific and medical community is that AIDS is caused by a virus, known as HTLV-III, which attacks and cripples the body's immune system, thereby leaving the body vulnerable to opportunistic infections. A person infected with AIDS suffers a variety [of virus-] and/or fungus-caused illnesses which debilitates the body, resulting in a high mortality rate within three (3) years after diagnosis. The spread of the virus has occurred through the exchange of body fluids, i.e., blood, blood byproducts, or semen, between individuals. 
(c)  Medical studies of family groups, in which one or more persons have been diagnosed with AIDS, show no spread of the virus other than through sexual intimacy or through the exchange of blood. No evidence exists to indicate that the virus can be spread by causal contact. 
(d)  The public health danger represented by the virus, and its subsequent manifestations as AIDS, is caused by the lengthy incubation period during which period an apparently healthy individual may spread the disease to other persons through the exchange of blood, blood byproducts, or semen. 
(e)  By its nature, AIDS has created a discrete and vulnerable minority of our citizens who are afflicted with a seriously disabling condition whose ultimate outcome is fatal. Persons afflicted with AIDS represent a segment of our population particularly victimized due to the nature of the disease and to the present climate of misinformation, ignorance, and fear in the general population. Discrimination against persons with AIDS and AIDS-related conditions exists in the City of New Haven. 
(f)  Persons with AIDS or AIDS-related conditions are faced with discrimination in employment, housing, medical and dental services, business establishments, city facilities, city services, and other public accommodations. Such discrimination cuts across all racial, ethnic and economic lines. 
(g)  Discrimination against persons with AIDS or AIDS-related conditions poses a substantial threat to the health, public safety, and welfare of the community. Existing state and federal restraints on, and enforcement mechanisms against, such arbitrary discrimination are inadequate to meet the particular problems of this city. 
(Ord. of 1-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 12½-62. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
AIDS means the disease, caused by a virus known as HTLV-III, which destroys the human immune system and damages the body's ability to fight off illness. The term AIDS shall also include AIDS-related conditions, seropositivity and any other medical condition which a person contracts as a result of having AIDS or an AIDS-related condition, including all signs and symptoms of the disease that are manifested in the afflicted person by a series of virus-or fungus-caused illnesses of a chronic nature. The term AIDS shall cover any person who has such medical condition or any one who is assumed or regarded as having such a condition. 
Person means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or other organization, association or groups however organized including, but not limited to, the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 1-3-89, § 2)  
Sec. 12½-63. - Prohibited activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to subject, or cause to be subjected, any other person in the City of New Haven to the deprivation of any constitutional rights, privileges, or immunities, or any other rights and protections in Section 46a-58 of the Connecticut General Statutes, on account of such person having AIDS. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to subject, or cause to be subjected, any other person in the City of New Haven to the deprivation of any rights or protections in Section 46a-59 of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to associations of licensed persons, Section 46a-60 of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to employment practices, Section 46a-64 of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to public accommodations practices, or Section 46a-66 of the Connecticut General Statutes with respect to credit practices, on the account of such persons having AIDS. 
(Ord. of 1-3-89, § 3)  
Sec. 12½-64. - Remedies. 
(a)  The commission on equal opportunities of the City of New Haven shall enforce the provisions of this article in the same manner as set forth in the equal opportunities ordinance, Article I of Chapter 12½ of the Code of General Ordinances of the City of New Haven. 
(b)  Any person who claims to have been injured by any violation of the provisions of this article may file a complaint with the commission on equal opportunities. The procedures for complaints filed under this section shall be the procedures as set forth in section 12½-6 and 12½-7 of Article I of this chapter for complaints filed under the equal opportunities ordinance; provided, however, that any complaint of discrimination involving a person who identifies himself or herself as a person having AIDS or whose complaint involves a claim under this article, shall be processed expeditiously. 
(c)  The commission on equal opportunities shall adopt the procedures consistent with the following sections of the Connecticut General Statutes with regard to confidentiality: Sections 1-19 et seq., 176-225, 19a-215, 19a-25, 19a-499, and other applicable sections, in order to ensure that the identity of persons submitting claims under this article remains confidential. 
(d)  The commission of equal opportunities of the City of New Haven shall adopt procedures which shall be consistent with the purposes and other provisions of this article, to provide written notice to state and local boards, commissions, chapters, departments, and other entities having legal authority under the Connecticut General Statutes or the Charter or Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven or authority under the bylaws under which such entity operates, to license, certify, review or otherwise regulate the conduct [of] the persons, informing such entities when said commission has found a violation of section 12½-63 of this article by persons whose conduct is subject to the recommendations or actions of such entities. 
(1)  The written notice shall include a statement of the particulars of the complaint filed with the commission and the complete text of all findings of the commission pertinent to the complaint, except that the identity of the complainant shall be kept confidential unless the complainant consents to such disclosure in writing; and 
(2)  The written notice shall request such entities, acting in accord with the statutes, bylaws, and regulations under which they operate, to conduct inquiries, discipline members, and initiate other actions as required when violations of law, bylaws, or professional codes of conduct are alleged; and 
(3)  The written notice shall request such entities to provide to the commission, for incorporation into the permanent public files of said commission, a written statement describing the actions of such entities in response to or as a result of the receipt of the written notice from the commission of a violation of section 12½-63 of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-3-89, § 4)  
Chapter 125/8 - ETHICS IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1561, adopted Dec. 17, 2007, amended and restated former Ch. 12 , §§ 12 -1—12 -10, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from the following: Ord. of 9-17-84, §§ 1—10; Ord. of 7-29-85; Ord. of 3-17-86; Ord. of 9-18-89, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-2-93. 
Ch. 12 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Sec. 125/8-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Ethics in Local Government Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-2. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
(a)  The proper operation of the municipal government of the City of New Haven requires that all public officials and municipal employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, shall be impartial and responsive to the public interest; that public office and employment shall not be used for personal gain or advantage; and, that the public have confidence in the integrity of municipal government. 
(b)  In recognition of these principles, and pursuant to section 7-148(c)(10)(B) of the Connecticut General Statutes and Article XXXVII of the Charter of the City of New Haven, establishing a "Code of Ethics" for all municipal employees and public officials, the purpose of this chapter is to provide specific articulation of said "Code of Ethics" and shall be deemed to be a part of said Code as if it were set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto. 
Business means any entity through which business for profit or not for profit is conducted, including a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm, enterprise, company, trust, franchise, association, organization, or self-employed individual. 
Business with which he is associated means a business of which the public official or municipal employee or a member of his immediate family is a director, officer, principal, owner, partner, beneficiary of a trust, or holder of stock constituting five (5) per cent or more of the total outstanding stock of any class; provided, a public official or municipal employee or member of his immediate family shall not be deemed to be associated with a not-for-profit entity solely by virtue of the fact that the public official or municipal employee or member of his immediate family is an unpaid member of the governing body or an unpaid officer of the not-for-profit entity. "Officer" refers only to the chairman and vice-chairman of the board, president, executive director, executive or senior vice president, chief financial officer, treasurer, or secretary of such business. 
Charter means Charter of the City of New Haven. 
City means the City of New Haven. 
Conflict of interest means in a situation that presents a conflict with the proper discharge of a public official's or municipal employee's duties or responsibilities. 
Disclose or disclosure means to notify, make known, reveal, expose, inform, to the board of ethics, or such other body of the city government or a public official designated by the board of ethics. 
Discretionary public action means any deliberation, official participation or voting on a matter by a member of a board, commission or task force, or any official participation by a public official or municipal employee in an action of his municipal department on any matter properly before said board or commission or any of its committees or said municipal department where the judgment of the public official or municipal employee is not substantially determined by existing legal or administrative guidelines. 
Financial interest means any interest in the result of a discretionary public action in which an individual derives, or expects that he or she will or may derive economic and/or pecuniary gain or loss, to himself, a member of his immediate family, or of any organization with which said individual is affiliated as an employee, owner, partner, or member of a governing board or body, or from which said individual will receive, has received, or expects to receive a gift. 
Gift means a payment, loan, advance, forbearance, rendering of services, deposit of money, or anything of value, unless consideration of equal or greater value is received therefore. "Gift" shall not include: 
(1)  A political contribution otherwise reported as required by law; 
(2)  Services provided without compensation by persons volunteering their time; 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan made on terms not more favorable than loans made in the ordinary course of business; 
(4)  A gift to a public official or municipal employee from a member of his immediate family, unless said family member makes the gift with the intent of influencing a discretionary public action in which the donor or other person receives or expects to have a financial or personal interest; or 
(5)  Food or beverage or both, consumed on a single occasion, the cost of which is less than fifty dollars ($50.00) per person on a single occasion, not more than once in any thirty-day period. 
(6)  Promotional or complimentary tickets or entrance to events sponsored by a non-profit organization, provided that the value of said ticket, tickets or entry fee does not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per event per sponsoring organization. 
Governmental entity means the State of Connecticut or any political subdivision thereof. 
Household means all the individuals who reside in a single housing unit, including related and unrelated people. 
Immediate family means: 
(1)  The individual's spouse or partner; or 
(2)  The individual's parent, brother or sister, or the parent, brother or sister of the individual's spouse or partner; or 
(3)  The individual's child, or that child's spouse, partner, or dependent relative who resides in the individual's household. 
Individual means a natural person or persons, sometimes herein referred to as and meaning "him," "her," or "they." 
Interference shall mean any action that intentionally hinders or obstructs the exercise of any public official's or municipal employee's duties or responsibilities. 
Lobbyist means any person who, on behalf of any person other than himself, or as any part of his duties as an employee or agent of another person, undertakes to influence any legislative, executive, or administrative action or decision by any public official, municipal official, or governmental body of the City of New Haven. 
Municipal employee means any employee in the executive or legislative branch of the municipal government of the City of New Haven, whether in the classified or unclassified service and whether full-time or part-time, or any contractor or any person hired as a contractor to perform the duties of any such employee or position. 
Partner means an adult who is related to an individual as husband, wife, or partner joined through a civil union. 
Person means an individual, partnership, business, company, firm, trust, corporation, limited liability company or partnership, association, union, committee, club, other organization, or group of persons. 
Personal interest means any interest, other than a financial interest, which shall affect or benefit the individual or his immediate family or any organization with which the individual is affiliated, which is not common to the general interest of other citizens of the city. 
Political subdivision shall include any city, town, borough, district, board of education, public social service or welfare agency, housing authority, redevelopment or urban renewal agency, board, commission, special district established pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. Section 7-324, or other public authority or public agency established by law, or the governing board or body of any of the foregoing. 
Practice warranting removal from office means those practices enumerated in section 12 5/8 -8 of this chapter in addition to those enumerated in section 211 of the Charter of the City of New Haven. 
Public official or city official means any elected officer, or any individual appointed to any office of the legislative or executive branch, including boards, commissions, and task forces. 
Spouse means husband, wife, or partner joined through a civil union. 
Substantial or substantially means material, appreciable, considerable. 
Unethical conduct means any conduct that violates the charter or this chapter, including but not limited to a conflict of interest or practice warranting removal from office. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-4. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  A public official or municipal employee who has a conflict of interest in a matter affecting the city shall refrain from taking any action on or in the matter. 
(b)  The professional and personal conduct of public officials and municipal employees shall avoid impropriety and even the appearance of impropriety. 
(c)  Public officials and municipal employees shall refrain from abusive conduct, personal charges, or affronts upon the character, motives, or intents of other public officials or municipal employees, or of members of the public. 
(d)  Public officials and municipal employees shall not give no special treatment or consideration to any person or group beyond that which is available to any other person or group. 
(e)  Recognizing the value of boards, and commissions, and task forces in the public policy decision-making process, public officials and municipal employees shall refrain from using their public positions to improperly influence the proceedings, deliberations, decisions, actions, or administration of any board, commission, or task force. 
(f)  Public officials and municipal employees shall represent the policies and positions of the city government to the best of their abilities when designated as delegates for such purpose. When representing their own individual opinions or personal positions, public officials and municipal employees shall state explicitly that the opinions or positions are their own and not the opinion or position of the city or of any administrative or other body within the city government, and shall not cause or allow such an inference to occur. 
(g)  Public officials and municipal employees shall avoid any action or activity that constitutes or gives rise to a conflict of interest. 
(h)  Public officials shall not interfere or seek to interfere with the duties or responsibilities of other public officials or municipal employees over whom they do not have supervisory authority and responsibility. 
(i)  Public officials shall support and contribute to the maintenance of a positive and constructive workplace environment. Recognizing their special role in the public trust, public officials shall refrain from inappropriate action toward other public officials, municipal employees or members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-5. - Conflict of interest. 
No officer, employee or official of the City of New Haven, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, shall engage in any activities which result in a conflict of interest between the duties and responsibilities of his public office and his private affairs, or which are incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or responsibilities. (Section 209(b) of the city charter.) 
(a)  A public official or municipal employee has a conflict of interest if he or she has, or has reason to believe or expect that they or a member of their immediate family or household, or a business or other organization with which or whom they are employed or with which or whom they are associated with, will or may derive a direct monetary gain or suffer a direct monetary loss, as the case may be, by reason of the official's or employee's official activity or position. 
(b)  A municipal employee or public official has a conflict of interest if they, or a member of their immediate family or household, have a financial interest or personal interest in the outcome of any matter requiring the exercise of judgment or discretion within or before their department, or a board, or commission, or task force of which they are a member, except in circumstances enumerated in sections 12 5/8 -6 or 12 5/8 -7. 
(c)  A municipal employee or public official has a conflict of interest if he accepts outside employment which will either impair their independence of judgment or performance with regard to their official duties or responsibilities or require them to disclose confidential information acquired by them in the course of their public duties or responsibilities. 
(d)  A municipal employee or public official who becomes employed by any person, other than other than a governmental entity, has a conflict of interest if they perform services under or receive compensation from a contract with the city during the one-year period after termination of their city employment or term of office, if the municipal employee or public official was directly involved in the preparation, procurement, awarding, performance, administration, or oversight of that city contract. 
(e)  A public official or municipal employee has a conflict of interest if he makes or participates in the making of any governmental decision or the taking of any governmental action with respect to any matter in which he has any economic interest distinguishable from that of the general public. 
(f)  A public official or municipal employee has a conflict of interest if, during the one-year period after termination of their city employment or term of office, they act as a lobbyist for or against any legislative, executive, or administrative action or decision by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-6. - Exceptions to the conflict of interest provisions. 
The following situations shall not constitute a conflict of interest under section 209 of Article XXXVII of the City Charter, or of this chapter: 
(a)  A public official or municipal employee does not have an interest that is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of their duties and responsibilities if, as a result of the official's or the employee's activity or position, a benefit or detriment accrues to the official or employee or a member of their immediate family or their household or to a business with which the official or employee or their immediate family or household, is associated as a member of a profession, occupation, or group, to no greater extent than to any other member of such profession, occupation, or group. 
(b)  Where a municipal employee or public official is employed by a person who enters into a contract with the city, where said employee or official is not directly involved in the preparation, procurement, awarding, or performance, administration, or oversight of such contract and whose remuneration is not, directly or indirectly, derived from said contract; 
(c)  Where a municipal employee or public official is employed by any newspaper which publishes any municipal notice, resolution, ordinance, or other proceeding, where such publication is required or authorized by law; 
(d)  Where a municipal employee or public official is employed by a public utility that furnishes public utility services to the city with respect to the utility's rates or charges when the rates or charges therefor are fixed or regulated by the public utilities control authority; 
(e)  Where a municipal employee or public official is employed by a person or business that has a contract with the city, if the total combined consideration under that contract and under other contracts in which the employee or official has an interest does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-7. - Disclosure. 
In accordance with Article XXXVII, Section 210, of the City Charter, interests requiring disclosure shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  Where a public official or municipal employee, or a member of the immediate family or household of a member of a board, commission, or task force is employed by the city; 
(b)  Where a member of a board, commission or task force is employed by a non-municipal agency or entity the funding of which is, in part or in its entirety, provided by funds authorized or provided by the city; 
(c)  Where a member of a board, commission or task force serves on the board of directors or governing board of a nonprofit or other organization when said organization is, has been, or is likely to be engaged in the application for federal or state funding or local funding authorized by the city; 
(d)  Where a member of a board, commission or task force serves on the board of directors or governing board of a nonprofit or other organization where said organization is or will be lobbying for or against specific legislation before the city, or where said organization is or will be lobbying for or against specific State of Connecticut legislation that will or may result in the city receiving funding which is administered or controlled by the city board, commission or task force of which the individual is a member; 
(e)  Where a member of a board, commission or task force serves on the board of directors or governing board of a nonprofit or other organization where said organization is, has been, or may become engaged in litigation against the city; 
(f)  Where a member of a board, commission or task force accepts an offer of employment, whether paid or unpaid, by the city or by a program recommended by said board, commission or task force, but has not yet resigned or retired from said board, commission or task force to accept said offer of employment; 
(g)  Where a municipal employee or public official has a financial interest or personal interest in a contract which was entered into prior to the time of his or her nomination, appointment, or election to or employment in said position; 
(h)  Where a municipal employee or public official seeks or obtains employment with a person, company, or corporation engaged in business with the city but has not yet resigned his or her position to assume said employment; 
(i)  Where a municipal employee or public official, or a member of their immediate family or household, applies for a city program or benefit over which the official or employee has actual or apparent control, influence, or discretionary authority; 
(j)  The amount of any reimbursement to the a public official or municipal employee of necessary expenses incurred that are due to an article, appearance, or speech, or for participation in an event in the official's or employee's official capacity. 
An interest requiring disclosure by a municipal employee or public official shall not be construed to constitute a conflict of interest as defined in section 12 5/8 -5 so long as he or she refrains from the activities enumerated in section 12 5/8 -8 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-8. - Prohibited practices; removal from office. 
In addition to those practices enumerated in the City Charter, section 190(b) and section 211(b) of Article XXXVII, which concern removal from office, the following shall be considered cause for removal from office: 
(a)  The deliberating, testifying or voting by a member of a board or commission or task force on any matter before said board, or commission, or task force, or any of its committees, which matter requires involves a disclosure of interest on the part of by said member pursuant to section 210 of Article XXXVII of the City Charter or 12 5/8 -7, except that: 
(1)  In the case of an alderman who is voting, deliberating or testifying on passage or rejection of a collective bargaining agreement, stipulation to a collective bargaining agreement, or fact-finder report, said alderman shall be disqualified from voting, testifying, or deliberating only if a member of his or her immediate family or household was engaged in the negotiations of said fact-finder report. 
(2)  In the case of an alderman, where an interest is derived from their membership on the board of directors or governing board of a nonprofit organization, said alderman shall be required to disqualify herself or himself from deliberating or testifying only if the source of the disclosed interest is litigation between said nonprofit organization and the city or the board of aldermen. 
(b)  No public official or municipal employee shall request, use, or permit the use of, any consideration, treatment, advantage, benefit, or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(c)  No public official or municipal employee shall request, use, or permit the use of any publicly owned or supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other person, beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(d)  That rule shall not be deemed to prohibit a public official or municipal employee from requesting, using, or permitting the use of such publicly owned or supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor, or service that it is the general practice to make available to the public at large, or that is provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of public officials and municipal employees in the conduct of official business. 
(e)  The failure to remove oneself from the decision-making process in cases set forth in subsection 12 5/8 -7(i). 
(f)  No public official or municipal employee shall accept any fee or honorarium for an article, appearance, or speech, or for participation in an event in the official's or employee's official capacity, provided that but they may accept reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred that are due to such activity or participation or participation, if those are disclosed within thirty (30) days of the activity or the reimbursement, whichever is later. 
(g)  No public official or municipal employee shall knowingly provide false or misleading information to the public. 
(h)  No public official or municipal employee shall take any action in retaliation against any person who makes a complaint or allegation of unethical conduct in accordance with the procedures outlined in this chapter with regard to the standards of conduct delineated herein. 
(i)  The foregoing prohibited practices are also sufficient for an appropriate authority to impose discipline in accordance with the City Charter, this chapter, the city's executive management compensation plan, and/or any applicable collective bargaining agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-9. - Board of ethics—Procedures and administration. 
The board of ethics shall be charged with determining whether unethical conduct has been engaged in or is likely to be engaged in by any public official or municipal employee. In addition to the procedures governing the board of ethics, enumerated in section 211 of Article XXXVII of the City Charter, and the rules and regulations of the board of ethics, the following shall apply: 
(a)  The procedures of the board of ethics of the city shall be governed by relevant state law, the city charter, and Robert's Rules of Order, except that all votes shall require a majority of the entire membership to carry. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall honor all requests for confidentiality, consistent with the requirements of state law, and may, in its discretion, initiate action on any complaint. 
(c)  The board of ethics shall be assigned staff assistance from the following departments of municipal government: the office of the city and town clerk, the director of labor relations, the office of the corporation counsel, and the human resources department, and shall be provided other assistance as it shall require from time to time. 
(d)  The board of ethics shall: 
(1)  Issue advisory opinions with regard to the requirements of the City Charter and of this chapter upon the request of any public official or municipal employee. Unless and until amended or revoked by the board of ethics, such advisory opinions shall be binding on the board and shall be deemed to be the final decisions of the board. Unless and until amended or revoked by the board, an advisory opinion concerning the public official or municipal employee who requested the opinion and who acted in reliance thereon, in good faith, shall be binding upon the board, and the official's reliance thereon, in good faith, shall be an absolute defense in any action brought under the provisions of the city charter or this chapter, and to any related disciplinary action; 
(2)  All advisory opinions of the board of ethics shall be promptly reduced to writing. A copy of the opinion shall be provided to the person requesting the opinion shall be filed with the city and town clerk; 
(3)  At the request of any of the parties involved in a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall issue subpoenas or subpoenas duces tecum enforceable upon application to the superior court, to compel attendance of persons at hearings and the production of books, documents, records and papers, pursuant to Sections 7-148(h) and 7-148(c)(10)(B) of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(4)  Upon the request of any public official or municipal employee on a form prescribed by the board of ethics, the board of ethics shall: 
a.  Conduct an investigation to determine if there is reasonable cause to believe that any public official or municipal employee has violated the code of ethics; 
b.  Conduct its investigation in such manner and upon such evidence as it deems appropriate; 
c.  Render its opinion as to the existence or lack of reasonable cause in writing; 
d.  Upon a finding of reasonable cause, conduct a hearing, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the board of ethics, in order to determine if in fact the official or employee has violated the code of ethics; 
e.  Complaints shall be signed under penalty of false statement, as defined in Section 53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes, and shall set forth with specificity the factual allegations and their sources upon which the request is based; 
f.  No complaint may be made under this section except within three (3) years next after the violation alleged in the complaint has been committed. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-10. - Board of ethics reports. 
(a)  The board of ethics shall report any finding of unethical conduct, for appropriate action: 
(1)  To the mayor, in the case of a public official or municipal employee or a member of a board, commission, or task force appointed by the mayor. 
(2)  To the aldermanic affairs committee of the board of aldermen, in the case of an alderman or a member of a board, commission, or task force appointed by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall: 
(1)  Advise the mayor, the board of aldermen, and its aldermanic affairs committee, and the corporation counsel concerning proposed amendments to the code of ethics. 
(2)  Compile and maintain all reports, advisory opinions, and an index thereof, filed by and with the board; 
(3)  Report annually, on or before July 1, to the mayor and the board of aldermen summarizing the activities of the board of ethics. 
(c)  Each year the board of ethics may make recommendations to the board of aldermen and the mayor, for updating or otherwise amending this code of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 125/8-11. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  Department heads appointed by the mayor shall monitor, investigate and report to their respective coordinator any conflict of interest or apparent conflict of interest of any municipal employee under their supervision. If a department head knows, or in the exercise of reasonable care in performing their supervisory duties should know, that any municipal employee under their supervision has any conflict of interest or apparent conflict of interest, the department head shall report that conflict or apparent conflict to their coordinator. Failure to so report may constitute just cause for discipline. 
(b)  Coordinators shall monitor, investigate and report to the mayor any conflict of interest or apparent conflict of interest of any department head under his or her supervision. If a coordinator knows, or in the exercise of reasonable care in performing their supervisory duties should know, that any department head whom they supervise has any conflict of interest or apparent conflict of interest, the coordinator shall report that conflict or apparent conflict to the mayor. Failure to so report may constitute just cause for discipline. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing subsection (a) and (b), a department head or coordinator who becomes aware of behavior by a municipal employee that constitutes or may constitute a conflict of interest shall investigate or cause to be investigated the facts and circumstances surrounding the possible conflict of interest and, if necessary in order to resolve any ambiguity, shall request an opinion from the board of ethics. 
(d)  Any public official or municipal employee who becomes aware of behavior by a contractor that constitutes or may constitute a conflict of interest or possible conflict of interest shall promptly report such conduct to the appropriate department head or coordinator, who shall investigate or cause to be investigated the facts and circumstances surrounding the conflict of interest or possible conflict of interest and, if necessary in order to resolve any question or ambiguity, shall request an opinion from the board of ethics. Department heads and coordinators may also, if requested by a contractor, request an opinion from the board of ethics regarding concerning ethical issues concerning the applicability of the charter, this chapter, or the contractor's disclosures and representations, to any an action or proposed action by the contractor. 
(e)  The heads of the various departments, the coordinators, and the mayor, where applicable, shall determine the appropriate disciplinary action to be imposed upon employees or officials whom they supervise, if any, to be imposed, consistent with the charter, this chapter, and applicable federal and state laws, court decisions, collective bargaining agreements, and city policies. 
(f)  The aldermanic affairs committee shall determine and recommend to the board of aldermen, the appropriate action concerning any member of the board of aldermen, to be imposed consistent with the Charter, this chapter, applicable federal and state laws, court decisions, city policies, and the rules of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1561, 12-17-07)  
Chapter 12¾ - FAIR RENT PRACTICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1984, provided that former Ch. 12¾, fair rent practices, §§ 12¾-1—12¾-10, be deleted, and that new provisions be set out in lieu thereof to read as set forth in §§ 12¾-1—12¾-11. Formerly, Ch. 12¾ was derived from ordinances adopted on the following dates: Dec. 23, 1969, §§ 1—9; Dec. 7, 1970, §§ 1—10; July 6, 1981, § 17. 
Ch. 12 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Commission on equal opportunities, § 12½-3 et seq.; rent discrimination against families or single parents with children, § 12½-41 et seq.; housing code, Title V. 
 
Sec. 12¾-1. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to and in conformity with Public Act No. 274 of the 1969 General Assembly, there is hereby created a commission known as the fair rent commission for the purpose of controlling and eliminating excessive rental charges on residential property within the City of New Haven. This chapter is enacted in recognition of the compelling need for rent stabilization for the duration of a severe housing shortage in New Haven. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
Commission shall mean the fair rent commission of the City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
Housing accommodation shall mean any building or structure, wholly or in part, containing living quarters occupied or fairly intended for occupancy as a place of residence, with any land or buildings appurtenant thereto and any services, furniture and facilities supplied in connection therewith except: A hospital, convent, monastery, asylum, public institution or college or school dormitory or any such accommodation which is operated or used exclusively for charitable or educational purposes. 
Landlord shall mean any person who leases, subleases, rents, permits or suffers the occupancy of any housing accommodation, including a person who manages a housing accommodation owned by someone else. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, corporation or group. 
Rent or rental charges shall mean any consideration, monetary or otherwise, including any bonus, benefit, or gratuity, demanded or received for the use or occupancy of any housing accommodation. 
Tenant shall mean any person who leases or rents, whether by written or oral lease who in any other legal may occupies any housing accommodation, as a residence for himself and/or his immediate family. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-2.1. - Commission—membership and term of office. 
The commission shall consist of nine (9) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of New Haven. At least five (5) members of the commission shall be residential tenants at the time of appointment. The members shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of three (3) years and approved by the board of aldermen. The mayor shall appoint a chairman and vice-chairman. Each member shall serve for the term for which he is appointed and qualified. A member may be reappointed at the expiration of his term. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-3. - Same—Staff. 
The commission shall employ an executive director and legal counsel to keep its records, to handle its correspondence, to supervise and direct the investigations, negotiations, and administration of this chapter and generally to perform such other functions as may be assigned by the commission. However, the inspection services related to the work of the fair rent commission may also be provided by the staff of the office of building inspection and enforcement. The commission may employ such additional employees as it deems necessary. Upon request, assistance from other municipal agencies shall be reasonably available to the commission. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-4. - Powers of commission. 
The commission shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To make studies and investigations into rentals charged for housing accommodations within the City of New Haven as it deems appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder. 
(2)  To receive complaints, inquiries, and other communications concerning alleged excessive rental charges in housing accommodations within said city. 
(3)  To conduct hearings, either on its own motion or on complaints or requests for investigation submitted to it by any interested person. 
(4)  To administer oaths. 
(5)  To subpoena witnesses and compel their attendance at said hearings and to compel production of any books and documents relating to any matter under investigation or question. 
(6)  To determine, after a hearing, whether or not the rent for any housing accommodation is so excessive based on the standards and criteria of this chapter, as to be harsh and unconscionable. 
(7)  To order a reduction of any excessive rent to an amount the commission considers fair and equitable retroactive to the date of filing of the complaint. Such order shall be effective for one (1) year from its date, except as provided under subsection (9) of this section, or if the commission shall, pursuant to a subsequent petition by the landlord or the tenant order that the rent be changed. 
(8)  To determine, after a hearing, whether or not a housing accommodation fails to comply with state statutes, municipal ordinances and regulations relating to health and safety. 
(9)  To order the suspension of further payment of rent by the tenant to the landlord and order the deposit of said rent in an escrow account to be administered by the commission, as hereinafter described, until such time as the landlord makes necessary changes, repairs, alterations or installations so as to bring the housing accommodation into compliance with state statutes, municipal ordinances or regulations relating to health and safety, if the commission finds that the housing accommodation in question fails to comply with said statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(10)  To refer, in those instances which it deems appropriate, those housing accommodations which fail to comply with state statutes, municipal ordinances or regulations relating to health and safety to the appropriate enforcement agency or office of the state or local government. 
(11)  To do all things now or hereinafter authorized by Public Act 274 of the 1969 General Assembly or Public Act 83-425 as the same now read(s) or may be amended from time to time. 
(12)  To adopt rules and regulations for the carrying on of its functions, including rules and regulations for the conduct of its hearings. 
(13)  To continue, review, modify, terminate or suspend all its orders and decisions. 
(14)  To attempt, through the process of informal conciliation and negotiation between a complaining tenant and a landlord, to arrive at a rental agreement which is mutually acceptable to said tenant and landlord before initiating the formal hearing process. 
(15)  To deposit into the escrow account rent paid to the commission by tenants whose landlord has refused to accept the rent after a tenant has filed a complaint or claim of retaliation. Said rent shall be withdrawn from the escrow account and paid to the landlord upon written request from the landlord. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-5. - Complaints concerning unfair practices. 
(a)  The commission shall prepare and make available complaint forms for use by persons desiring to file complaints. The complaint forms shall provide for the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the party making the complaint; 
(2)  The name and address of the landlord; 
(3)  The name and address of the tenant; 
(4)  Whether it is the belief of the party making the complaint that the occupied premises comply with state statutes, municipal ordinances, and regulations relating to health and safety; 
(5)  A statement signed by the complaining party listing the specific reasons for the filing of the complaint. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a complaint by a complainant, the executive director shall set a date for a hearing on the complaint which shall not be more than sixty (60) days from the date the complaint was filed except that said date shall not be more than thirty (30) days in the case where a tenant claims harassment or retaliatory action. During the period of time between the filing of a complaint and the date of the hearing, the executive director shall promptly conduct an investigation to determine if reasonable cause exists for the complaint, and shall attempt to resolve such complaint by conference, conciliation, or persuasion. The hearing shall take place as scheduled on all complaints which are not resolved to the satisfaction of the parties prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be open to the public. A hearing may be continued by agreement by all parties or for good cause shown. 
(c)  The commission shall render a decision within ten (10) days following a hearing on the complaint. 
(d)  The executive director shall ensure that the tenant and the landlord are fully informed of all their rights and responsibilities, procedures and other information relevant to filing a complaint, both orally and in written form, at the time of the complaint, at any informal hearing, and in the public hearing. These materials and oral instructions shall be available in Spanish and English. 
(e)  Pending a determination by the fair rent commission, the tenant shall pay to the landlord the last agreed upon rent for the housing accommodation in question. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-6. - Notice of hearing. 
The notice of hearing given by the commission shall: 
(1)  Be in writing and signed by one (1) of the members of the commission or a designated representative; 
(2)  Be served on the landlord personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled date of hearing; 
(3)  Be given to all tenants of the housing accommodation in question. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-7. - Hearings and procedures. 
(a)  Five (5) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum in the exercise of any of the commission's powers and duties, but three (3) or more members of the commission may be appointed by the chairman to serve as a hearing tribunal to conduct hearings in accordance with provisions of this chapter. Any decision, finding, order, determination or other action by a hearing tribunal shall be deemed to be the decision, finding, order, determination or action of the commission. 
(b)  The proceedings of the commission in the conduct of its hearings shall be informal. 
(c)  All parties to a hearing shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to cross-examine witnesses and to call witnesses and introduce evidence in his own behalf. The testimony taken at such hearing shall be made under oath and a recording thereof shall be made upon request of either party. 
(d)  All proceedings shall continue regardless of the fact that a tenant may quit the housing accommodation in question and notwithstanding any attempt, successful or otherwise, to evict said tenant. No sale, assignment or transfer of the housing accommodation in question shall be cause for discontinuing any pending proceeding nor shall it affect the rights, duties and obligations of the commission or the parties thereto. 
(e)  Any person who violates any order of rent reduction or rent suspension by demanding, accepting or receiving an amount in excess thereof while said order remains in effect, or who violates the provisions of this chapter prohibiting retaliatory action, or any person who violates any other provision of this chapter or refuses to obey any subpoena, order, or direction of this commission pursuant thereto, shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each such offense. Such offense, should it continue more than one (1) day, shall constitute a new offense for every day it continues to exist. No action shall be taken on any such violation by the prosecuting authorities of the city or the state, except upon written complaint of the commission. 
(f)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the commission may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas for the County of New Haven, such appeal to be taken within ten (10) days after the rendering of the decision in question. Any such appeal shall be considered a privileged matter with respect to the order of trial. Such appeal shall be limited to the question of whether the commission acted arbitrarily, illegally or in abuse of its discretion. Unless otherwise directed by the commission or the court, the filing of an appeal shall not stay any order issued by the commission. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84; Ord. of 1-3-89, §§ 1,2)  
Sec. 12¾-8. - Standards pertaining to rental charges. 
In making determinations as to whether a rental charge is excessive, the commission shall give due consideration to the following: 
(1)  Rents charged for the same number of rooms in other housing accommodations within the city; 
(2)  The sanitary conditions in the housing accommodations in question; 
(3)  The number of bathtubs, or showers, flush water closets, kitchen sinks, and lavatory basins available to the occupant thereof; 
(4)  Services, furniture, furnishings and equipment supplied within said housing accommodations by the landlord; 
(5)  Size and number of bedrooms and number of whole bathroom accommodations; 
(6)  Repairs, including the cost of same, necessary to make such housing accommodation comply with the minimum standards required by the Code of the City of New Haven; 
(7)  Compliance of the housing accommodation with the ordinances of the City of New Haven and the General Statutes and regulations of the State of Connecticut relating to health and safety; 
(8)  Amount of taxes and overhead expenses of the landlord; 
(9)  Income of the tenant and availability of other accommodations for him and his immediate family. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-9. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12¾-10. - Retaliatory eviction. 
(a)  In any action for summary process, it shall be an affirmative defense pursuant to Connecticut Public Act 315 of the 1969 General Assembly that the plaintiff brought such action against the tenant solely because of a complaint which was filed with the commission or because the tenant or complainant has taken any other action with reference to the matter covered by this chapter. 
(b)  Pursuant to Public Act 83-425 of the Connecticut General Assembly, any tenant who claims that the action of his or her landlord constitutes retaliatory action may file a notice of said claim with the fair rent commission. 
(c)  It shall be retaliatory action for a landlord to refuse to renew the lease or other rental agreement of any tenant, to bring an action or proceeding against the tenant to recover possession of the dwelling unit, to demand an increase in rent from the tenant, to decrease the services to which the tenant has previously been entitled or to verbally, physically or sexually harass a tenant because a tenant has filed a complaint with the fair rent commission. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense against a claim of retaliatory action when the landlord seeks to recover possession of the dwelling unit if: 
(1)  The tenant is using the dwelling unit for an illegal purpose; 
(2)  There is nonpayment of rent by the tenant; 
(3)  The landlord in good faith seeks to recover the dwelling unit for immediate use as his or her own abode; 
(4)  The conditions complained of were caused by the willful actions of the tenant or another person in the tenant's household or a person on the premises with the tenant's consent; 
(5)  The landlord seeks to recover possession of the dwelling unit on the basis of a notice to terminate a periodic tenancy previous to the tenant's complaint. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Sec. 12¾-11. - Filing of claim. 
(a)  Upon receipt of notice of claim of retaliatory action, the fair rent commission shall inform the landlord and shall investigate the claim. Within fifteen (15) days the commission shall convene a hearing after due notice to the tenant and the landlord for the purpose of determining whether the landlord has engaged in retaliatory action. 
(b)  If after such a hearing the fair rent commission finds that the landlord has engaged in retaliatory action in violation of the provisions of section 12¾-10(a), the commission pursuant to its powers under Section 148 (b) through (f) of the Connecticut General Statutes and the fair rent ordinance of the City of New Haven shall order the landlord to cease and desist from such actions. This cease and desist order may include the following provisions: 
(1)  That the landlord maintain no action against the tenant to recover possession of the dwelling unit; 
(2)  That the landlord shall not increase the rent; 
(3)  That the landlord restore the services to which the tenant was entitled; 
(4)  That the landlord cease and desist all verbal, physical and sexual harassment of the tenant. 
(Ord. of 12-13-84)  
Chapter 13 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 13, Arts. I—VIII, §§ 13-100—13-831, is derived from an ordinance passed December 2, approved December 9, 1963 and effective January 4, 1964. Section "c" of this ordinance enacted the chapter in the following words and figures: "The Fire Prevention Code, as adopted per order passed by the Board of Aldermen on December 2, 1963, is hereby enacted as New Chapter 13, effective January 1, 1964." Section "b" of said ordinance repealed the following sections of Ch. 17 relative to licenses and permits for flammable materials; §§ 17-20(12), 17-20(13)(b) and (c), 17-20(14) and (15). Section "a" repealed in its entirety former Ch. 13, Fire Protection, derived from the following sources: 1928 Code, §§ 480—501, 540, 881—883, 885—890, 893—900 and ordinances dated October 3, 1932, May 1, 1939, July 3, 1939, April 1, 1940, July 2, 1962, August 5, 1963. 
Ch. 13 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-100. - Purpose of code. 
It is the purpose of this code to prescribe regulations consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use or hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use and occupancy of structures and premises. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention provisions at municipal airport, §§ 4-35—4-44; detention buildings and convalescent homes, Ch. 12; flammable goods and merchandise on harbor facilities, § 15-15; fires in public parks, § 19-2(j); requirements for steam, electrical and refrigeration equipment, Ch. 26; burning refuse in open fire, § 16-14; fire zones (fire lanes), § 29-70 et seq. 
Charter reference— For provisions concerning the department of fire service, see §§ 119—121. 
State Law reference— Municipal fire departments, §§ 7-301—7-313 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); fire marshals and fire hazards, §§ 29-39—29-108 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 13-101. - Other statutes, regulations, codes and ordinances. 
(a)  This code supplements existing city and state statutes, regulations, codes and ordinances dealing with protection from and prevention of fire and explosion. For purposes of convenience many of the state codes and regulations are cited in this code. 
(b)  The adoption of this code shall not excuse the noncompliance with any federal, state or local statute, regulation, code or ordinance which directly or indirectly governs the protection from and prevention of fire and explosion, whether or not the same is referred to herein.  
Sec. 13-102. - Conflict of provisions. 
In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or other statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the state or city, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.  
Sec. 13-103. - Applicability of code; effective date. 
This code shall become effective on January 1, 1964 and the provisions thereof shall apply to all structures and premises in existence within the City of New Haven on that date and thereafter and shall be binding on all persons.  
Sec. 13-104. - Liability for damages. 
This code shall not be construed to hold the City of New Haven or any of its officers responsible for any damage to person, persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect or the permit issued as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.  
Sec. 13-105. - Enforcement of other statutes, codes and ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code shall not be construed to prohibit the enforcement of other statutes, regulations, codes and ordinances, national, state and local, by the fire marshal and other lawful authorities duly empowered to enforce the same.  
Sec. 13-106. - Severability. 
If any provision of this code or any section, sentence, clause, phrase or word, or the application thereof in any circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the code and of the application of any such provision, section, sentence, clause, phrase or word in any other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 13-200. - Definitions; interpretation. 
(a)  In the interpretation of the code, all words other than the terms herein specifically defined shall have the meanings implied by their context in the code or their ordinarily accepted meanings as used in the construction industry; words used in the present tense shall include the future; words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural number includes the singular. Where reference is made to a paragraph by numbers, all paragraphs designated by said number or by any decimal part thereof shall be taken as included in the reference paragraph. 
(b)  Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this code have the meanings indicated in this section: 
(1)  Approved shall mean accepted by the fire marshal on the basis of his investigation or experience as not constituting a reasonable threat to person or property, or by reason of test, listing or approval by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the National Bureau of Standards, the American Gas Association Laboratories or any other nationally recognized and accepted testing agency. 
(2)  Assembly occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof by a gathering of persons for civic, political, travel, religious, social or recreational purposes. 
(3)  Automatic fire alarm system shall mean a system which automatically detects a fire condition and actuates a fire alarm signal device. 
(4)  Automobile wrecking yard shall mean any land structure, or land and structure in combination, used solely or partially for the storage, sorting, handling, disassembling, purchase, sale or trade of motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts and accessories which are or are to be used for salvage, or scrap. 
(5)  Basement shall mean that portion of a building located partly underground but having less than one-half (½) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining terrain. 
(6)  Blasting agent shall mean any material, composition or mixture intended for blasting, consisting substantially of a fuel and oxidizer, none of the ingredients of which is an explosive as defined in this Code, and the finished product of which as mixed and packaged for use or shipment cannot be detonated by the test procedure established by regulations of the fire marshal. 
(7)  Fire Prevention Code Appeals Board shall mean the board appointed pursuant to Section 13-264 of this Code. 
(8)  Bowling establishment shall mean any building which houses one or more lanes utilized for the game of bowling. 
(9)  Building shall mean a structure enclosed by exterior walls or fire walls, built, erected and formed of component structural parts, designated for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of persons or property of any kind. When used herein, building shall mean an entire structure or a portion thereof. 
(10)  Building inspector shall mean the officer of the City of New Haven appointed pursuant to section 141 of the charter of the City of New Haven, or his authorized representative. 
(11)  Bulk oxygen system shall mean an assembly of equipment such as oxygen storage containers, either stationary or portable, pressure regulators, safety devices, vaporizers, manifolds, and interconnecting piping to the point where the oxygen at service pressure first enters the supply line, which has a storage capacity at normal temperature and pressure of 
(a)  More than twelve thousand cubic feet (12,000 cu. ft.) of oxygen connected in service or ready for service, or 
(b)  More than twenty-five thousand cubic feet (25,000 cu. ft.) of oxygen, including unconnected reserves on hand at the site. 
The bulk oxygen system terminates at the point where oxygen at service pressure first enters the supply line. 
(12)  Business occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building for the transaction of business or the rendering or receiving of professional services. 
(13)  Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin) shall mean any plastic substance, material or compound, other than cellulose nitrate film or nitrate film as defined herein or guncotton or other explosive as defined herein, having cellulose nitrate as a base, by whatever name known, when in the form of blocks, slabs, sheets, tubes or fabricated shapes. 
(14)  Chief of department of fire service shall mean the officer of the City of New Haven appointed pursuant to section 119 of the charter of the City of New Haven, or his authorized representative. 
(15)  Christmas tree shall mean any tree brought inside a building or structure in connection with the observance of Christmas. 
(16)  Code shall mean this Fire Prevention Code. 
(17)  Combustible shall mean any substance which is inflammable, readily ignitable or free burning. 
(18)  Combustible fibre shall mean any readily ignitable and free burning fibre such as cotton, sisal, henequen, ixtle, jute, hemp, tow, cocoa fibre, oakum, baled waste, baled waste paper, kapok, hay, straw, Spanish moss, excelsior and other like materials. 
(19)  Commercial or industrial establishment shall mean a place wherein the storage, handling, or use of flammable liquids is incidental to but not the principal business or process. 
(20)  Compressed gas shall mean any mixture or material having in the container either an absolute pressure exceeding forty pounds (40 lbs.) per square inch at 70°F., or an absolute pressure exceeding one hundred four pounds (104 lbs.) per square inch at 130°F., or both; or any liquid flammable material having a Reid vapor pressure, as defined in American Society for Testing Materials publication D323-58, exceeding forty pounds (40 lbs.) per square inch at 100°F. 
(21)  Container shall mean any can, bucket, barrel, drum or portable tank, except stationary tanks, tank vehicles and tank cars. 
(22)  Corporation counsel shall mean the officer of the City of New Haven appointed pursuant to section 13 of the charter of the City of New Haven. [2] 
(23)  Corrosive liquids shall mean those acids, alkaline caustic liquids, and other corrosive liquids which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe damage of such tissue by chemical action; or in case of leakage will materially damage or destroy other containers of other hazardous commodities by chemical action and cause the release of their contents; or are liable to cause fire when in contact with organic matter or with certain chemicals. 
(24)  Decorative material shall mean cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery and foam plastic materials. 
(25)  Dip tank shall mean a tank, vat or container of flammable or combustible liquid in which articles or materials are immersed for the purpose of coating, finishing treating or similar processes. 
(26)  Dry cleaning shall mean the process of removing dirt, grease, paints and other stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs and other materials by the use of nonaqueous liquid solvents, flammable or nonflammable, including the process of dyeing clothes or other fabrics or textiles in a solution of dye colors and nonaqueous liquid solvents. 
(27)  Dust shall mean pulverized particles of any material which, if mixed with air in the proper proportions, become explosive and may be ignited by a flame or spark. 
(28)  Dwelling shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
(29)  Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
(30)  Educational occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building by persons assembled for the purpose of learning or of receiving educational instruction. 
(31)  Explosive shall mean any chemical compound or any mechanical mixture that contains oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that ignition by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or detonator may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressure is capable of destroying life or limb or of producing destructive effects to contiguous objects, but not including collided nitrocellulose in sheets or rods or grains not under one-eighth of an inch in diameter, wet nitrocellulose containing twenty percent (20) or more moisture and wet nitrostarch containing twenty percent (20%) or more moisture; and manufactured articles shall not be held to be explosive when the individual units contain explosives in such limited quantity, of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to produce a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of such units to the injury of life, limb or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion or detonator, including fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, safety fuses and matches. 
(32)  Film vault shall mean a compartment for the storage of combustible film. 
(33)  Fire marshal shall mean the officer of the City of New Haven appointed pursuant to section 121 of the charter of the City of New Haven, or his authorized representative. 
(34)  Fire resistance rating shall mean the time in hours that the material or construction will withstand the standard fire exposure as determined by a fire test made in conformity with nationally recognized good practices. 
(35)  Fireworks shall mean any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper caps, manufactured in accordance with the United States interstate commerce commission regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper caps, are used and toy pistol paper caps manufactured as provided therein. 
(36)  Flammable anesthetic shall mean a compressed gas which is flammable and administered as an anesthetic and shall include among others, cyclopropane, divinyl ether, ethyl chloride, ethyl ether and ethylene. 
(37)  Flammable gas shall mean any material in the gaseous state of atmospheric temperature and pressure which will burn in the normal concentrations of oxygen in the air. 
(38)  Flammable liquid shall mean any liquid including finishes other than a liquefied gas that gives off a flammable vapor at or below 200°F., and having a vapor pressure not exceeding forty pounds (40 lbs.) per square inch (absolute) at 100°F. 
(39)  Flammable solid shall mean a solid substance, other than one classified as an explosive, which is liable to cause fires through friction, through absorption of moisture, through spontaneous chemical changes, or as a result of retained heat from manufacturing or processing. 
(40)  Fuel oil shall mean kerosene or any hydrocarbon oil as specified by U. S. Department of Commerce Commercial Standard CS12 or A.S.T.M. D396, and having a flash point not less than 100°F. 
(41)  Fumigant shall mean any substance which by itself or in combination with any other substance emits or liberates a gas, fume or vapor used for the destruction or control of insects, fungi, vermin, germs, rodents, or other pests, and shall be distinguished from insecticides and disinfectants which are essentially effective in the solid or liquid phases. Examples are methyl bromide, ethylene dibromide, hydrogen cyanide, carbon disulfide and sulfuryl fluoride. 
(42)  Fumigation shall mean the use within an enclosed space of a fumigant in concentrations which may be hazardous or acutely toxic to man. 
(43)  Garage shall mean any place of business where motor vehicles are, for compensation, received for service or repair. 
(44)  Hazardous chemicals shall mean those materials which are highly flammable, or which may react to cause fires or explosions, or which by their presence create or augment a fire or explosion hazard, or which because of their toxicity, flammability, or liability to explosion render fire fighting abnormally dangerous or difficult; it shall also include flammable liquids which are chemically unstable and which may spontaneously form explosive compounds, or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or with sufficient evolution of heat may be a fire hazard. Hazardous chemicals shall include such materials as flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive chemicals, highly toxic materials, and poisonous gases but shall exclude substances which, although falling within this definition of hazardous chemicals, are specifically covered by provisions of this code. 
(45)  Heating and cooking appliance shall mean an oil-fired appliance not intended for central heating, including kerosene stoves, oil stoves, and conversion range oil burners. 
(46)  High hazard occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building, that involves highly combustible, highly flammable, or explosive material, or which has inherent characteristics that constitute a special fire hazard. 
(47)  Highly toxic material shall mean a material so toxic to man as to afford an unusual hazard to life and health during fire fighting operations. Examples are parathion, TEPP (Tetraethyl phosphate), HETP (hexaethyl tetraphosphate) and similar insecticides and pesticides. 
(48)  I.C.C. container shall mean a container approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission for shipping any liquid, gaseous or solid material of a flammable, toxic or other hazardous nature. 
(49)  Industrial occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building for assembling, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing operations, except when classed as a high hazard occupancy. 
(50)  Institutional buildings shall mean any structure, or parts thereof, in which people are harbored for medical, charitable or other care or treatment in which persons are detained for penal or correctional purposes or in which the liberty of the inmates is restricted including, but not limited to, asylums, jails, prisons, reformatories, orphanages, nurseries, hospitals and sanitariums. 
(51)  Institutional occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building by persons harbored or detained to receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment, or by persons involuntarily detained. 
(52)  Junk yard shall mean any land, structure, or land and structure in combination, used solely or partially for the storage, bailing, packing, sorting, handling, disassembling, purchase, sale or trade of any material or materials which are used, salvaged, scrapped or claimed but are capable of being reused in some form, including but not limited to metals, bones, rags, fibers, paper, wastepaper, glass, cordage, cloth, rubber, rope, bottles, machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures, utensils, lumber, boxes, crates, pipe, pipe fittings, tires, motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. A junk yard shall include automobile wrecking yards and waste material handling plants. 
(53)  Liquefied petroleum gas shall mean any material which is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or mixtures of them: propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or iso-butane) and butylenes. 
(54)  Liquefied petroleum gas equipment shall mean all containers, apparatus, piping (not including utility distribution piping systems) and equipment pertinent to the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gas but excluding gas consuming appliances. 
(55)  LP-Gas shall mean liquefied petroleum gas. 
(56)  Magnesium shall mean the pure metal and alloys of which the major part is magnesium. 
(57)  Mercantile occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building for the displaying, selling or buying of goods, wares or merchandise, except when classed as a high hazard occupancy. 
(58)  Multifamily house shall mean a building containing three or more dwelling units. 
(59)  Nationally recognized good practice shall mean the standards set forth in publications on subjects covered by this code, which publications are issued by nationally recognized and respected organizations such as the National Board of Fire Underwriters, Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the American Society for Testing Materials, and other groups enjoying equivalent reputations. 
(60)  Nitrate motion picture film shall mean cellulose nitrate motion picture film. Film having a cellulose acetate or other approved slow-burning base, marked safety film, is not included within this definition. 
(61)  Nonflammable medical gas shall mean a compressed gas which is nonflammable and used for therapeutic purposes, including oxygen and nitrous oxide. 
(62)  Oil burning equipment shall mean an oil burner of any type, together with its tank, piping, wiring, controls and related devices, including all conversion oil burners, oil-fired units, and heating and cooking appliances but excluding internal combustion engines, oil lamps and portable devices such as blow torches, melting pots and weed burners. 
(63)  Oil fired unit shall mean a heating appliance, equipped with one or more oil burners and all the necessary safety controls, electrical equipment and related equipment manufacturer for assembly as a complete unit. Kerosene stoves and oil stoves are not included within this definition. 
(64)  Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any building or structure with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any building or structure as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this code, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
(65)  Oxidizing material shall mean substances such as chlorates, permanganates, peroxides, or nitrates, that yield oxygen readily to stimulate combustion. 
(66)  Person shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
(67)  Piped distribution system shall mean a central supply system with control equipment, and a system of piping extending to the points in the structure where nonflammable medical gases are used, and suitable station outlet valves at each use point. 
(68)  Place of assembly shall mean a room or space used for assembly or educational occupancy for seventy-five (75) or more occupants or which has a floor area of one thousand five hundred square feet (1,500 sq. ft.) or more used for such purposes. Such room or space shall include any similarly occupied connecting room or space in the same story, or in a story or stories above or below, where entrance is common to the rooms or spaces. 
(69)  Poisonous gas shall mean any noxious gas of such nature that a small amount of the gas when mixed with air is dangerous to life, including chlorpicrin, cyanogen, hydrogen cyanide, nitrogen peroxide, and phosgene. 
(70)  Potentially explosive chemical shall mean a chemical substance, other than one classified as an explosive or blasting agent, which has a tendency to be unstable and which can be exploded by heat or shock or a combination thereof. 
(71)  Pressure vessel shall mean a storage tank or vessel which has been designated to operate at pressures above fifteen pounds (15 lbs.) per square inch. 
(72)  Public buildings shall mean any structure, or parts thereof, in which people come together for civic, political, religious, educational, social or recreational purposes including but not limited to armories, churches, city halls, court houses, libraries, museums, post offices, railroad passenger stations and schools. 
(73)  Radioactive material shall mean any material or combination of materials that spontaneously emit ionizing radiation. 
(74)  Residential occupancy shall mean occupancy of a building by persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided but who are not harbored or detained to receive medical, charitable or other care or treatment, or are not involuntarily detained. 
(75)  Sealed source shall mean a quantity of radiation so closed as to prevent the escape of any radioactive material but at the same time permitting radiation to come out for use. 
(76)  Smoking shall mean the holding or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form. 
(77)  Spraying area shall mean any area in a building or structure in which dangerous quantities of flammable vapors or combustible residues, dusts or deposits are present due to the operation of spraying processes including the interior of spray booths, the interior of ducts exhausting from spraying processes and any other area in the direct path of spray or any area containing dangerous quantities of air-suspended combustible residue, dust, deposits, spray or vapor as a result of spraying operations. 
(78)  Storage occupancy shall mean the occupancy or use of a building for the storage of goods, wares, merchandise, raw materials, agricultural or manufactured products, including parking garages, or the sheltering of livestock and other animals, except when classed as a high hazard occupancy. 
(79)  Structure shall mean an assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or use including buildings. 
(80)  Tank, atmospheric shall mean a storage tank which has been designated to operate at pressures from atmospheric through five-tenths pounds (0.5 lbs.) per square inch. 
(81)  Tank, low pressure shall mean a storage tank which has been designed to operate at pressures above five-tenths pounds (0.5 lbs.) per square inch but not more than fifteen pounds (15 lbs.) per square inch. 
(82)  Tent shall mean any structure having wood or metal supports and using any kind of a textile or similar material for coverage of an area of one hundred twenty square feet (120 sq. ft.) or more. 
(83)  Thermal insecticidal fogging shall mean the use of insecticidal liquids which are passed through thermal fog-generating units where they are by means of heat, pressure and turbulence, transformed and discharged in the form of a fog or mist that is blown into an area to be treated. 
(84)  Tire rebuilding plants shall mean any building used in whole or in part for rebuilding or recapping motor vehicle tires. 
(85)  Vapor area shall mean any area containing dangerous quantities of flammable vapors during operation or shut-down periods in the vicinity of dip tanks as defined in this code, their drain boards or associated drying, conveying or other equipment. 
(86)  Vehicle shall mean any wheeled device propelled or drawn by motor power, specifically designated for the transportation of passengers, or commodities over public highways. 
(87)  Waste material handling plant shall mean any land, structure, or land and structure in combination, used solely or partially for the storage, bailing, packing, sorting, handling, disassembling, purchase, sale or trade of any material or materials which are used, salvaged, scrapped or claimed, but are capable of being reused in some form. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— The Charter of the city is contained in Vol. I of this Code of Ordinances. 
 
ARTICLE III. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 13-300. - Fire marshal; inspections.[3] 
The fire marshal is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of all yards, structures and the equipment therein in the City of New Haven, including new structures before they are completed in order that he may perform his duty of protecting yards, structures, equipment and persons from fire or explosion or the threat of same. For the purpose of making such inspections, the fire marshal is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable times, such yards, structures and equipment, and the owner or occupant of every such yard or structure, or his agent, shall give the fire marshal free access to such yards or structures for the purpose of such inspections. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Qualifications, appointment, duties generally, and duties as head of department of fire services, §§ 119, 121 and 1234 respectively. 
Cross reference— Inspection of detention and convalescent homes by fire marshal, § 12-4; approval of gas appliances by fire marshal required, § 13-81. 
 
Sec. 13-301. - Obstructing fire marshal prohibited. 
No person or persons shall hinder, obstruct or abuse the fire marshal or his lawful agent in the discharge of any of the duties imposed upon him by this code.  
Sec. 13-302. - Notice to eliminate dangerous or hazardous conditions. 
Whenever the fire marshal shall find in any yard or in any structure any of the dangerous conditions set forth below, he shall order the owner of the property or his agent or the person responsible for the existence of such dangerous condition to remove or remedy the same within such time and in such manner as may re required to prevent the loss of life or property or reduce the threat of fire or explosion. Such order shall be in the form prescribed by section 13-303 of this code: 
(a)  Combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials, stored or otherwise accumulated in violation of this code or any statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the State of Connecticut or City of New Haven, or stored or otherwise accumulated in such quantities or found in such a condition as may cause fire or explosion or present an unreasonable threat to life or property. 
(b)  Equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous material and installed in violation of this code or any statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the State of Connecticut or City of New Haven, or in such a defective condition as to cause fire or explosion or present an unreasonable threat to life or property. 
(c)  Rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly flammable material, stored or otherwise accumulated in violation of this code or any statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the State of Connecticut or City of New Haven, or stored or otherwise accumulated in such a manner as may cause fire or present an unreasonable threat to life or property. 
(d)  Dust or waste material in an air-conditioning or ventilating system or grease in the kitchen or other exhaust ducts accumulated in violation of this code or any statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the State of Connecticut or City of New Haven, or stored or otherwise accumulated in such a manner as may cause fire or present an unreasonable threat to life or property. 
(e)  The presence of any material on or near any fire escape, stairway, passageway, door or window in violation of this code or any statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the State of Connecticut or City of New Haven, or the storage of any material in such a manner as to interfere with the convenient ingress or egress of the fire department or occupants of the structure in case of fire. 
(f)  Any structure which, for want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, may cause fire or presents an unreasonable threat to life or property. 
(g)  The specific violation of any provision of this code or of any statute, regulation, code or ordinance of the State of Connecticut or City of New Haven which the fire marshal is authorized to enforce.  
Sec. 13-303. - Fire marshal; notice of violation. 
Whenever the fire marshal determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of this code, he shall give written notice of such violation to the person or persons responsible for such violation. Such notice shall describe the violations charged with specific reference to the provisions of the code, and shall outline the remedial action required to remove the violation, including the time within which such violation must be removed. Service of the notice shall be either upon the person or by certified mail to his last known address or by posting such notice in a conspicuous place in or about the yard or structure affected thereby.  
Sec. 13-304. - Fire records. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall keep, in his office, a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the fire department officers and inspectors. All such records shall be open to reasonable public inspection. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall keep a record book or books, wherein he shall enter the substance of all orders issued by him, all complaints made to him in reference to the matters within his cognizance, and all inspections and examinations made by him. 
(c)  The fire marshal shall annually make a report to the board of aldermen of the services performed by him. 
(d)  The fire marshal shall enter a complaint to the proper prosecuting official in the city for any violation of the provisions of this code.  
Sec. 13-305. - Condemnation of unsafe buildings or structures. 
Any building or structure which the fire marshal shall find to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unsafe and shall be designated and placarded by the fire marshal: 
(a)  One which is in such a condition as to create a serious threat to the loss of person or property by reason of or in the event of fire; 
(b)  One which has been so damaged by fire that it creates a serious threat to the health or safety of the occupants, or those who may come on the premises, or of the public.  
Sec. 13-306. - Occupants required to vacate unsafe buildings or structures. 
Any building or structure or portion thereof condemned as unfit for human use and habitation and so designated and placarded by the fire marshal shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the fire marshal.  
Sec. 13-307. - Removal of placard prohibited. 
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building or structure which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in section 13-308.  
Sec. 13-308. - Reoccupation; removal of placard when defect corrected. 
No building or structure or portion thereof which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human use or habitation shall again be used or inhabited until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by the fire marshal. The fire marshal shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based has been eliminated.  
Sec. 13-309. - Corrections of defects by fire marshal; assessment of costs. 
In any order of the fire marshal issued pursuant to this code shall not be complied with within the time prescribed therein, the fire marshal shall take such actions as may be necessary to cause such order to be complied with, and the expense thereof shall be paid by the City of New Haven but shall be charged against the person upon whom any such order is made and shall be recovered in behalf of the City of New Haven in any proper form of action. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to notify the corporation counsel of the commencement of such corrective action. It shall be the duty of the corporation counsel to prepare a notice of correction which shall, in a form recordable on the land records of the City of New Haven, set forth the address of the structure or building and the items to be corrected and shall be recorded by the corporation counsel on the land records of the City of New Haven and shall constitute a lis pendens against the building or structure concerned. It shall be the further duty of the corporation counsel to cause proceedings to be taken to collect any expenses incurred by the city for any action of the fire marshal pursuant to this paragraph.  
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 13-400. - Application for permits. 
All applications for a permit required by this code shall be made to the fire marshal in such form and detail as he shall prescribe. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as required by the fire marshal and shall specify the particular building or structure in which the activities will be conducted. In addition, the fire marshal may, where he deems it necessary, require detailed drawings and specifications and proof of compliance with the city zoning ordinance or building code.  
Sec. 13-401. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall issue all permits required by this code upon compliance by its applicant with the applicable provisions of this code and any applicable provision of federal, state or local laws or regulations. No permit for the use of flammable or explosive materials shall be issued unless the fire marshal has determined that the applicant is familiar with the characteristics of such materials and the proper methods of handling an using such materials. 
(b)  Except as provided herein to the contrary, all permits issued by the fire marshal pursuant to this code shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance.  
Sec. 13-402. - Permits or licenses from other agencies. 
The issuance of a permit by the fire marshal shall in no way remove the responsibility of the owner to procure such other permits, licenses and/or approval from other agencies having provisions or regulations over the building or structure or activities to be or carried on therein.  
Sec. 13-403. - Display of permits. 
Permits required by this code shall be kept in the building or structure designated therein and shall be displayed in such a manner as will readily permit inspection by the fire marshal.  
Sec. 13-404. - Revocation of permits. 
The fire marshal may revoke a permit or approval issued if any violation of this code is found upon inspection or in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.  
Sec. 13-405. - Fire rescue insurance recovery. 
The city shall pursue recapture of fire department costs for accident response, hazmat response, and other public safety rescue work that is reimbursable from insurance coverage. Fees for fire rescue insurance recovery shall be set forth in section 17-201 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1596, 6-1-09)  
ARTICLE V. - APPEALS 
 
Sec. 13-500. - Fire Prevention Code appeals board created; membership, term of members. 
There is hereby created a Fire Prevention Code appeals board which shall consist of the building inspector, who shall serve as chairman, a heating engineer, an architect, a general contractor, a fire safety specialist and a secretary. The mayor shall appoint the heating engineer, the architect, the general contractor and the secretary. The term of the general contractor and the fire safety specialist shall expire April 1, 1964 and the term of the architect, the heating engineer and the secretary shall expire April 1, 1965. All subsequent appointments shall be for the term of two (2) years from the expiration dates heretofore set forth.  
Sec. 13-501. - Fire Prevention Code appeals board duties. 
The fire prevention code appeals board shall hear appeals from any person affected by any order which has been issued by the fire marshal pursuant to this code. The board shall be responsible for reviewing the standards and provisions of this code to assure reasonable protection for fire or threat of fire. The secretary shall keep a record of the meetings of the board but shall take no part in its decision.  
Sec. 13-502. - Hearings; appeals. 
(a)  Any person affected by any notice of violation which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this code or aggrieved by the issuance, denial or revocation of a permit or otherwise aggrieved by this code shall be granted a hearing before the board of fire prevention, standards and appeals; provided that such person shall file in the office of the fire marshal a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds thereof, within twenty (20) days after the day the notice was served. 
(b)  On receipt of such petition, the fire marshal shall notify said board to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner not less than two (2) days written notice thereof. 
(c)  At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice shall be modified, extended or withdrawn or a variance granted, or why such permit should be issued or not revoked. 
(d)  The hearing shall be commenced not later than thirty (30) days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that upon application of the petitioner said committee may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such thirty (30) days period; if in its judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement, but in no event shall such hearing be postponed longer than an additional thirty (30) days.  
Sec. 13-503. - Composition of board; authority of board; conditions for granting extensions; variances. 
Such hearings shall be had before a panel of not less than three (3) members of such board in addition to the secretary. Said panel by a majority vote of those present may sustain, modify or withdraw any notice given by the fire marshal; it may also reverse the denial or issuance or revocation of a permit; it may also grant an extension or variance in accordance with the following conditions: 
(a)  Extension. The time for performance of any act required by the notice may be extended for not more than twelve (12) months subject to appropriate conditions and provided that the committee makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating to the following factors: 
(1)  That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any provision of this code; and 
(2)  That such extension is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this code in securing the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Variance. A variance may be granted in a specific case and from a specific provision of this code subject to appropriate conditions and provided that the committee making specific findings of fact based on evidence relating to the following facts: 
(1)  That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the provisions; 
(2)  That the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; 
(3)  That an extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships and this arbitrary effect; and 
(4)  That such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this code in securing the public health, safety and general welfare.  
Sec. 13-504. - Effect of action taken at hearing; effect of failure to petition for hearing. 
If the notice is sustained, modified, or extended, it shall become an order as so sustained, modified, or extended. Any notice served pursuant to section 13-153 of this code shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the fire marshal within twenty (20) days after such notice is served.  
Sec. 13-505. - Effect of sustaining notice of permit; suspension time for filing petition for hearing on permit suspension. 
After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this code, when such notice has been sustained by the said board, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the fire marshal within twenty (20) days after such notice is served.  
Sec. 13-506. - Recording of proceedings required; right of judicial appeal. 
The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decision of the committee, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the fire marshal and shall be open to reasonable public inspection. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the fire marshal of the board may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the general statutes.  
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 13-600. - Responsibility for compliance with this code. 
Unless provided in this code to the contrary the owner of any land, building or structure and/or any person or persons, including the person in possession of the property, responsible for the activities or conditions violating this code shall be liable for prosecution pursuant to this code.  
Sec. 13-601. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this code may upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days. A violation of each provision of this code shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to comply with any order issued by the fire marshal pursuant to this code is a violation. Each day's failure to comply with such order shall constitute a separate offense.  
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 13-700. - Interfering with, obstructing fire department during fire.[4] 
Every person present at or near a fire who shall conduct himself in a disorderly manner, or neglect or refuse to obey promptly any proper order of the chief, or who shall resist, obstruct, hinder or abuse any officer of the fire department or any fireman in the discharge of his duty, shall be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense and any of the aforesaid officers may forthwith arrest without warrant, and take to a police station, any person so offending. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Creation of fire department, board of fire commissioners, position of fire chief and marshal, §§ 118—121. 
 
Sec. 13-701. - Driving over hose prohibited. 
No person shall drive any vehicle over any hose laid by the fire department, without permission therefor first obtained from the chief or officer in charge.  
Sec. 13-702. - Unauthorized possession, wearing of fireman's badge, uniform prohibited. 
No person shall have or keep in his possession, except while a member of the fire department of said city, any fireman's badge, issued by or belonging to said city, or shall wear any uniform adopted for the department by the board of fire commissioners.  
Sec. 13-703. - Damaging, destroying, stealing fire department property prohibited. 
No person shall wilfully and maliciously take away, conceal, cut, deface or injure any of the property of the city, belonging to or used by said fire department.  
Sec. 13-704. - Tampering with fire alarms; false alarms. 
No person shall cut any fire alarm wire, or shall destroy, deface, or in any manner injure the fire alarms or any part thereof, in said city, or any of the appurtenances of the same, or shall interfere with, or do anything to the same, so as to prevent or delay the proper or timely use thereof, or shall without probable cause send in an alarm of fire.  
Sec. 13-705. - Tying or hitching to hydrants prohibited. 
No person shall fasten any guy rope, brace, support, or fastening of any kind, or hitch or fasten any animal, to any public hydrant.  
Sec. 13-706. - Damaging, blocking access to hydrants prohibited. 
No person shall wilfully break, injure, cover up or encumber any hydrant or shall place upon or about it any snow, ice, sleet, rubbish, building material or other substance.  
Sec. 13-707. - Opening hydrants regulated; leaving running prohibited. 
No person shall open any public fire hydrant or make any hose connection therewith without first having obtained a license therefor from the department of fire service; the fee for such license shall be as provided in section 17-20 (12); provided, however, that the foregoing shall not apply to said use of said hydrant by any department or bureau of the city; any violation of the foregoing shall be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. Any person who shall wilfully and maliciously leave the water of any hydrant or pipe running in any public building or to the damage of others in any tenement building shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(4), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 13-708. - General power of fire chief during fire. 
During the continuance of any fire, the chief shall have absolute control of the streets adjacent thereto; he may blockade any such street and forbid passage therein; he may order those present to stand back to any required and reasonable distance; he may command the assistance of any police officer, special constable, or person present at the fire, in extinguishing the same or preventing its spread, or in saving or securing property. 
He shall have power, with necessary assistance, to enter any building or premises, for the purpose of extinguishing or checking the progress of fire, or securing or protecting property, and he may, with the advice of the mayor, direct the destruction of any building, to stay the further progress of the fire.  
Sec. 13-709. - Responsibility of chief to report deficiencies of supply of water to hydrants. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to report to the board of aldermen any deficiency in the supply of water to any public hydrant.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PROVISIONS REGARDING SPECIFIC USES 
 
Sec. 13-801. - Bowling establishments. 
(1)  Permit required for lane or pin refinishing or resurfacing. 
No person shall refinish any bowling pins or resurface any bowling lanes unless he holds a permit. 
(2)  Lane resurfacing. 
No person shall resurface bowling lanes or permit bowling lanes to be refinished on his premises in violation of the provisions of this section. No resurfacing operations shall be carried on while a bowling establishment is open for business. The fire marshal shall be notified when bowling lanes are to be resurfaced. Proper ventilation shall be provided. Heating, ventilating, or cooling systems employing recirculation of air shall not be operated during resurfacing operations or within one hour following the application of flammable finishes. All electric motors or other equipment in the area which might be a source of ignition shall be shut down, and all smoking and use of open flames shall be prohibited during the application of flammable finishes and for one hour thereafter. 
(3)  Pin refinishing. 
No person shall refinish bowling pins or permit bowling pins to be refinished on his premises in violation of the provisions of this section. Pin refinishing involving the application of flammable finishes shall be done only in a special room meeting the requirements of provisions governing the use of flammable liquids; such room shall not be located below grade nor shall it have communication with any pits, wells, pockets or basements. 
(1)  All power tools in the room shall be effectively grounded. A substantial metal box or other receptacle approved by the fire marshal shall be provided for lathes and sanding or buffing machines for catching dust thrown off during operations. Contents shall be removed daily and disposed of safely. 
(2)  Storage of flammable liquids in such rooms shall not exceed a combined aggregate of sixty gallons (60 gals.) in original metal containers, or in approved safety containers not exceeding five gallons (5 gals.) individual capacity. A metal waste can with self-closing cover shall be provided for all waste materials and rags; contents shall be removed daily. Smoking shall be prohibited at all times in refinishing rooms.  
Sec. 13-802. - Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin). 
(1)  Permit required. 
No person shall store, handle or in any way use more than twenty-five pounds (25 lbs.) of cellulose nitrate plastics for manufacturing or other purposes unless he obtains a permit. 
(2)  Display of plastics. 
No person shall display or permit cellulose nitrate plastic to be displayed in violation of the following: 
(a)  All display of cellulose nitrate plastic articles in stores shall be in show cases or show windows except as permitted in the following four subparagraphs. 
(b)  Articles may be placed on tables but no table shall be over three feet (3') wide and 10 feet long, and tables shall be spaced at least three feet (3') apart, except as otherwise provided by the fire marshal. Where articles are displayed on counters, they shall be arranged in like manner. 
(c)  Spaces underneath tables shall be kept free of any accumulations of paper, refuse and other combustible material, or any storage which presents a reasonable threat of fire. 
(d)  Sales or display tables shall be so located that in the event of a fire at that table, the table will not interfere with free exit from the room, in at least one direction. 
(e)  No electric or gas light shall be located directly above any cellulose nitrate plastic (pyroxylin) material, unless provided with a suitable guard to prevent heated particles falling. 
(3)  Storage and handling. 
No person shall store or handle or permit cellulose nitrate plastic material to be stored or handled in violation of the following: 
(a)  All raw cellulose nitrate plastic material in factory buildings shall be stored and handled in accordance with the following subparagraphs. 
(b)  Where raw material in excess of twenty-five pounds (25 lbs.) is received in any building or fire area, an approved vented cabinet or vented and sprinklered vault shall be provided for the storage of the material. 
(c)  Not more than one thousand pounds (1,000 lbs.) of raw material may be stored in cabinets in any one workroom, but not more than five hundred pounds (500 lbs.) in any one cabinet, or more than two hundred fifty pounds (250 lbs.) in one compartment. 
(d)  All raw material in excess of that permitted above shall be kept in vented vaults not exceeding one thousand five hundred cubic feet (1,500 cu. ft.) capacity and with one automatic sprinkler head to each one hundred twenty-five cubic feet (125 cu. ft.) of total vault space and with construction and venting in conformity with the requirements prescribed in section 13-821(1) and satisfactory to the fire marshal. 
(e)  No cellulose nitrate plastics shall be stored within two feet (2') of any heat producing appliances, steam pipes, radiators or chimneys. 
(f)  In factories manufacturing articles of cellulose nitrate plastics such sprinklered and vented cabinets, vaults or storage rooms, approved by the fire marshal, shall be provided as may be necessary to prevent the accumulation in work rooms, of raw stock, stock in process or finished articles. 
(g)  In the work rooms of cellulose nitrate plastic factories, operators shall not be stationed closer together than three feet (3'), and the amount of material per operator shall not exceed one-half day's supply and shall be limited to the capacity of three toteboxes including material awaiting removal or use. 
(h)  All waste cellulose nitrate plastic material such as shavings, chips, turnings, sawdust, edgings and trimmings shall be kept under water in metal receptacles until removed from the premises. 
(4)  Fire protection equipment. 
No person shall use any building or permit any building or any portions of buildings to be used for the manufacture or storage of articles of cellulose nitrate plastics in quantities and used or stored in a method presenting a reasonable threat of fire and shall be equipped with adequate automatic sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal. 
(5)  Heating equipment. 
No person shall install or permit equipment used for heating structures, buildings or rooms where cellulose nitrate plastics are handled or stored to be installed except in accordance with nationally recognized good practice.  
Sec. 13-803. - Combustible fibres, storage and handling of. 
(1)  Permit required. 
No person shall store, handle or use combustible fibres in quantities of one hundred cubic feet (100 cu. ft.) or more unless he holds a permit. 
(2)  Loose storage. 
No person shall store or permit loose combustible fibres to be stored in violation of the following: 
(a)  Loose combustible fibres (not in suitable bales or packages), whether housed or in the open, shall not be stored within one hundred feet (100') of any building except as hereinafter specified. 
(b)  Not more than one hundred cubic feet (100 cu. ft.) of loose combustible fibres may be kept in any building unless stored in a metal or metal-lined bin equipped with a self-closing cover, or in such manner as is approved by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Quantities exceeding one hundred cubic feet (100 cu. ft.) of loose combustible fibres, but not exceeding five hundred cubic feet (500 cu. ft.), may be stored in rooms or compartments having floor, walls and ceiling having a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour. Each opening into such rooms or compartments from other parts of the building shall be equipped with an approved fire door. 
(d)  Quantities exceeding five hundred cubic feet (500 cu. ft.) of loose combustible fibres may be stored in approved vaults, constructed as follows: 
(1)  Storage vaults shall be located outside of buildings or if located inside shall be provided with approved safety vents to the outside. 
(2)  Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be constructed of brick or other approved noncombustible material. Roofs of outside vaults shall be of noncombustible material but may be so constructed as to readily give way in case of an internal explosion. 
(3)  Openings, if any, between vault and main building shall be protected on each side of the wall by an approved fire door. Wall openings in outside vaults exposing other property (not sufficiently detached to be considered cut off) shall be protected by approved fire doors or equivalent. 
(4)  Vaults located within buildings and exceeding one thousand cubic feet (1,000 cu. ft.) storage capacity shall be protected by approved automatic sprinklers, carbon dioxide, or other approved inert gas systems. 
(5)  Not to exceed two thousand five hundred cubic feet (2,500 cu. ft.) of loose fibres may be stored in a detached "loose house" suitably located, with openings properly protected against entrance of sparks. The "loose house" shall be used for no other purpose. 
(3)  Baled storage. 
No person shall store or permit combustible fibres to be stored in bulk in violation of the following: 
(a)  No single block or pile shall contain more than twenty-five thousand cubic feet (25,000 cu. ft.) of fibre exclusive of aisles or clearances. Blocks or piles of baled fibre shall be separated from adjacent storage by aisles not less than five feet (5') wide; or by flash fire barriers consisting of continuous sheets of noncombustible material extending from floor to a height of a least one foot above the highest point of piles and projecting at least one foot beyond the sides of the piles. 
(b)  Sisal and other fibres in bales bound with combustible tie ropes, also jute and other fibres liable to swell when wet, shall be stored to allow for expansion in any direction without endangering building walls, ceilings or columns. Not less than three feet (3') clearance shall be left between walls and sides of piles, except that if storage compartment is not more than thirty feet (30') in width, one foot (1') clearance at side walls will be sufficient, provided a center aisle not less than five feet (5') wide is maintained. 
(c)  Not less than three feet (3') clearance shall be maintained between sprinkler pipes and tops of piles. 
(4)  Storage of agricultural products on the farm. 
No person shall store or permit unlimited quantities of hay, straw, and other agricultural products to be stored in or near farm buildings located outside closely-built areas. No permit shall be required for such storage.  
Sec. 13-804. - Compressed gases. 
(1)  General. 
This article shall apply to bulk oxygen systems and to the storage, handling, and use of compressed gases and flammable gases as defined herein. Liquefied petroleum gases and compressed gases used in conjunction with welding or cutting operations are exempt from these provisions. 
(2)  Permit required. 
No person shall store, handle or use more than two thousand cubic feet (2,000 cu. ft.) of flammable compressed gas or six thousand cubic feet (6,000 cu. ft.) of nonflammable compressed gas unless he holds a permit. 
(3)  Storage containers. 
No person shall store or permit compressed gases to be stored in violation of the following: 
(a)  Cylinders and pressure vessels shall be designed, constructed, tested and maintained in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(b)  Each cylinder, pressure vessel, or group of containers shall be marked with the name of the gas contained in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(4)  Cylinder systems for flammable anesthetics and nonflammable medical gases. 
No person shall store, handle or use or permit flammable anesthetics and nonflammable medical gases to be stored, handled or used in hospitals and similar facilities, except in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(5)  Piped distribution systems for nonflammable medical gases. 
No person shall install and use or permit piped distribution systems handling nonflammable medical gases, in hospitals and similar facilities, to be installed and used except in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(6)  Bulk oxygen systems installed at industrial and institutional consumer sites. 
No person shall install or permit bulk oxygen systems located at industrial and institutional consumer sites to be installed except in accordance with nationally recognized good practice.  
Sec. 13-805. - Dry cleaning plants. 
(1)  General. 
Dry cleaning plants are regulated by state law. The reader is directed to regulations 29-67-1 through 29-67-30 of the state fire marshal which govern the installation and operation of dry cleaning plants and self-service or coin-operated dry cleaning facilities and also to paragraphs 608.1 through 608.15 of the New Haven Building Code which govern the size of and nature of construction of buildings housing dry cleaning plants.  
Sec. 13-806. - Dust. 
(1)  Permit required. 
No person shall operate any grain elevator, flour, starch or feed mill, or plant pulverizing aluminum, coal, cocoa, magnesium, spices, sugar, or other material producing dust unless he holds a permit. 
(2)  General requirements. 
No person shall conduct or permit to be conducted any dust producing or collecting operation except as follows: 
(a)  All dust-producing or dust-agitating machinery such as grinding mills and separators, and all elevators, elevator legs, spouts, hoppers and other conveyors shall be provided with casings or enclosures maintained as nearly dust-tight as possible. 
(b)  Approved magnetic or pneumatic separators shall be installed ahead of all shellers, crackers, crushers, grinding machines, pulverizers and similar machines in which the entrance of foreign materials may cause sparks to be generated. 
(c)  Efficiently operating dust collecting equipment shall be installed and accumulation of dust shall be kept at a minimum in the interior of buildings. 
(d)  All machinery and metal parts of the crushing, drying, pulverizing and conveying systems shall be electrically grounded. 
(e)  Smoking and the carrying of matches, the use of heating or other devices employing an open flame, or use of any spark producing equipment is prohibited in areas containing dust-producing or dust-agitating operations. Artificial lighting in such areas shall be by electricity with all wiring and electrical equipment installed in accordance with nationally recognized safe practice. Compliance with the standard of the National Board of Fire Underwriters known as the "National Electrical Code" shall be deemed evidence of compliance with nationally recognized safe practice. 
(f)  Where specified requirements are not otherwise established, plants producing dusts shall comply with nationally recognized good practice.  
Sec. 13-807. - Explosives, ammunition and blasting agents. 
(1)  General. 
Explosives, ammunition and blasting agents are regulated by state law. The reader is directed to regulations 29-89-1 through 29-89-105 of the commissioner of state police regarding the transportation, storage, sale and use of explosives. These regulations include requirements that a person obtain a permit or license before handling explosives and keep records with regard to the disposition of such explosives.  
Sec. 13-808. - Fireworks. 
(1)  General. 
Fireworks are regulated by state law. The reader is directed to the Connecticut General Statutes, sections 29-96 through 29-106 regarding fireworks and also regulations of 29-97-1 through 29-97-21 of the state fire marshal governing the sale and use of fireworks. These statutes and regulations require that permits and licenses be obtained before fireworks are manufactured or handled. They also impose a comprehensive set of requirements governing the storage and display of fireworks, set qualifications for any person operating a fireworks display, and impose certain fire and police protection requirements for any location at which fireworks will be detonated.  
Sec. 13-809. - Flammable finishes. 
(1)  General. 
This article shall apply to locations or areas where the following activities are regularly done: (1) the application of flammable or combustible paint, varnish, lacquer, stain or other flammable or combustible liquid applied as a spray by whatever means, in continuous or intermittent processes; and (2) dip tank operations in which articles or materials are passed through contents of tanks, vats or containers of flammable or combustible liquids, including coating, finishing, treating and similar processes. 
(2)  Permit required. 
No person shall conduct spraying or dipping operations utilizing more than one gallon of flammable or combustible liquids per working day unless he holds a permit. 
(3)  Smoking prohibited. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in any spray finishing areas and in the vicinity of dip tanks. "No Smoking" signs with lettering of approved size shall be conspicuously posted in such areas and shall read, "By Order of the Fire Marshal". 
(4)  Welding warning signs. 
Conspicuous signs shall be posted in the vicinity of all spraying areas, dipping operations and paint storage rooms, conveying the following warning: 
NO WELDING 
The use of welding or cutting equipment in, or near this area is dangerous because of fire and explosion. Welding and cutting shall be done only under the supervision of the foreman in charge. 
(5)  Electric wiring and equipment. 
No person shall permit any flammable finishing operation to be conducted in any structures unless electric wiring and equipment shall conform to the provisions of this article and shall otherwise be installed in accordance with nationally recognized safe practice. 
(6)  Location of spray finishing operations. 
No person shall permit spray finishing operations to be conducted in buildings used for assembly, educational, institutional or residential occupancies, except in a room designed for the purpose, protected with an approved system of automatic sprinklers and separated vertically and horizontally from other areas by construction having not less than two (2) hours fire resistance rating. 
(7)  Spray booths. 
No person shall permit spraying of flammable finishes to be conducted in spray booths which violate the following: 
(a)  Spray booths shall be substantially constructed of noncombustible material. 
(b)  The interior surfaces of spray booths shall be smooth and continuous without edges and otherwise designed to prevent pocketing of residues and facilitate cleaning and washing without injury. 
(c)  The floor of the spray booth and operators' working area, if combustible, shall be covered with noncombustible, nonsparking material of such character as to facilitate the safe cleaning and removal of residues. 
(d)  If installed, baffle plates shall be of noncombustible material, readily removable or accessible on both sides for cleaning, and designed to promote an even flow of air through the booth and to prevent the deposit of over-spray before it enters the exhaust duct. Such baffle plates shall not be located in exhaust ducts. 
(e)  Each spray booth having a frontal area larger than nine square feet shall have a metal deflector or curtain not less than two and one-half inches (2½") deep installed at the upper outer edge of the booth, over the opening. 
(f)  Each spray booth shall be separated from other operations by not less than three feet, or by a greater distance, or by such partition or wall as the fire marshal may require to reduce the danger from juxtaposition of hazardous operations. 
(g)  Spray booths shall be so installed that all portions are readily accessible for cleaning. A clear space of not less than three feet on all sides shall be kept free from storage or combustible construction. 
(h)  When spraying areas are illuminated through glass panels or other transparent materials, only fixed lighting units shall be used as a source of illumination. Panels shall effectively isolate the spraying area from the area in which the lighting unit is located, and shall be of noncombustible material of such a nature or so protected that breakage will be unlikely. Panels shall be so arranged that normal accumulations of residue on the exposed surface of the panel will not be raised to a dangerous temperature by radiation or conduction from the source of illumination. 
(8)  Dry type overspray collectors (exhaust air filters). 
No person shall install or permit overspray dry filters or filter rolls to be installed in conventional dry type spray booths unless in conformance with the following: 
(a)  The spraying operations shall be so designed, installed and maintained that the average air velocity over the open face of the booth (or booth cross-section during spraying operations) shall be not less than one hundred (100) linear feet per minute. Visible gauges or audible alarm or pressure activated devices shall be installed to indicate or insure that the required air velocity is maintained. 
(b)  All discarded filter pads and filer rolls shall be immediately removed to a safe, well detached location or placed in a water-filled metal container and disposed of at the close of the day's operation unless maintained completely in water. 
(c)  The location of filters in a spray booth shall be so as to not reduce the effective booth enclosure of the articles being sprayed. 
(d)  Space within spray booth on the downstream and upstream sides of filters shall be protected with approved automatic sprinklers. 
(e)  Filters or filter rolls shall not be used when applying a spray material known to be highly susceptible to spontaneous heating and ignition. 
(f)  Clean filters or filter rolls shall be noncombustible or of approved type. 
(g)  Filters and filter rolls shall not alternately be used for different types of coating materials, where the combination of materials may be conducive to spontaneous ignition. 
(9)  Electrical and other sources of ignition. 
No person shall spray or permit any flammable finish to be sprayed in any structure which does not comply with the following: 
(a)  There shall be no open flame or spark producing equipment in any spraying area as defined in this code, nor within twenty feet (20') thereof, unless separated by a partition, except as permitted in section 13-809(14), Drying Apparatus, and in sections 13-809(26) to 13-809(29), Electrostatic Apparatus. 
(b)  Room heating appliances, steam pipes or hot surfaces shall not be located in a spraying area where deposits of combustible residues may readily accumulate. 
(c)  Unless specifically approved for locations containing both deposits of readily ignitable residue and explosive vapors, there shall be no electrical equipment in any spraying area, whereon deposits of combustible residues may readily accumulate, except wiring in rigid conduit or in boxes or fittings containing no taps, splices or terminal connections and except as hereinafter provided in sections 13-809(14)(c) relating to drying apparatus and 13-809(26) to 13-809(29) relating to electrostatic apparatus. 
(d)  Electrical wiring and equipment not subject to deposits of combustible residues but located in a spraying area shall be of explosion-proof type approved for use in such hazardous locations. 
(e)  Electrical wiring, motors, and other equipment outside of but within twenty feet (20') of any spraying area, and not separated therefrom by partitions, shall not produce sparks under normal operating conditions. Such area shall be considered a Class I, Division 2 hazardous location under the National Electrical Code. 
(f)  Electric lamps outside of but within twenty feet (20') of any spraying area and not separated therefrom by a partition, shall be totally enclosed to prevent the falling of hot particles and shall be protected from physical damage by suitable guards or by location. 
(g)  Portable electric lamps shall not be used in any spraying area during spraying operations. Portable electric lamps, if used during cleaning or repairing operations, shall be of the type approved for hazardous locations. 
(h)  All metal parts of spray booths, exhaust ducts and piping systems conveying flammable liquids shall be properly electrically grounded in an effective and permanent manner. 
(10)  Ventilation of spray booths and spray finishing areas. 
No person shall spray or permit any flammable liquid to be sprayed in any structure which does not comply with the following: 
(a)  All spraying areas shall be provided with mechanical ventilation adequate to prevent the dangerous accumulation of vapors and to safely remove such vapors to a safe location. 
(b)  Mechanical ventilation shall be kept in operation at all times while spraying operations are being conducted and for a sufficient time thereafter to allow vapors from drying coated articles and drying finishing material residue to be exhausted. 
(c)  Each spray booth shall have an independent exhaust duct system discharging to building exterior, except multiple cabinet spray booths in which identical spray finishing material is used with a combined frontal area of not more than eighteen square feet may have a common exhaust. If more than one fan serves one booth, all fans shall be so interconnected that one fan cannot operate without operating all. 
(d)  Electric motors driving exhaust fans shall not be placed inside booths or ducts. Fan rotating element shall be nonferrous or nonsparking or the casing shall consist of or be lined with such material. 
(e)  Belts shall not enter duct or booth unless belt and pulley within the duct or booth are tightly enclosed. 
(f)  Exhaust ducts shall be constructed of steel and shall be substantially supported. 
(g)  Exhaust ducts shall have a clearance from unprotected combustible construction or material of not less than 18 inches. If combustible construction is provided with the following protection applied to all surfaces within eighteen inches (18"), clearances may be reduced to the distances indicated. 
(1)  28 gauge sheet metal on ¼-inch asbestos mill board ..... 12 inches 
(2)  28 gauge sheet metal on 1/8 inch asbestos mill board spaced out one inch on noncombustible spacers ..... 9 inches 
(3)  22 gauge sheet metal on 1 inch rockwool bats reinforced with wire mesh or the equivalent. 
(h)  Air exhausted from spraying operations shall not be recirculated. 
(11)  Storage and handling of flammable liquids. 
No person shall store, handle or permit flammable liquids to be stored or handled in violation of the following: 
(a)  The storage and handling of flammable liquids shall be in accordance with article 16 and shall also conform to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Where the quantity of liquid in five-gallon (5 gal.) and smaller containers, other than original sealed containers, exceeds a total of ten gallons (10 gals.) it shall be stored in a storage cabinet conforming to section 13-810(1) or in storage or mixing rooms conforming to sections 16.32 or 16.72 (b) and (c). 
(c)  Original closed containers, approved portable tanks, approved safety cans or a properly arranged system of piping shall be used for bringing flammable liquids into spray finishing areas. Open or glass containers shall not be used. 
(d)  Containers supplying spray nozzles shall be of closed type or provided with metal covers kept closed. Containers not resting on floors shall be on noncombustible supports or suspended by wire cables. Containers supplying spray nozzles by gravity flow shall not exceed ten gallons (10 gals.) capacity. 
(e)  All containers or piping to which is attached a hose or flexible connection shall be provided with a shut-off valve at the connection. Such valves shall be kept shut when not in use. 
(f)  Heaters shall not be located in spray booths or other locations subject to the accumulation of deposits or combustible residue. 
(g)  If flammable liquids are supplied to spray nozzles by positive displacement pumps, pump discharge line shall be provided with an approved relief valve discharging to pump suction or to a safe detached location, or a device shall be provided to stop the prime mover when the discharge pressure exceeds one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the normal operating pressure. 
(h)  whenever flammable liquids are transferred from one container to another, both containers shall be bonded or effectively grounded. Piping systems for flammable liquids shall be permanently grounded. 
(12)  Fire protection equipment. 
Suitable portable fire extinguishers, small hose or other fire extinguishing equipment installed near all spraying areas as specified by the fire marshal. 
(13)  Operations and maintenance. 
No person shall spray with flammable liquids or permit flammable liquids to be sprayed in violation of the following: 
(a)  All spraying areas shall be kept as free from the accumulation of deposits of combustible residues as practical, with cleaning conducted daily if necessary. 
(b)  Scrapers, spuds or other such tools used for cleaning purposes shall be of nonsparking material. 
(c)  Residue scrapings and debris contaminated with residue shall be immediately removed from premises and properly disposed of. 
(d)  The use of flammable solvents for cleaning operations shall be restricted to those having flash points not less than kerosene except solvents with flash points not less than those normally used in spraying operations may be used for cleaning spray nozzles and auxiliary equipment, provided such cleaning is conducted inside spray booths and ventilating equipment is operating during cleaning. 
(e)  Spray booths shall not be alternately used for different types of coating materials, where the combination of the materials may be conducive to spontaneous ignition, unless all deposits of the first used material are removed from the booth and exhaust ducts prior to spraying with the second. 
(f)  Approved metal waste cans shall be provided wherever rags or waste are impregnated with finishing material and all such rags or waste deposited therein immediately after use. The contents of waste cans shall be properly disposed of at least once daily and at the end of each shift. 
(14)  Drying apparatus. 
No person shall use or permit any apparatus for the drying of flammable liquids be used which does not comply with the following: 
(A)  Drying apparatus shall, in addition to conforming with the requirements of this article, comply with the applicable provisions of subsection (13) above. 
(B)  Spraying booths, rooms or other enclosures used for spraying operations shall not alternately be used for the purpose of drying by any arrangement which will cause a material increase in the surface temperature of the spray booth, room, or enclosure. 
(C)  Except as specifically provided in section 13-809(14) drying or baking units, utilizing a heating system having open flames or which may produce sparks, shall not be installed in a spraying area as defined herein, but may be installed adjacent thereto when equipped with an interlocked ventilating system arranged to: 
(1)  Thoroughly ventilate the drying space before heating system can be started; 
(2)  Maintain a safe atmosphere at any source of ignition; 
(3)  Automatically shut down heating system in the event of failure of the ventilating system. 
(D)  Automobile refinishing booths or enclosures, otherwise installed and maintained in conformity with this division, may alternately be used for drying with portable infra-red drying apparatus when conforming with the following: 
(1)  The procedure shall be restricted to low-volume, occasional spray application. 
(2)  Interior of spray enclosures shall be kept free of overspray deposits. 
(3)  During spray operations, the drying apparatus and electrical connections and wiring thereto shall not be located within spray enclosure nor in any other location where spray residue may be deposited thereon. 
(4)  Spraying apparatus, drying apparatus, and ventilating system of spray enclosure shall be equipped with suitable inter-locks so arranged that: 
(a)  Spraying apparatus cannot be operated while drying apparatus is inside spray enclosure. 
(b)  Spray enclosure will be purged of spray vapors for a period of not less than three (3) minutes before drying apparatus can be energized. 
(c)  Ventilating system will maintain a safe atmosphere within the enclosure during the drying process and drying apparatus will automatically shut off in the event of failure of the ventilating system. 
(5)  All electrical wiring and equipment of drying apparatus shall conform to the provisions of this article and shall otherwise be installed in accordance with nationally recognized safe practice. Only equipment of a type approved for Class I, Division 2 Hazardous Locations shall be located within eighteen inches (18") of floor level. All metallic parts of drying apparatus shall be properly electrically bonded and grounded. 
(15)  Location of dip tank operations. 
No person shall conduct or permit to be conducted, dip tank operations in buildings used for assembly, educational, institutional or residential occupancies, except in a room designed for the purpose, protected with an approved system of automatic sprinklers and separated vertically and horizontally from other areas by construction having not less than two (2) hours fire resistance rating. 
(16)  Ventilation of vapor areas. 
No person shall operate or permit any dip tanks to be operated in violation of the following: 
(a)  All vapor areas shall be provided with mechanical ventilation adequate to prevent the dangerous accumulation of vapors and to remove such vapors to a safe location. 
(b)  Required ventilating systems shall be so arranged that the failure of any ventilating fan shall automatically stop any dipping conveyor system. 
(17)  Construction of dip tanks. 
No person shall install or permit dip tanks to be installed or constructed in violation of the following: 
(a)  Dip tanks, including drain boards if provided, shall be constructed of substantial noncombustible material, and their supports shall be of heavy metal, reinforced concrete or masonry. 
(b)  Dip tanks of over one hundred fifty (150) gallons in capacity or ten square feet (10 sq. ft.) in liquid surface area shall be equipped with a properly trapped overflow pipe leading to a safe location outside buildings. 
(c)  The bottom of the overflow connection shall be not less than six inches (6") below the top of the tank. 
(d)  Dip tanks over five hundred (500) gallons in liquid capacity shall be equipped with bottom drains automatically and manually arranged to quickly drain tank in event of fire, unless the viscosity of the liquid at normal atmospheric temperature makes this impractical. Manual operation shall be from a safely accessible location. Where gravity flow is not practicable, automatic pumps shall be provided. 
(e)  Such drains shall be trapped and discharge to a closed properly vented salvage tank or to a safe outside location. 
(f)  Dip tanks utilizing a conveyor system shall be so arranged that in the event of fire, the conveyor system shall automatically cease motion and required bottom drains shall open. 
(18)  Electrical and other sources of ignition. 
No person shall operate or permit a dip tank to be operated in violation of the following: 
(a)  There shall be no open flames, spark producing devices, or heated surfaces having a temperature sufficient to ignite vapors in any vapor area. 
(b)  Electrical wiring and equipment in any vapor area shall be explosion-proof type approved for use in such hazardous locations. Such area shall be considered as Class I, Division 1 Hazardous Location under the National Electrical Code. 
(c)  Unless specifically approved for locations containing both deposits of readily ignitable residues and explosive vapors, there shall be no electrical equipment in the vicinity of dip tanks or associated drain boards or drying operations which are subject to splashing or dripping of dip tank liquids, except wiring in rigid conduit or in threaded boxes or fittings containing no taps, splices or terminal connections and except as hereinafter specifically permitted in sections 13-809(22) to 13-809(28) relating to electrostatic apparatus. 
(d)  In any floor space outside a vapor area, but within twenty feet (20') therefrom, and not separated by tight partitions, there shall be no open flames or spark producing devices, except drying and baking apparatus may be installed adjacent to vapor areas when conforming to section 13-809(14) (c). Such area shall be considered a Class I, Division 2 Hazardous Location under the National Electrical Code. 
(19)  Operations and maintenance. 
No person shall operate or permit a dip tank to be operated in violation of the following: 
(a)  Areas in vicinity of dip tanks shall be kept as clear of combustible stock as practical and shall be kept entirely free of combustible debris. 
(b)  When waste or rags are used in connection with dipping operations, approved metal waste cans shall be provided and all impregnated rags or waste deposited therein immediately after use. The contents of waste cans shall be disposed of at the end of each shift by methods approved by the fire marshal. 
(20)  Fire extinguishing equipment. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit a dip tank to be operated unless the areas in the vicinity of dip tanks shall be provided with manual fire extinguishers suitable for flammable liquid fires, as specified by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Dip tanks of over one hundred fifty (150) gallons capacity or ten square feet (10 sq. ft.) liquid surface area shall be protected with at least one of the following automatic extinguishing facilities: 
(1)  Approved automatic water spray extinguishing system; 
(2)  Approved automatic foam extinguishing system; 
(3)  Approved automatic carbon dioxide system. 
(4)  Dip tank covers conforming to section 13-809(21). 
(c)  Dip tanks containing a liquid with a flashpoint below 110°F. (when used in such manner that the liquid temperature may equal or be greater than its flashpoint from artificial or natural causes) shall conform to section 13-809(20) (b) when having both a capacity of more than ten (10) gallons and a liquid surface area of more than four square feet (4 sq. ft.). 
(21)  Dip tank covers. 
No person shall operate or permit dip tanks to be operated unless: 
(a)  Covers arranged to close automatically in event of fire shall be actuated by approved automatic devices and shall also be arranged for manual operation. 
(b)  Covers shall be of substantial noncombustible material or of tin-clad type with enclosing metal applied with locked joints. 
(c)  Chains or wire rope shall be used for cover support or operating mechanism where the burning of a cord would interfere with the action of the device. 
(d)  Covers shall be kept closed when tanks are not in use. 
(22)  Hardening and tempering tanks. 
No person shall operate or permit dip tanks to be operated unless: 
(a)  Hardening and tempering tanks shall conform to sections 13-809(17), 13-809(18), 13-809(19), 13-809(20) (a), as well as to the following paragraphs of this section, but shall be exempt from other provisions of division III of this article. 
(b)  Tanks shall be located as far as practicable from furnaces and shall not be located on or near combustible floors. 
(c)  Tanks shall be provided with a noncombustible hood and vent or other equally effective means, venting to outside of building to serve as a vent in case of fire. All such vent ducts shall be treated as flues and be kept well away from combustible roofs or materials. 
(d)  Tanks shall be equipped with a high temperature limit switch arranged to sound an alarm when the temperature of the quenching medium reaches 50° F. below the flash point. 
(e)  Hardening and tempering tanks of over five hundred (500) gallons capacity or twenty-five square feet (25 sq. ft.) liquid surface area shall be protected as specified in section 13-809(20) (b). 
(f)  Air under pressure shall not be used to fill or to agitate oil in tanks. 
(23)  Flow coat operations. 
(a)  No person shall carry on or permit flow coat operations which do not conform to the requirements for dip tanks, considering the area of the sump and any areas on which paint flows as the area of a dip tank. 
(b)  No person shall carry on or permit flow coat operation unless paint shall be supplied by direct low pressure pumping arranged to automatically shut down by means of approved heat actuated devices, in case of fire, or by a gravity tank not exceeding ten (10) gallons in capacity. 
(24)  Roll coating. 
(a)  No person shall conduct the processes of roll coating, spreading and impregnating, in which fabrics, paper or other material is passed directly through a tank or through containing flammable liquids, or over the surface of a roller that revolves partially submerged in a flammable liquid shall conform to the requirements of this section and to the applicable provisions of this section 13-809. 
(b)  No person shall conduct or permit roll coating operation to be conducted unless adequate arrangements shall be made to prevent sparks from static electricity by electrically bonding and grounding all metallic rotating and other parts of machinery and equipment and by the installation of static collectors or maintaining a conductive atmosphere by means such as high relative humidity. 
ELECTROSTATIC APPARATUS 
(25)  Equipment type and location. 
(a)  No person shall operate electrostatic apparatus and devices used in connection with paint spraying and paint detearing operations which are not of a type approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  No person shall operate or permit electrostatic apparatus to be operated unless transformers, power packs, control apparatus, and all other electrical portions of the equipment, with the exception of high voltage grids and electrostatic atomizing heads and their connections, shall be located outside of the spraying or vapor areas as defined herein or shall conform to the requirements of sections 13-809(9) or 13-809(18). 
(c)  No person shall operate or permit electrostatic apparatus to be operated unless electrodes and electrostatic atomizing heads shall be of substantial construction, shall be rigidly supported in permanent locations and shall be effectively insulated from ground. Insulators shall be nonporous and noncombustible. 
(26)  Controls. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit electrostatic apparatus to be operated unless a space shall be maintained between goods being painted or deteared and electrodes, electrostatic atomizing heads or conductors of at least twice the sparking distance. A suitable sign stating the sparking distance shall be conspicuously posted near the assembly. 
(b)  Electrostatic apparatus shall be equipped with automatic controls which will operate without time delay to disconnect the power supply to the high voltage transformer and to signal the operator under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Stoppage of ventilating fans or failure of ventilating equipment from any cause. 
(2)  Stoppage of the conveyor carrying goods past the high voltage grid. 
(3)  Occurrence of a ground or of an imminent ground at any point on the high voltage system. 
(4)  Reduction of clearance below that specified in section 15.42a. 
(27)  Guards and signs. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit electrostatic apparatus to be operated unless adequate booths, fencing, railings or guards shall be so placed about the equipment that they, either by their location or character or both, assure that a safe isolation of the process is maintained from plant storage or personnel. Such railings, fencing and guards shall be of conducting material, adequately grounded, and shall be at least five feet (5') from processing equipment. 
(b)  Signs designating the process zone as dangerous as regards fire and accident shall be posted. 
(28)  Maintenance. 
No person shall operate or permit electrostatic apparatus to be operated unless: 
(a)  All insulators shall be kept clean and dry. 
(b)  Drip plates and screens subject to paint deposits shall be removable and shall be taken to a safe place for cleaning. 
AUTOMOBILE UNDERCOATING 
(29)  Operations included. 
(a)  Automobile undercoating spray operations, conducted in areas having adequate natural or mechanical ventilation, may be exempt from the provisions of sections 13-809(6) through 13-809(15) of this article, on approval of the fire marshal, when using undercoating materials which are not more hazardous than kerosene, or undercoating materials using only solvents having a flashpoint in excess of 100°F. 
(b)  Undercoating spray operations not conforming with paragraph (a) of this section shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this article.  
Sec. 13-810. - Flammable liquids.[5] 
(1)  General. 
In addition to the provisions of this code, flammable liquids are regulated by state law. The reader is directed to regulations 29-62-1 through 29-62-210 of the commissioner of state police governing the storage, use and transportation of flammable liquids. These regulations contain specific requirements dealing with the design and nature of the materials, devices and structures in which flammable liquids may be stored and transported and provisions governing service stations, commercial and industrial establishments and other structures in which flammable liquids are handled and used. 
(2)  License from fire marshal required to deal with flammable liquids. 
No person shall manufacture, refine, sell or keep on sale or storage any crude or refined petroleum, earth oil, coal or rock oil, benzine or any other inflammable or explosive composition of which any of the foregoing substances constitute a principal ingredient, of a fire test of less than one hundred and ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°), unless licensed so to do by the fire marshal after a thorough investigation made by him of the premises in which said material is to be stored and a certificate on his part that all requirements of the city ordinances have been faithfully complied with. The fee for such licenses shall be as provided in section 17-20 (13). This section shall not apply to the storage of fuel oil in one and two family dwellings where such oil is used for cooking and/or heating. 
(3)  Dealing with flammable liquids, petroleum in vehicles. 
(a)  License. No person shall engage in the selling, peddling, delivering or storing of flammable liquids in wagons, carts or motor vehicles without first having obtained a license from the fire marshal. The fee for such license shall be as provided in section 17-20 (13) for each individual wagon, cart or motor vehicle, for each year or portion thereof in all cases and unless sooner revoked shall expire on the first day of May succeeding the date of issue. Licenses are not transferable and shall be revoked upon any deviation from these regulations. 
(b)  Approval of vehicles, equipment of fire marshal. All tanks and equipment attached to such wagon, cart or motor vehicle for the purpose of keeping or storing flammable liquids for sale or delivery, must first be approved by the fire marshal before a license is issued. 
(c)  Sign on vehicle. Each person so licensed shall in selling, peddling, delivering or storing flammable liquids conspicuously place on such wagon, cart or motor vehicle, a sign designed and furnished by the fire marshal bearing the number of his license and the year in which license shall expire and the words "Flammable Liquids." 
(4)  Applications for licenses under sections 13-810(2) and 13-810(3). 
Every applicant for a license to manufacture, refine, sell or keep on sale or storage any of the products mentioned in sections 13-810(2) and 13-810(3) shall contain the name of the party or parties, nature of the business, the substances to be dealt in and the precise place or locality where the substance is to be located. 
(5)  Limitation on licenses under sections 13-810(2) and 13-810(3). 
No person shall receive a license to sell or keep on sale or storage any of the substances mentioned in sections 13-810(2) and 13-810(3) upon any street or wharf nor in any building or place not approved by the fire marshal, nor upon any floor of a building above the first floor, nor in any receptacle except in the original unbroken receptacle, in which they are shipped, or in metallic vessels approved in writing by the fire marshal. (CC 13-33). 
(6)  Automobile service station regulations. 
Automobile service stations are regulated by state law. The reader is directed to regulations 14-332-1 through 14-332-5 of the motor vehicle department governing the sale of gasoline and motor oil and also regulations 29-62-1 through 29-62-210 of the commissioner of state police governing the storage, use and transportation of flammable liquids. 
Cross reference— Construction of filling stations, Pars. 608.3—608.31 of Building Code, Vol. III of this Code. 
(7)  Storage containers for flammable oils, paint. 
No person operating or conducting an automobile storage station, painters' supply store, or other establishment where inflammable oils are sold, kept or offered for sale, shall keep such products in other than metal tanks located to the approval of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(5), 12-17-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Building requirements for establishments using flammable liquids, Par. 608.1 of the Building Code contained in Vol. III of this Code. 
 
Sec. 13-811. - Fruit ripening process. 
(1)  General. 
This section shall apply to the process of ripening green bananas or citrus fruits in tightly closed rooms heated with direct fired heaters and shall include those processes where ethylene gas is introduced into the room to assist the ripening process. 
(2)  Permit required. 
No person shall conduct any of the processing described in this section unless he holds a permit. 
(3)  Use of ethylene. 
No person shall use or permit the use of ethylene in fruit ripening process unless: 
(a)  The location of buildings in which fruit ripening processes utilizing ethylene are conducted shall be approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Ethylene shall be introduced by some means under positive control and measured so that the quantity introduced does not exceed one (1) part ethylene to one thousand (1,000) parts of air. 
(c)  Containers storing ethylene shall be built in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(d)  Containers other than those connected for use shall be stored outside of the building or in a special building except that not more than two portable ICC containers not connected for use may be stored inside the building premises. Such inside rooms or portions of buildings used for storage of these containers shall be within a portion of the building which is one-story in height, without cellar or basement, of construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour and with openings to other parts of the building protected by approved self-closing fire doors or stationary wired glass windows in approved metal frames. Adequate ventilation shall be provided and the rooms or portions of buildings shall not be used for any other purpose. 
(e)  Ethylene piping shall be of iron pipe. Flexible connectors and hose, when used, shall be of approved type. Tubing shall be of brass or copper with not less than 0.049 inch wall thickness. 
(4)  Electrical equipment. 
No person shall conduct or permit fruit ripening to be conducted in any structure unless: 
(a)  Electrical wiring and equipment shall be installed in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(b)  Lighting shall be by electricity. 
(5)  Heating. 
No person shall conduct or permit any fruit ripening to be conducted in any structure unless: 
(a)  Heating of ripening rooms shall be by indirect means with low pressure steam hot water; or warm air; approved electric heaters; or approved gas heaters or approved kerosene heaters both of which shall have sealed combustion chambers. 
(b)  Steam and hot water pipes and radiators shall have a clearance of at least one inch to combustible material. 
(c)  Gas heaters and their vents shall be installed in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. Gas heaters shall be equipped with an automatic pilot device to shut off the gas supply whenever the flame is extinguished. 
(d)  Burners for gas or kerosene heaters shall be installed so that air for combustion is taken from outside the ripening room and the products of combustion are discharged to the outside. 
(e)  Kerosene heaters shall be installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of section 13-825. 
(f)  Electric heaters shall be of a type having no exposed surface at a temperature higher than eight hundred degrees Fahrenheit (800°F.) and with thermostatic elements which produce no sparks and shall be of a type approved for use in hazardous locations. 
(g)  A protective guard shall be provided around any heater to prevent the possibility of its being knocked over by other equipment such as vehicles or lift trucks. 
(6)  Open flames. 
No person shall conduct or permit any fruit ripening to be conducted in violation of the following: 
(a)  Open flame heaters and open lights shall not be permitted in ripening rooms. 
(b)  "No Smoking" signs shall be posted at every entrance and smoking shall be prohibited in the ripening rooms. 
(7)  Housekeeping. 
Any person operating a fruit ripening process shall frequently clear ripening rooms of all combustible material.  
Sec. 13-812. - Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging. 
(1)  General. 
The provisions of this section apply to fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging operations in enclosed spaces only. These operations are also regulated by state and other local law, however, and the reader is directed to the public health code of the State of Connecticut, promulgated by the public health council, and to sections 16-25 through 16-38 of the New Haven Code which govern pest and insect control. 
(2)  Permit required. 
No person shall conduct any fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations unless he holds a permit. 
(3)  Sources of ignition. 
No person shall conduct any fumigation or internal insecticidal fogging unless: 
(a)  All fires, open flames and similar sources of ignition shall be eliminated from the space under fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging. Heating if needed, shall be by indirect means with steam or hot water. 
(b)  Electricity shall be shut off except circulating fans may be used provided such equipment is designed and installed so as not to create an ignition hazard. 
(4)  Notification of fumigation. 
Any person conducting any fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging shall notify the fire marshal in writing at least twenty-four hours before any building or structure is to be closed in connection with the use of any toxic or flammable fumigant. 
(5)  Breathing apparatus required. 
All persons engaged in the business of fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging shall maintain and have available protective breathing apparatus approved by the fire marshal. 
(6)  Watchman required during fumigation. 
Any person conducting any fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging shall during the period fumigation is in progress, except when fumigation is conducted in a gas-tight vault or tank, shall a capable, alert watchman or watchman remain on duty at the entrance or entrances to the building, ship, or enclosed space fumigated until after the fumigation is completed and until the premises are properly ventilated and again safe for human occupancy. Sufficient watchmen shall be provided to prevent any person from entering the building, ship or enclosed space under fumigation without being observed. 
(7)  Thermal insecticidal fogging liquids. 
No person conducting any fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging shall use any fogging liquid that has a flash point below one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F.).  
Sec. 13-813. - Garages. 
(1)  Permit required. 
No person shall conduct or maintain any garage unless he holds a permit. 
(2)  Cleaning with flammable liquids. 
No person shall use or permit to be used a flammable liquid with a flash point below 100°F. in any garage for washing parts or removing grease or dirt, unless in a special closed machine approved for the purpose or in a separate well ventilated room enclosed by walls having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours with openings therein protected by approved fire doors or fire windows, and with no opening from such room to any upper or lower story. 
(3)  Handling of gasoline and oils. 
No person shall operate or permit the garage to be operated in violation of the following: 
(a)  The fuel tanks of motor vehicles shall be filled directly through hose from approved pumps attached to approved portable tanks or drawing from underground storage tanks. Storage and handling of flammable liquids shall conform to section 13-810(1). No transfer of gasoline in any garage shall be made in any open container. 
(b)  Garage floors shall drain to oil separators or traps discharging to sewer. Contents of oil separators or traps of floor drainage systems shall be collected at sufficiently frequent intervals and removed from the premises to prevent oil from being carried into the sewers. Self-closing metal cans shall be used for all oily waste or waste oils.  
Sec. 13-814. - Hazardous chemicals. 
(1)  General. 
This section shall apply to materials not otherwise covered in this code which are highly flammable, or which may react to cause fires or explosions, or which by their presence create or augment a fire or explosion hazard, or which because of their toxicity, flammability, or liability to explosion render fire fighting abnormally dangerous or difficult; also to flammable liquids which are chemically unstable and which spontaneously form explosive compounds, or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence or with sufficient evolution of heat to be a fire hazard. Hazardous chemicals shall include such materials as flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive chemicals, highly toxic materials, and poisonous gases. 
(2)  Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall store or handle more than sixty-five (65) gallons of corrosive liquids; or more than five hundred pounds (500 lbs.) of oxidizing materials; or more than ten pounds (10 lbs.) of organic peroxides; or more than five hundred pounds (500 lbs.) of nitromethane; or one thousand pounds (1,000 lbs.) or more of ammonium nitrate, ammonium nitrate fertilizers and fertilizer mixtures covered in section 13-814(6) or any amount of highly toxic material or poisonous gas without a permit. 
(b)  No person shall store or handle more than one microcurie of radium not contained in a sealed source; or more than one millicurie of radium or other radioactive material in a sealed source or sources, or any amount of radioactive material for which a specific license from the United States Atomic Energy Commission is required in accordance with nationally recognized good practice, without a permit. 
(3)  General requirements. 
No person shall or permit the manufacturing, storage, handling or use of hazardous chemicals in violation of the following: 
(a)  The manufacture, storage, handling and use of hazardous chemicals shall be safeguarded with such reasonable protective facilities as public safety requires. 
(b)  The fire marshal may require the separation, or isolation of any chemical that in combination with other substances may bring about a fire or explosion or may liberate a flammable or poisonous gas. The fire marshal may require separation from other storage, occupancies or buildings when the quantity stored constitutes a material hazard. 
(c)  Defective containers which permit leakage or spillage shall be disposed of or repaired, in accordance with recognized safe practices; no spilled materials shall be allowed to accumulate on floors or shelves. 
(d)  Where kept for retail sale in containers or packages usual to the retail trade, storage shall be neat and orderly and shelves shall be of substantial construction. 
(e)  Where specific requirements are not otherwise established, storage, handling and use of hazardous chemicals shall be in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(4)  Oxidizing materials. 
No person shall store or permit packaged oxidizing materials to be stored in other than dry locations separated from stored organic materials. Bulk oxidizing materials shall not be stored on or against wooden surfaces. 
(5)  Radioactive materials. 
No person shall or permit the manufacturing, storage, handling or use of hazardous chemicals in violation of the following: 
(a)  Durable, clearly visible signs warning of radiation dangers shall be placed at all entrances to areas or rooms where radioactive materials are used or stored. In addition, each container in which radioactive materials are used, stored, or transported shall bear a durable, clearly visible, appropriate warning sign. Such signs shall bear the three-bladed radiation symbol in magenta or purpose on a yellow background in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(b)  Signs are not required for storage of manufactured articles other than liquids, such as instruments or clock dials or electronic tubes or apparatus of which radioactive materials are a component part, and luminous compounds, when securely packed in strong containers, provided the gamma radiation at any surface of the package is less than ten (10) milliroentgen in twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  When not in use, radioactive materials shall be kept in adequately shielded fire-resistant containers of such design that the gamma radiation will not exceed two hundred (200) milliroentgens per hour or equivalent at any point of readily accessible surface. 
(d)  The reader is also directed to regulations 19-13-E11 through 19-13-E24 of the state department of health governing radiation sources and radioactive materials. 
(6)  Potentially explosive chemicals. 
No person shall or permit the manufacturing, storage, handling or use of potentially explosive chemicals in violation of the following: 
(a)  Potentially explosive chemicals shall be stored away from all heat-producing appliances and electrical devices and shall be protected from external heat, fire and explosion. Explosives and blasting agents shall not be stored in the same building or in close proximity to such materials, except in accordance with the provisions of this code on explosives. Good housekeeping shall be maintained. Uncontaminated contents of broken or cracked bags, packages or other containers shall be transferred to new and clean containers before storing. Other spilled materials and discarded containers shall be promptly gathered up and destroyed in an approved manner. All electric bulbs shall be equipped with guards to prevent breakage. Open lights or flames and smoking shall be prohibited in or near storage areas. Internal combustion motor vehicles or lift trucks shall not be parked or stored in the room or compartment where such chemicals are located. 
(b)  Organic peroxides. A detached, well isolated, ventilated and unheated storage building constructed with walls having a fire resistance rating of not less than two hours (2 hrs.); a noncombustible floor and a light-weight insulated roof shall be provided for the storage of fifty pounds (50 lbs.) or more of organic peroxides. If not adequately protected by a fast-acting deluge type automatic sprinkler system, the storage building shall be located the following minimum distances from flammable liquid storage, combustible materials in the open and from any other building or highway: 
Weight or Organic Peroxide (pounds) 	Distance (feet) 
50 to 100 	75 
100 to 500 	100 
500 to 1000 	125 
1000 to 3000 	200 
3000 to 5000 	300 
 
The organic peroxides shall be stored in the original shipping containers (I.C.C. containers). Care shall be taken to avoid rough handling or contamination of these chemicals. Readily legible warning signs and placards shall be prominently placed in the storage and processing areas. 
(c)  Nitromethane. A suitable isolated outdoor storage area shall be provided for nitromethane. Hazardous processing shall not be permitted in the vicinity of this storage area. Nitromethane shall be stored in the drums in which it is received or in an underground tank with suitable corrosion protection and a minimum of two feet (2') of earth over the tank or in barricaded tanks aboveground. If the drum storage is not adequately protected by a fast acting deluge type automatic sprinkler system, the storage of two thousand pounds (2,000 lbs.) or more shall be located the following minimum distances from inhabited buildings: 
Weight (pounds over) (pounds not over) 	Approximate Number of Drums 	Distance 
(feet) 
Beginning at 2,000       4    	100 
2,000  to 10,000 	20 	200 
10,000 to 20,000 	40 	300 
20,000 to 40,000 	80 	400 
40,000 to 80,000 	160 	500 
 
Care shall be taken to avoid rough handling or contamination of this chemical. Readily legible warning signs and placards shall be prominently placed in the storage and processing areas. 
(d)  Ammonium nitrate. 
(1)  All flooring in storage and handling areas shall be of noncombustible material and shall be without drains, traps, pits or pockets into which any molten ammonium nitrate could flow and be confined in case of fire. 
(2)  Each storage pile of bags or other authorized packages and containers of such materials shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height, fifteen feet (15') in width and thirty feet (30') in length. Such pile units shall be separated by a clear space of not less than thirty-six inches (36") in width from the base to the top of the piles, serving as cross-aisles. At least one service or main aisle in the storage area shall not be less than four feet (4') in width. A clearance of not less than thirty inches (30") shall be maintained from building walls and partitions and of not less than thirty-six inches (36") from ceilings or roof structural members with a minimum of eighteen inches (18") from sprinklers. 
(3)  Ammonium nitrate storage areas shall be separated by a space of thirty feet (30') or by a tight noncombustible partitions from storages or organic chemicals corrosive liquids, compressed gases, flammable and combustible materials or other contaminating substances, such as sulphur, coal, flour, and metallic powders such as zinc, copper and magnesium where storage of such materials is permitted with ammonium nitrate. 
(4)  Quantities of ammonium nitrate or ammonium nitrate fertilizer, having no organic coating, in the form of crystals, flakes, grains, or prills including fertilizer grade, dynamite grade, nitrous oxide grade and technical grade ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitrate phosphate (containing sixty percent (60%) or more ammonium nitrate by weight) of more than fifty (50) tons total weight shall be stored in a well-ventilated building of fire-resistive or noncombustible construction, or in buildings of there types or construction equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. In populated areas, quantities of two thousand five hundred (2,500) tons or more shall be stored in well-ventilated buildings of fire-resistive or noncombustible construction equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, and no combustible materials or ammonium nitrate sensitizing contaminants shall be stored in this building. 
(5)  Storage of ammonium nitrate, coated or mixed with organic anti-caking materials, except compounded blasting agents, shall not be permitted in populated and congested areas. Outside such areas, quantities of five hundred (500) tons or less may be stored in well-ventilated buildings of fire-resistive or noncombustible construction equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
(7)  Highly toxic materials. 
No person shall or permit the manufacturing, storage, handling, or use of highly toxic materials in violation of the following: 
(a)  Highly toxic materials shall be segregated from other chemicals and combustible and flammable substances by storage in a room or compartment separated from other areas by walls and floor and ceiling assemblies having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour. The storage room shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities and natural or mechanical ventilation to the outside atmosphere. 
(b)  Legible warning signs and placards stating the nature and location of the highly toxic materials shall be posted at all entrances to areas where such materials are stored or used. 
(8)  Poisonous gases. 
No person shall or permit the manufacturing, storage, handling or use of highly toxic material in violation of the following: 
(a)  Storage of poisonous gases shall be in rooms of at least one-hour fire-resistant construction and having natural or mechanical ventilation adequate to remove leaking gas. Such ventilation shall not discharge to a point where the gases may endanger any person. 
(b)  Legible warning signs stating the nature of hazard shall be placed at all entrances to locations where poisonous gases are stored or used. 
(9)  Corrosive liquids. 
No person shall store or handle or permit the storage or handling of corrosive liquids without making satisfactory provisions for containing and neutralizing or safely flushing away leakage of corrosive liquids.  
Sec. 13-815. - Junk yards, automobile wrecking yards and waste material handling plants. 
(1)  General. 
In addition to the provisions of this section, motor vehicle junk dealers are governed by state law and other city regulations. The reader is directed to state regulations 21-22-1 and 21-22-2 which impose a fee upon motor vehicle junk dealers and also to the zoning regulations of the City of New Haven. 
(2)  Permit required. 
No person shall conduct or maintain any such yard or plant unless he holds a permit. 
(3)  Location. 
No person shall operate a junk yard, automobile wrecking yard or waste material handling plant in any location which will seriously expose adjoining or adjacent properties to fire or an unreasonable threat of fire. 
(4)  Burning operations. 
No person shall burn or permit wrecked or discarded automobiles or any parts thereof or any junk or waste material to be burned at hours, in a manner and at such locations in violation of section 13-825 (1) of this Code and the laws of the State of Connecticut, City of New Haven or such reasonable regulations as may be adopted by the fire marshal governing burning within the City of New Haven. No person shall burn or permit more than two motor vehicles to burn at one time. 
(5)  Construction and protection requirements. 
(a)  No person shall handle or store large quantities of waste paper, rags or other combustible materials in a building of wood frame or ordinary construction unless the building is sprinklered. Vertical openings shall be enclosed in an approved manner. 
(6)  Access to yards. 
(a)  Any person operating a junk yard, automobile wrecking yard or waste material handling plant shall maintain all material in an orderly manner, which in the opinion of the fire marshal, provides adequate ingress and egress from all portions of the yard or plant. 
(b)  No person shall operate any junk yard, automobile wrecking yard or waste material handling plant unless picking rooms are separated from storage rooms by construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour, with each door opening provided with an approved fire door. Picking rooms shall be provided with exhaust systems of sufficient capacity to adequately remove dust and lint.  
Sec. 13-816. - Liquefied petroleum gases. 
(1)  General. 
All liquefied petroleum gas equipment including such equipment installed at utility gas plants, shall be installed in accordance with nationally recognized good practice, as provided in this code. Liquefied petroleum gas equipment is also governed by state law. The reader is directed to regulations 29-72-1 through 29-72-134 of the commissioner of state police governing the storage, use and transportation of liquefied petroleum gas, reference to which is made. These regulations cover the design and material requirements of devices used for the storage, handling and transportation of liquefied petroleum gas, including handling requirements in highway mobile vehicles, gas service stations and other buildings and structures.  
Sec. 13-817. - Lumberyards. 
(1)  Permit required. 
No person shall store in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) board feet of lumber without a permit. 
(2)  Open yard storage. 
No person shall operate a lumberyard in violation of the following: 
(a)  Lumber shall be piled with due regard to stability of piles and in no case higher than twenty feet (20'). 
(b)  Driveways between and around lumber piles shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide and maintained free from accumulation of rubbish, equipment or other articles or materials. Driveways shall be so spaced that a maximum grid system unit of fifty feet (50') by one hundred fifty feet (150') is produced. 
(c)  Permanent lumber storage, operating under a permit, shall be surrounded with a suitable fence at least six feet (6') high, unless storage is within a building. 
(3)  Operational fire hazards in lumber yards. 
No person shall operate a lumberyard in violation of the following: 
(a)  The burning of shavings, sawdust and refuse materials shall be permitted only under boilers, in furnaces, or in incinerators or refuse burners safely constructed and located. Stacks shall be provided with approved spark arresters having openings not greater than three-quarter-inch (¾"), or other effective means provided which will eliminate the danger from sparks, such as an expansion chamber, baffle walls or other effective arrangement. At boiler or other points where sawdust or shavings are used as fuel, a storage bin of noncombustible construction with raised sill, shall be provided. 
(b)  Smoking shall be prohibited except in specified safe locations in buildings. Large "No Smoking" signs shall be painted on exterior building walls and on signs, erected at driveways' edges. "No Smoking" signs shall be posted throughout all buildings except in specific locations designated as safe for smoking purposes. 
(c)  Weeds shall be kept down throughout entire yard and shall be sprayed as often as needed with a satisfactory weed killer or cut or grubbed out. Dead weeds shall be removed. 
(d)  Debris such as sawdust, chips and shorts shall be removed regularly from piling areas and not less frequently than once a year. Proper housekeeping shall be maintained at all times. 
(4)  Fire extinguishing equipment in open yards and buildings. 
No person shall operate a lumberyard unless water barrels and pails or other approved portable fire extinguishing equipment are provided for open yards and sheds. Water barrels with three pails each shall be located at driveways so that a travel distance of not more than seventy-five feet (75') along driveways is needed from any part of open yard to reach a barrel. In buildings, fire extinguishing equipment shall be provided as specified by the fire marshal in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(5)  Woodworking plants. 
No person shall operate a lumberyard unless: 
(a)  Sawmills, planing mills and other woodworking plants shall be equipped with refuse removal systems which will collect and remove sawdust and shavings as produced; or suitable metal or metal-lined bins, provided with normally closed covers or automatically closing covers, shall be installed at or near such machines, and shavings and sawdust shall be swept up and deposited in such bins at sufficiently frequent intervals as to keep the premises clean. Blower and exhaust systems shall be installed in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(b)  Fire fighting equipment, either portable fire appliances or small hose supplied from a suitable water system, shall be provided near any machine producing shavings or sawdust. 
(c)  Where specific requirements are not otherwise established, woodworking plants shall comply with nationally recognized good practice.  
Sec. 13-818. - Magnesium. 
(1)  General. 
This section applies to the storage, handling and processing of magnesium. 
(2)  Permit required. 
No person shall melt, cast, heat, treat, machine or grind more than ten pounds (10 lbs.) of magnesium on any single working day without a permit. 
(3)  Storage of pigs, ingots and billets. 
(a)  No person shall store magnesium pigs, ingots and billets out of doors in piles exceeding one million pounds (1,000,000 lbs.) each, separated by aisles not less in width than one-half (½) the height of pile, and separated from combustible material or buildings on the same adjoining property by a distance of not less than the height of the nearest pile. 
(b)  No person shall store magnesium pigs, ingots and billets in buildings except on floors of noncombustible construction, in piles not larger than five hundred thousand pounds (500,000 lbs.) each, separated by aisles not less in width than one-half (½) the height of the pile. 
(4)  Melting pots. 
No person shall melt magnesium unless the floors under and around melting pots are of noncombustible construction. 
(5)  Storage of magnesium articles in foundries and processing plants. 
No person shall store magnesium in foundries or processing plants in piles exceeding one thousand two hundred fifty cubic feet (1,250 cu. ft.) which are separated by aisles not less in width than one-half (½) the height of pile. 
(6)  Heat treating ovens. 
No person shall heat magnesium unless approved means shall be provided for control of magnesium fires in heat treating ovens. 
(7)  Magnesium processing operations. 
No person shall conduct any magnesium processing operation in violation of the following: 
(a)  At each grinding, buffing or wire brushing operation on magnesium, not including rough finishing of castings, dust shall be collected by means of suitable hoods or enclosures connected to a liquid precipitation type of separator, such that the dust will be converted to sludge without contact in a dry state with any high speed moving parts. 
(b)  Connecting ducts or suction tubes shall be completely grounded and as short as possible, with no unnecessary bends. Ducts shall be carefully fabricated and assembled, with a smooth interior and with internal lap joints pointing in the direction of air flow, and without unused capped side outlets, pockets or other dead-end spaces which might allow an accumulation of dust. 
(c)  Each machine shall be equipped with its individual dust separating unit, except that with multi-unit machines not more than two dust-producing units may be served by one separator. Not more than four portable dust-producing units in a single enclosure or stand may be served by one separator unit. 
(d)  Power supply to machines shall be interlocked with (1) exhaust air flow and (2) liquid pressure level or flow in such a way that improper functioning of the dust removal and separator system will shut down the machine it serves. 
(e)  All electric wiring, fixtures and equipment in the immediate vicinity of and attached to dust-producing machines, including those used in connection with separator equipment, shall be of types approved for use in Class II, Group E hazardous locations under the National Electrical Code and shall be installed in accordance with nationally recognized safe practice. Compliance with applicable provisions of the standard of the National Board of Fire Underwriters known as the "National Electrical Code" shall be deemed prima facie evidence of compliance with nationally recognized safe practice. 
(f)  All equipment shall be securely grounded by permanent ground wires. 
(8)  Fire extinguishing powder. 
Any person heating magnesium shall keep a supply of approved extinguishing powder in a substantial container with a hand scoop or shovel for applying powder on magnesium fires or an approved extinguisher unit designed for use with such powder within easy reach of every operator performing a machining, grinding or other processing operation on magnesium. 
(9)  Storage of magnesium articles in warehouses and stores. 
No person shall keep or store magnesium articles in violation of the following: 
(a)  Magnesium storage in quantity greater than fifty cubic feet (50 cu. ft.) shall be separated from storage of other materials that are either combustible or in combustible containers, by aisles equal in width to not less than the height of the piles of magnesium. 
(b)  Magnesium storage in quantity greater than one thousand cubic feet (1,000 cu. ft.) shall be separated into piles each not larger than one thousand cubic feet (1,000 cu. ft.) with aisles between equal in width to not less than the height of the piles. 
(c)  Where storage in quantity greater than one thousand cubic feet (1,000 cu. ft.) is in a building of combustible construction, or the magnesium is packed in combustible crates or cartons, or there is other combustible storage within thirty feet (30') of the magnesium, the storage area shall be protected by automatic sprinklers. 
(10)  Handling of magnesium fines (fine magnesium scrap). 
No person shall handle fine magnesium scrap in violation of the following: 
(a)  Chips, turnings and other fine magnesium scrap shall be collected from the pans or spaces under machines and from other places where they collect at least once each working day, and placed in a covered, vented steel container and removed to a safe location. 
(b)  Magnesium fines shall be kept separate from other combustible materials. 
(c)  Storage in quantity greater than fifty cubic feet (50 cu. ft.) of fine magnesium scrap (six fifty-five-gallon (55 gals.) steel drums) shall be separated from other occupancies by fire-resistive construction without window openings or by an open space of at least fifty feet (50'). 
(d)  Storage in quantity greater than one thousand cubic feet (1,000 cu. ft.) shall be separated from all buildings other than those used for magnesium scrap recovery operations by a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100').  
Sec. 13-819. - Matches and smoking. 
(1)  Permit required. 
No person shall manufacture matches or store more than an aggregate of twenty-five (25) cases of matches without a permit. 
(2)  Wholesale storage. 
Any person storing more than twenty-five (25) cases shall arrange shipping containers in piles not exceeding eighteen feet (18') in height nor twenty-five thousand cubic feet (25,000 cu. ft.) in volume. Such pile units shall be separated from each other and from other combustible material by a clear space of not less than four feet (4'). 
(3)  Housekeeping. 
Any person storing matches shall keep the broken containers and contents neatly piled with other match stock in a portion of the room devoted to match storage exclusively. 
(4)  Fire marshal to designate areas where smoking shall be prohibited. 
Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of piers, wharves, warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places of assembly, and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled, the fire marshal is empowered and authorized to order the owner or occupant in writing to post "No Smoking" signs in each building, structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. The fire marshal shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any building, structure or place in which smoking may be permitted. 
(5)  Posting no smoking signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to post "No Smoking" signs pursuant to an order issued by the fire marshal. 
(6)  Smoking and removal of no smoking signs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally required "No Smoking" sign or to smoke in any place, where such signs are posted.  
Sec. 13-820. - Miscellaneous fire hazards. 
(1)  Flammable substances under pressure prohibited; exceptions. 
No machine, retort, cylinder and other receptacle or contrivance containing inflammable substances, whether gaseous or otherwise, under a greater pressure than five pounds (5 lbs.) to the square inch, shall be located, placed or used in any building other than a laboratory of an institution of learning without license therefor from the fire marshal, and no such license shall be granted for the use of any such device in any building which is used for purposes other than such laboratories; except that the fire marshal may issue licenses for such use of any gases which he finds are in common use in trades, professions, or lines of business; provided he also finds that such use is consistent with public safety. 
(2)  Hay, stalks, straw, husks, flags—Building containing people to have approved heating arrangement. 
No person shall deposit or keep any hay, stalks, straw, husks, or flags in any building in said city wherein any person dwells, or in which a fire is kindled, until the arrangement in such building for heating purposes shall have been examined and approved by the fire marshal. 
(3)  Same—Accumulations endangering property prohibited. 
No person shall keep or suffer to accumulate any shavings, straw or other combustible material in or near any building so as to endanger property from fire. 
(4)  Same—Open flames, smoking near. 
No person shall carry into, or use in, any barn, stable or other building in which hay, stalks, straw, husks or flags are deposited any lighted candle lamp or fire, unless the same be well secured in a lantern, nor carry into such building a lighted pipe or cigar. 
(5)  Careless disposition of matches, fireworks. 
No person shall throw or drop any matches, unused or with any fire on them, or any fireworks, into or in any barn, stable, shop, store or factory, or upon any combustible materials. 
(6)  Minimum distance of lumber piles from dwellings. 
No person shall pile, or cause to be piled, any boards, timber, shingles, lath or any other lumber, in the vicinity of any dwelling house in said city, at any less distance from dwelling house, at the nearest point, than double the height of such pile. 
(7)  Ashes on wooden floors prohibited; chimneys cleaning regulated. 
No person shall keep or allow to be kept any ashes in any wooden box, cask or barrel or emptied upon any wooden floor within any building in said city. 
No person shall clean any chimney by burning except during the daytime and when rain or snow is falling. 
(8)  Approval of gas appliances by fire marshal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, sell, expose or offer for sale, to install or fix in the city any illuminating gas fixture, stove, heater or lamp, or other gas appliances, unless such device, shall be constructed according to nationally recognized good practice. 
(b)  The state fire marshal may also issue regulations governing the use of gas appliances pursuant to Public Act 135 (1961) of the General Assembly to which the reader's attention is directed. 
(9)  License from fire marshal for production of lighting gas required. 
No person shall use or permit to be used any machine or contrivance in any building in said city for generating gas from oil or other fluid, for lighting purposes, without a permit.  
Sec. 13-821. - Nitrate motion picture film. 
(1)  General. 
The storage, handling and projection of nitrate film is governed by state law. The reader's attention is directed to regulations 29-109-71 through 29-109-116 of the commissioner of state police and sections 608.7 through 608.8 of the New Haven building code which govern the storage, handling and projection of nitrate film.  
Sec. 13-822. - Oil burning equipment. 
(1)  General. 
The design, construction and installation of oil burning equipment is covered by state law. The reader's attention is directed to regulations 29-60-1 through 29-60-51 of the commissioner of state police, covering the installation of oil burning equipment. These regulations contain specific provisions with regard to the installation and ventilation of oil burning equipment, oil storage tanks, pumps, piping, vent piping and valve requirements, and provisions governing the installation of conversion oil burners and oil-fired units and also the installation of heating and cooking appliances. 
(2)  Permit required. 
A permit shall be required for the installation of any oil burner that utilizes a fuel oil tank in excess of twenty-five gallons (25 gals.) in a building or in excess of sixty gallons (60 gals.) outside of a building.  
Sec. 13-823. - Ovens, industrial baking and drying. 
(1)  General. 
This section applies to the location, design, construction and operation of industrial baking and drying ovens which are heated with oil or gas fuel or which during operation contain flammable vapors from the products being baked or dried. It is the intent of this article to provide requirements for the operation of these ovens within certain limitations of control depending on oven design, paint formulation, and ventilation requirements, the disregard of which may cause them to function in an unsafe manner, thereby becoming liable to destruction by fire or explosion. 
(2)  Permits and plans required. 
No building permit for the construction, installation or modification of any industrial baking or drying ovens shall be issued unless the fire marshal shall certify that the plans for such construction, installation, or modification are in compliance with the provisions of this code. 
(3)  Location and construction. 
No person shall operate or permit an industrial baking or drying oven to be operated in violation of the following: 
(a)  Ovens, oven heaters and related equipment shall be located with due regard to the possibility of fire resulting from overheating or from the escape of fuel gas or fuel oil and the possibility of damage to the building and injury to persons resulting from explosion. 
(b)  Ovens shall be located at or above grade, or if in basements at least fifty percent (50%) of the wall area of the room in which the oven is located shall be above grade. 
(c)  Ovens shall be so located as to be readily accessible for inspection and maintenance and with adequate clearances to permit the proper functioning of explosion vents. Roofs and floors of ovens shall be sufficiently insulated and ventilated to keep temperatures at combustible ceilings and floors below one hundred sixty degrees (160°) Fahrenheit. 
(d)  Ovens shall be constructed of noncombustible materials throughout except where the maximum oven operating temperature is not over one hundred sixty degrees (160°) Fahrenheit. The amount of insulation used in oven panel construction shall be enough to prevent the outside surface temperature from exceeding one hundred sixty degrees (160°) Fahrenheit, or adequate guards shall be provided to protect personnel. 
(e)  Ovens which may contain flammable air-gas mixtures shall be equipped with relief vents for freely relieving internal explosion pressures, and all explosion-venting panels or doors shall be arranged so that when open, the full vent opening will be an effective relief area. 
(f)  All duct work shall be constructed of noncombustible material. Ducts shall be made tight throughout and shall have no openings other than those required for the proper operation and maintenance of the system. Ducts passing through combustible walls, floors, or roofs shall have adequate insulation and clearances to prevent surface temperatures from exceeding one hundred sixty degrees (160°) Fahrenheit. Exhaust ducts shall not discharge near doors, windows or other air intakes in a manner that will permit re-entry of vapors into the building. 
(4)  Ventilation. 
No person shall operate or permit an industrial baking or drying oven to be operated in violation of the following: 
(a)  Ovens in which flammable or toxic vapors are liberated or through which products of combustion are circulated shall be ventilated by the introduction of a supply of fresh air and proper exhaust to outdoors. Discharge pipes shall not terminate within ten feet (10') measured horizontally from any door, window or wood frame walls of any building. Such oven ventilation shall be arranged to provide vigorous and well distributed air circulation within the oven and to insure that the flammable vapor concentration will be safely below the lower explosive limit at all times. Unless the oven is operated in accordance with specific approval specifying particular solvents and rate of ventilation, the rate of ventilation shall not be less than ten thousand cubic feet (10,000 cu. ft.) of fresh air per gallon of solvent evaporated in continuous process ovens, and not less than three hundred eighty cubic feet (380 cu. ft.) per minute per gallon of flammable solvent evaporated in batch process ovens. 
(b)  Exhaust duct openings shall be located in the area of greatest concentration of vapors. 
(c)  All exhaust shall be by mechanical means using power driven fans. 
(5)  Safety controls. 
No person shall operate or permit an industrial baking or drying oven to be operated in violation of the following: 
(a)  Safety controls shall be sufficient in number, and substantially constructed and arranged to maintain the required conditions of safety and prevent the development of fire and explosion hazards. 
(b)  Ventilation controls, suitably interlocked, shall be provided which will insure required ventilation of the system. 
(c)  Fuel safety controls, suitably interlocked and arranged to minimize the possibility of dangerous accumulations of explosive air-fuel mixtures in the heating system, shall be provided. 
(d)  Excess temperature controls shall be provided to maintain a safe operating temperature within the oven. 
(e)  Conveyor interlocks shall be provided in conveyor ovens having a flammable vapor hazard, so that the conveyor cannot move unless ventilating fans are operating and discharging the required amount of air.  
Sec. 13-824. - Places of assembly, public buildings and institutional buildings. 
(1)  General permit required. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions contained in this code, places of assembly are also regulated by state law. The reader is directed to regulations 29-40-1 through 29-40-226 of the state fire marshal, which regulations constitute the Connecticut fire safety code, and regulations 29-109-1 through 29-109-116 of the commissioner of state police governing places of assembly, hotels, hospitals, convalescent homes, schools, boarding homes, rooming houses, child day care centers and related facilities. These regulations contain comprehensive requirements regarding entrances, exits, exit signs, maximum occupancy, standing room conditions, physical design and location of structures, aisles, emergency lighting, housekeeping and other physical features. In addition, special requirements are provided for structures used for specific purposes. 
(b)  No place of assembly shall be maintained, operated or used as such without a permit, except that no permit shall be required for any place of assembly used solely as a place of religious worship. 
(2)  Decorative material. 
No person shall maintain or permit any Place of Assembly, Public Building or Institutional Building to be maintained in violation of the following: 
(a)  No decorative material shall be used which as applied will ignite and allow flame to spread over the surface when exposed to match flame test applied to a piece removed from the material and tested in a safe place. The piece shall be held in a vertical position and the bottom edge exposed to a flame from a common match held in a horizontal position, one-half inch underneath the piece, and at a constant location for a minimum of fifteen (15) seconds. 
(b)  Treatments used to accomplish this flameproofing shall be renewed as often as may be necessary to maintain the flameproof effect. 
(3)  Pyroxylin coated fabric. 
No person shall maintain or permit any Place of Assembly, Public Building or Institutional Building to be maintained in violation of the following: 
Pyroxylin coated fabric used as a decorative material in accordance with section 13-824(2), or as a surface covering on fixed furnishings, shall be limited as follows: Such fabrics containing one and four-tenths ounces (1.4 ozs.) or more of cellulose nitrate per square yard shall not be used in excess of a total amount equivalent to one square foot of fabric surface to fifteen cubic feet (15 cu. ft.) of room volume. Each square foot of such fabric which contains one and seven-tenths ounces (1.7 ozs.) or more of cellulose nitrate per square yard shall be counted as two square feet in making this computation. 
(4)  Motion picture screens. 
No person shall use or permit a motion picture screen or screen masking to be used in any place of assembly, public building, or institutional building which will ignite and allow flame to spread over the surface when exposed to the match flame test described in section 13-824(2). 
(5)  Exit doors. 
No person shall permit a place of assembly, public building or institutional building to be occupied when any exit door shall be locked, bolted, or otherwise fastened or obstructed by any means, so that the door cannot be opened from the inside by the use of the ordinary door latch or knob or by pressure on the door or on a panic release device. 
(6)  Aisles. 
No person shall permit a place of assembly, public building or institutional building to be occupied unless in each room where chairs, or tables and chairs, are used, the arrangement shall be such as will provide for ready access by aisles to each exit doorway. Aisles leading directly to exit doorways shall have not less than thirty-six inches (36") clear width which shall not be obstructed by chairs, tables or other objects. 
(7)  Use of exit ways. 
No person shall permit a place of assembly, public building or institutional building to be occupied of any part of a stairway, whether interior or exterior, or of a hallway, corridor, vestibule, balcony or bridge leading to a stairway or exit of any kind, will be used in any way that will obstruct its use as an exit or that will present a hazardous condition. 
(8)  Ash trays. 
Any person permitting a place of assembly, public building or institutional building to be occupied shall provide on each table and other convenient places in areas where smoking is permitted, suitable noncombustible ash trays or match receivers. 
(9)  Open flames. 
Open flame illuminating devices presenting a reasonable threat of fire are prohibited. 
(10)  Plan of exit ways and aisles. 
No person shall permit a place of assembly, public building or institutional building to be occupied unless a plan showing the capacity and location of exit ways and of aisles leading thereto has been submitted and approved by the fire marshal and an approved copy placed and kept on display in the premises. 
(11)  Marking and lighting of exits. 
No person shall permit a place of assembly, public building or institutional building to be occupied unless all fire escapes and exitways in places of assembly shall be marked and lighted in accordance with section 13-826 of this Code.  
Sec. 13-825. - Precautions against fire, general. 
(1)  Open fires. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow the burning of materials of any type, including, but not limited to, trash, rubbish, garbage, leaves, brush, building materials, wire insulation, and automobile bodies, outdoors in the open air within the city limits. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the occasional cooking of food for human consumption. 
(b)  The chief of the department of fire service, with approval of the director of public health, is hereby authorized to permit in writing, the burning prohibited in subsection (a) at such places and under such conditions and safeguards as public convenience, health and safety require, subject to the standards set forth in subsection (e). 
(c)  The provisions of this section concerning the burning of automobile bodies shall become effective March 6, 1969. 
(d)  The chief of the department of fire service may prohibit any or all fires in the City of New Haven or any part thereof not otherwise prohibited in subsection (a) when, in the opinion of the chief, atmospheric or wind conditions, or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(e)  No person shall kindle or maintain any fire not otherwise prohibited by law or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained unless (A) the location is not less than fifty feet (50') from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within fifty feet (50') of any structure, or (B) the fire is contained in an approved waste burner located safely not less than fifteen feet (15') from any structure. And further, no such fire shall be kindled or maintained after 2:00 p.m. or before sunrise except with a permit so permitting from the chief of the department of fire services. 
(2)  Kindling of fire on land of others prohibited. 
No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without permission of the owner thereof or his agent. 
(3)  Use of torches for removing paint. 
No person shall use a torch or other flame-producing device for removing paint from any building or structure without providing one approved fire extinguisher or water hose connected to the water supply on the premises where such burning is done. In all cases, the person doing the burning shall remain on the premises one hour after the torch or flame-producing device has been used. 
(4)  Hot ashes and other dangerous materials. 
No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, or smoldering coals, or greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition, into any combustible receptacle, or place the same within ten feet (10') of any combustible materials, except in metal or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building, shall be placed on noncombustible stands, and in every case shall be kept at least two feet (2') away from any combustible wall or partition or exterior window opening. 
(5)  Accumulations of waste materials. 
No person shall accumulate or permit to accumulate waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or open space. All weeds, grass, vines or other growth, which in the determination of the fire marshal, endangers property, or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the property. 
(6)  Handling readily combustible materials. 
No person making, using, storing or having in charge, or under his control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults or in metal or metal-lined, covered, receptacles or bins. In any store, apartment building, factory or any other building or part or portion of a building where paper and waste material are not removed at least every second day there shall be provided baling presses which in the determination of the fire marshal shall be suitable to reasonably prevent fire or the spread of fire. 
(7)  Storage of readily combustible materials. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall store, keep or have on hand in any building or structure or any portion thereof in excess of two thousand five hundred cubic feet (2,500 cu. ft.) gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes, barrels, or similar containers, or rubber tires, or baled cotton, rubber or cork, or other similarly combustible material without a permit naming the person and specifying the building, structure or property in which such activities are to be conducted. 
(b)  Storage requirements. No person shall store readily combustible materials unless in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet (2') of the ceiling, and not so located as to endanger exit from building. 
(2)  Storage in the open shall not be more than twenty feet (20') in height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as not to constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly. 
(8)  Flammable decorative materials other than Christmas trees. 
Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery and foam plastic materials shall not be used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of mercantile and institutional occupancies unless flameproofed. Electric light bulbs in mercantile and institutional occupancies shall not be decorated with paper or other combustible materials unless such materials shall first have been rendered flameproof. 
(9)  Christmas trees and decorative materials. 
No person shall maintain or permit any Christmas decorations in the interior of any Place of Assembly, Public Building or Institutional Building in violation of the following: 
(a)  A natural Christmas tree, without electrical decorations, may be used if freshly cut within ten (10) days prior to the first day of its use indoors and if it has a high moisture content. In no case, however, shall a Christmas tree be installed indoors before December 1st. The tree must be held secure in an upright position in a stand or other container having a broad base and a water capacity adequate to replenish daily any lost moisture content. 
(b)  All trees, including artificial ones, shall be illuminated only by indirect lighting. Where indirect lighting is used, all electrical equipment shall meet the standards of a nationally recognized testing laboratory and shall be installed pursuant to nationally recognized standards and practices. Indirect lighting shall also apply to decorative metal Christmas trees because of the casualty hazard from possible electric shock. 
(c)  No tree or other decorative material, such as wreaths or sprays, shall be in direct contact with electrical wiring or electrical equipment, or near an open flame or other sources of heat. 
(d)  No tree shall be trimmed with any decoration or material that is flammable or combustible. 
(e)  No tree shall be so located that it will block or obstruct any exit or passageway. 
(f)  Trees and decorative material shall be removed in accordance with such reasonable regulations as may be established by the fire marshal. 
(g)  Good general housekeeping practices shall be maintained at all times by guarding against smoking hazards and making provision for metal-covered containers for flammable waste material disposal that may accumulate during holiday socials. 
(10)  Use of open flame or light restricted. 
(a)  No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn, vessel, boat or any other place where highly flammable, combustible, or explosive material is kept, unless such light or flame shall be tightly secured in a glass globe, wire mesh cage or similar approved device. 
(b)  No person shall use any heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting flammable materials of the types stored or handled in the storage area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair or other highly flammable or combustible material; nor in the work area of any shop or factory used for the manufacture, repair or renovating of mattresses or bedding; nor in the work areas of any establishment used for the upholstering of furniture. 
(11)  Maintenance of chimneys and heating appliances. 
(a)  No person shall construct or maintain any chimneys, smokestacks or similar devices for conveying smoke or hot gases to the outer air and the stoves, furnaces, restaurant type cooking equipment, incinerators, fire boxes or boilers to which they are connected in such a manner as to create a hazardous condition. 
(b)  No person shall use any commercial or industrial type incinerator for the burning of rubbish or other readily combustible solid waste material and any flame fed incinerator which is not provided with approved operating spark arrestors or other effective means for arresting sparks and fly particles. 
(12)  Trap doors to be closed. 
No person shall occupy or permit any building or structure to be occupied unless all trapdoors, except those which are automatic in their operation, in any factory building or building used for storage shall be closed at the completion of the business of each day. 
(13)  Shaftways to be marked. 
No person shall occupy or permit any building or structure which is to be used for manufacturing purposes or for storage to be occupied unless every outside window which opens directly on any hoistway or other vertical means of communication between two or more floors in such building, shall be plainly marked with the word "SHAFTWAY" in red letters at least six inches high on a white background; such warning sign to be so placed as to be easily discernible from the outside of the building. Every door or window opening on such shaftway from the interior of the building, unless the construction of the partition surrounding the shaftway is of such distinctive nature as to make its purpose evident at a glance, shall be similarly marked with the warning word, "SHAFTWAY" so placed as to be easily visible to any one approaching the shaftway from the interior of the building. 
(Ord. of 2-6-67) 
Amendment note— Ord. of Feb. 6, 1967, enacted Feb. 6, 1967, approved Feb. 16, 1967, effective March 6, 1967, with the exception of subsection (c) which becomes effective March 6, 1969, amended § 13-825(1) to read as herein set out. Due to the nature of the subject matter, a detailed analysis of the amendment is not included.  
Sec. 13-826. - Fire escapes and exit ways. 
(1)  General. 
Fire escapes and exit ways are regulated by state and local law. The reader is directed to the following provisions: Connecticut general statutes, Chapter 353 governing fire escapes and exit ways in public and other buildings; regulations 29-40-1 through 29-40-226 of the state fire marshal constituting the state fire safety code which govern fire escapes and exit ways in places of assembly, hotels, hospitals, convalescent homes, schools and school buildings, boarding homes, rooming houses and child day care centers; regulations 29-67-1 through 29-67-30 of the state fire marshal governing dry cleaning plants and self-service and coin-operated dry cleaning facilities; regulations 29-109-1 through 29-109-116 of the commissioner of state police governing moving picture exhibitions; regulations 29-140-1 through 29-140-16 of the commissioner of state police governing outdoor amusements under tents and portable shelters; and Article VII of the New Haven Building Code [6] governing the design, construction and arrangement of exit facilities. 
(2)  Obstructions to means of egress. 
(a)  No person shall at any time place an encumbrance of any kind before or upon any fire escape, balcony or ladder intended as a means of escape from fire. 
(b)  In other dwellings, no person shall place, store or keep, or permit to be placed, stored or kept on or under or at the bottom of any exit stairway, inside or outside, exit hallway, elevator or other means of egress, any materials the presence or the burning of which would obstruct or render hazardous, egress of persons from building. 
(c)  No person shall occupy or permit any building or structure to be used for mercantile occupancy where any aisle, passageway or stairway is obstructed with tables, show cases, or other obstruction during hours such occupancy is open to the public. 
(d)  No person shall occupy or permit any building to be occupied unless all doors in or leading to required public exit ways shall be kept unlocked at all times when the building or floor area served thereby is occupied. 
(3)  Marking of exit ways. 
(a)  No person shall occupy or permit rooms accommodating more than seventy-five (75) persons to be occupied unless required exit doorways, other than those normally used for entrance, shall be plainly marked by approved exit signs, sufficiently illuminated when the floor area is occupied, to be readily distinguished. 
(b)  No person shall occupy or permit any building to be occupied unless exit doorways and directional signs, as required by the fire marshal shall be placed on walls or otherwise displayed in conspicuous locations to direct occupants to exit doorways not otherwise conveniently visible from all locations in public corridors. 
(4)  Lighting of exit ways. 
No person shall occupy or permit any building or structure to be occupied unless required stairways, hallways and other means of egress, including exterior open spaces to or through which exit ways lead, shall be kept adequately lighted at all times that the building served thereby is occupied. 
(5)  Stairway doors to be kept closed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to block or to permit any stairway enclosure door which leads to or from a floor of the building, and which by any statute, regulation, code of ordinance is required to be self closing to remain blocked. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— The Building Code is set out in Vol. III of this Code of Ordinances. 
 
Sec. 13-827. - Fire protection equipment. 
(1)  General. 
Fire protection equipment including fire extinguishers, sprinklers, stand pipes, etc., is required by state and local law. The reader is directed to the following provisions: Regulations 29-40-1 through 29-40-226 of the state fire marshal, constituting the state fire code, which govern places of assembly, hotels, outside stairways, hospitals, convalescent homes, schools and school buildings, boarding homes, rooming houses and child day care centers; regulations 29-67-1 through 29-67-30 of the state fire marshal which govern dry cleaning and dry dyeing and also cover self-service and coin-operated facilities; regulations 29-109-1 through 29-109-116 of the commissioner of state police which govern moving picture exhibitions; regulations 29-140-1 through 29-140-16 of the commissioner of state police which govern outdoor amusements under tents and portable shelters; and the New Haven Building Code, Article XXIV, [7] setting forth the requirements for standpipes and sprinkler equipment in certain buildings and structures. The above materials contain specific requirements for fire extinguishing devices and fire protection devices which vary, depending upon the size, type and nature of the building or structure. 
(2)  Fire marshal to survey premises and specify equipment to be provided. 
The fire marshal shall survey each commercial and industrial establishment, mercantile, educational and institutional occupancy, place of assembly, hotel, multi-family house, and trailer camp and shall specify, in instances of reasonable threat of fire, suitable fire detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be provided in or near boiler rooms, kitchens of restaurants, clubs and like establishments, storage rooms involving considerable combustible material, rooms in which hazardous manufacturing processes are involved, repair garages, and other places of a generally hazardous nature. Such devices or appliances may consist of automatic fire alarm systems, automatic sprinkler or water spray systems, standpipe and hose, fixed or portable fire extinguishers of a type suitable for the probable class of fire, or suitable asbestos blankets, manual or automatic covers, or carbon dioxide or other special fire extinguishing systems. In special hazardous processes or storage, appliances of more than one type or special systems may be required. 
(3)  Maintenance of equipment. 
Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems, and other fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in compliance with any permit or order, or because of any law or ordinance, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required; except this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations or additions. The fire marshal shall be notified before such tests, repairs, alterations or additions are started unless the work is to be continuous until completion. 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— The building code is contained in Vol. III of this Code of Ordinances. 
 
Sec. 13-828. - Space heaters. 
(1)  "Space heater" defined. 
"Space heater" as used herein shall mean a heating unit which uses or is designed to use solid, liquid or gaseous fuel, and which is designed to heat or is used to heat the area in which it is located, and which is not connected with a heat distribution system. 
(2)  Sale and installation of space heaters unlawful to be used; prohibited; penalty. 
Effective thirty (30) days after enactment of this article, no person shall keep for sale, sell, offer to sell, install or offer to install, within the limits of the city any space heater whose use in dwelling units is prohibited by the applicable statutes, ordinances, code and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the City of New Haven, as they may from time to time be amended. 
Every person who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(3)  Permits to install space heaters. 
(a)  Required. Effective thirty (30) days after enactment of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to install within the city any space heater, unless such person shall have obtained from the department of fire service a permit to install said heater. 
(b)  Fee: contents. Permits to install space heaters shall be issued by the department of fire service on application and payment of a fee of three dollars ($3.00). Each permit shall state the name and address of the seller of the heater, the name and address of the purchaser of the heater, the name and address of person or firm which is to install the heater, and the address of the premises on which it is to be installed. 
(c)  Penalty. Every person who shall install a space heater in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(4)  Inspection by department of fire service. 
(a)  Required. The department of fire service shall promptly inspect each space heater and its installation for which a permit has been issued under section 13-829 (3) hereof, and shall periodically inspect all dwellings, dwelling units and buildings where there is reason to believe a space heater has been installed or is in use. For purposes of inspection the fire chief, the fire marshal or the authorized representatives of either may at reasonable hours enter upon any premises where a space heater has been or is to be installed, or where he has reason to believe that a space heater has been installed or may be in use. 
(b)  Findings upon inspection. Whenever the fire chief or the fire marshal, upon inspection, shall determine that a space heater, for any reason is dangerous to use, or that its use would be contrary to applicable statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations, he shall order its removal. The Department of Fire Service shall keep a record of all inspections and orders made pursuant to this article. 
(5)  Prohibition of use in any building of space heaters unlawful to be used in dwelling units. 
(a)  Use prohibited. Effective October 1, 1963, no person shall use or maintain or permit the use of maintenance in any building within the limits of the city any space heater unless such space heater and its installation shall meet all the requirements of the statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the City of New Haven as they may be amended from time to time with respect to space heaters in dwelling units, with the exception of existing kitchen ranges which are used for heating and/or cooking until October 1, 1966. 
(b)  Noncompliance with applicable laws. For the purposes of this section it shall be deemed that a property owner has permitted the use of a space heater if, knowing that the premises are not centrally heated, he has failed to ensure that the heating apparatus used by the occupants of the property is in full conformance with all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations. 
(c)  Penalty. Every person who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day of violation of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. of 4-15-85, § 2)  
Sec. 13-829. - Tents. 
(1)  General. Permit required. 
(a)  Tents are governed by state law. The reader is directed to regulations 29-140-1 through 29-140-16 of the commissioner of state police. These regulations contain license requirements and deal with the location and nature of the tent or tent-like structure and the site thereof, plus the lighting, seating, aisles and exists within the shelter, occupancy limitations, fire and police protection required and other general requirements. 
(b)  No person shall erect or use a tent covering an excess of one hundred twenty square feet (120 sq. ft) without a permit.  
Sec. 13-830. - Tire rebuilding plants. 
(1)  Permit required. 
No person shall maintain any tire rebuilding plant unless he holds a permit. 
(2)  Construction and protection requirements. 
No person shall maintain any tire rebuilding plant in violation of the following: 
(a)  Tire rebuilding plants shall have floor and stairway openings enclosed in a manner approved by the fire marshal which will reduce the threat of fire or the spread of fire. 
(b)  Existing tire rebuilding plants in buildings of wood frame construction or in buildings used in part for residential occupancy shall be separated from other portions of the building by construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than two hours, and shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
(3)  Dust collecting system. 
No person shall maintain any tire rebuilding plant unless buffing machines are located in a room separated from the remainder of the plant by construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour, with each door opening protected by an approved self-closing fire door. Each machine shall be connected to an ample dust collecting system discharging to a suitable container which shall be cleaned at frequent intervals. 
(4)  Ventilation. 
No person shall maintain any tire rebuilding plant unless each room in which rubber cement is used or mixed, or flammable solvents are applied, is equipped with effective mechanical or natural ventilation.  
Sec. 13-831. - Welding or cutting, calcium carbide and acetylene generators. 
(1)  General. 
Welding or cutting shall include gas, electric-arc, or flammable liquid welding or cutting or any combination thereof. 
(2)  Permit required for welding or cutting. 
(a)  A permit shall be required of each company, corporation, co-partnership or owner-operator performing welding or cutting operations except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subsection (2). This permit shall not be required for each welding or cutting job location. The company, corporation, co-partnership or owner-operator shall notify the fire marshal in advance where such work is taking place except where such work is done in response to an emergency call that does not allow time for the fire marshal to be notified in advance of the work. A fee of shall be paid for each permit as set out in section 17-20 of this Code. 
(b)  A permit shall not be required of any company, corporation, co-partnership, or owner-operator: 
(1)  Where the welding or cutting is performed in areas approved for the purpose, or 
(2)  Having an approved permit system established for control of the fire hazards involved. 
(c)  Application for a permit required by this article shall be made by the company, corporation, co-partnership or owner-operator performing the welding or cutting operation or by his duly authorized agent. 
(d)  A permit for welding or cutting operations shall not be issued unless the individuals in charge of performing such operations are capable of doing such work in a safe manner. Demonstration of a working knowledge of the provisions of this article shall constitute acceptable evidence of compliance with this requirement. 
(e)  Companies, corporations, co-partnerships and owner-operators required to have a permit shall maintain a record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are performed and have it available for inspection by the fire marshal. 
(3)  Compliance with nationally recognized good practice. 
No person shall use or permit to be used any welding or cutting equipment unacceptable to the fire marshal and the equipment shall be installed and operated in accordance with nationally recognized good practice. 
(4)  Fire prevention. 
No person shall weld or perform any cutting operation in violation of the following: 
(a)  Before welding or cutting operations are begun in areas not designed or approved for the purpose, specific authorization shall be obtained from the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent. 
(b)  When welding or cutting operations are performed above, or within thirty-five feet (35') of combustible construction or material exposed to the operation, or within thirty-five feet (35') of floor, ceiling or wall openings so exposed: 
(1)  Such combustible construction or material shall be protected by noncombustible shields or covers from possible sparks, hot metal or oxide. 
(2)  Such floor, ceiling or wall openings shall be protected by noncombustible shields or covers. 
(3)  A fire watcher shall be provided to watch for fires, make use of portable fire extinguishers or fire hose, and perform similar fire prevention and protection duties. The fire watcher shall remain on the job at least thirty (30) minutes after the welding or cutting operations have been completed to insure that no fire exists. A signed inspection report attesting to that fact shall be filed and available for inspection by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
(c)  One or more portable fire extinguishers of approved type and size shall be kept at the location where welding or cutting is to be done. 
(d)  Welding or cutting shall not be done in or near rooms or locations where flammable gases, liquids or vapors, lint, dust, or loose combustible stocks are present when sparks or hot metal from the welding or cutting operations may cause ignition or explosion of such materials. 
(e)  Except as provided in paragraph (f) of this subsection, welding or cutting shall not be performed on containers and equipment which contain or have contained flammable liquids, gases or solids until these containers and equipment have been thoroughly cleaned or inerted or purged. 
(f)  "Hot tapping" may be permitted on tanks and pipe lines provided such operations are performed by companies, corporations, copartnerships or owner-operators not required to have a permit under section 13-831(2)(b)(2). 
(g)  Sprinkler protection shall not be shut off while welding or cutting work is being performed. When welding or cutting is done close to automatic sprinkler heads, sheet asbestos or damp cloth guards may be used to shield the individual heads but shall be removed when the work is completed. 
(5)  Gas welding and cutting. 
No person shall use gas in welding or cutting in violation of the following: 
(a)  Devices or attachments facilitating or permitting mixture of air or oxygen with combustible gases prior to consumption, except at the burner or in a standard torch or blowpipe, shall not be allowed unless approved for the purpose. 
(b)  The user shall not transfer gases from one cylinder to another or mix gases in a cylinder. 
(c)  Acetylene gas shall not be generated, piped (except in approved cylinder manifolds and cylinder manifold connections), or utilized at a pressure in excess of fifteen pounds (15 lbs.) per square inch gauge unless dissolved in a suitable solvent in cylinders manufactured according to Interstate Commerce Commission requirements. 
(d)  Acetylene gas shall not be brought in contact with unalloyed copper except in a blowpipe or torch. 
(e)  A cylinder or cylinder manifold for oxygen shall be provided with a pressure regulating device intended for use with oxygen, and so marked. 
(f)  Cylinders permitted inside of buildings shall be stored at least twenty feet (20') from highly combustible materials and in locations where they are not subject to excessive rise in temperature, physical damage or tampering by unauthorized persons. Empty cylinders shall have their valves closed in storage and when shipped. 
(g)  When a cylinder is not in use, the valve shall be closed and the valve protection cap shall be in place, hand tight. 
(h)  Tests for leaks in any piping system or equipment shall be made with soapy water. Flames shall not be used. 
(i)  Welding or cutting work shall not be supported on compressed gas cylinders or other containers. 
(j)  Fuel gas cylinders shall be placed with valve end up whenever they are in use. 
(k)  Fuel gas shall not be used from cylinders through torches or other devices equipped with shut-off valves without reducing the pressure through a suitable regulator attached to the cylinder valve or manifold. 
(l)  Cylinders, valves, regulators, hose and other apparatus and fittings containing or using oxygen shall be kept free from oil or grease. Oxygen cylinders, apparatus and fittings shall not be handled with oily hands or gloves or greasy tools or equipment. 
(m)  When moving compressed gas cylinders by crane, suitable cradles shall be used to prevent the possibility of dropping them. Ordinary rope slings or electromagnets shall not be used. 
(n)  Oxygen and fuel gas cylinders and acetylene generators shall be placed far enough away from the welding area to prevent them from being heated by radiation from heated materials, by sparks or slag, or by misdirection of the torch flame. 
(o)  When gas welding or cutting operations are discontinued for a substantial period of time such as during lunch hour or overnight, the torch valves shall be closed and the gas supply to the torch completely shut off. 
(6)  Electric arc-welding and cutting. 
No person shall electric arc-weld or cut in violation of the following: 
(a)  The frame or case of the welding machine except internal combustion engine driven machines shall be grounded. Ground connections shall be mechanically strong and electrically adequate for the required current. 
(b)  Welding current return circuits from the work to the machine shall have proper electrical contact at all joints and periodic inspection shall be made to ascertain that proper electrical contact is maintained. 
(c)  When electric arc welding or cutting is to be discontinued for any substantial period of time, such as during lunch hour or overnight, all electrodes shall be removed from the holders, the holders shall be carefully located so that accidental contact cannot occur, and the machines shall be disconnected from the power source. 
(7)  Permit required for storage of calcium carbide. 
No person without a permit shall store or keep calcium carbide in excess of two hundred pounds (200 lbs.). 
(8)  Containers for calcium carbide. 
No person shall store or permit calcium carbide to be stored in any container which is not of sufficient strength to insure handling without rupture, and which is not provided with a screw top or its equivalent. The containers shall be of water-tight and air-tight construction. Solder shall not be used on joints in such manner that fire would disrupt the package. Packages shall be marked "Calcium Carbide—Dangerous If Not Kept Dry". 
(9)  Storage of calcium carbide in buildings. 
No person shall store or permit calcium carbide to be stored in violation of the following: 
(a)  Storage of calcium carbide inside buildings shall be in a dry, waterproof and well ventilated location. 
(b)  Calcium carbide not in excess of six hundred pounds (600 lbs.) may be stored inside of buildings or in the same room with fuel gas cylinders but not with oxygen cylinders. 
(c)  Calcium carbide in excess of six hundred pounds (600 lbs.) but not in excess of five thousand pounds (5,000 lbs.) shall not be stored in a building containing other occupancy unless in an acetylene generator room or separate room or compartment, in a one-story building without cellar or basement underneath the carbide storage section. Such rooms shall be of construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than one (1) hour, with openings to other parts of the building protected by approved self-closing fire doors or stationary wired glass windows in approved metal frames. Adequate ventilation shall be provided. This room shall not be used for any other purpose. 
(d)  Calcium carbide in excess of five thousand pounds (5,000 lbs.) shall be stored in one story buildings without cellar or basement and used for no other purpose, or in outside acetylene generator houses. Location of such storage buildings shall be outside congested mercantile and manufacturing districts. If storage building is of noncombustible construction, it may adjoin other one story buildings if separated therefrom by unpierced fire walls; if detached less than ten feet (10') from such building or buildings, there shall be no opening in any of the mutually exposing sides of such buildings within said distance. If the storage building is of combustible construction it shall not be within twenty feet (20') of any other one or two story building, nor within thirty feet (30') of any other building exceeding two stories. 
(10)  Permit required for acetylene generators. 
No person shall operate an acetylene generator having a carbide capacity exceeding five pounds (5 lbs.) without a permit. 
(11)  Generators to be approved. 
No person shall operate or permit any acetylene generators to be operated which are not of an approved type, and are not plainly marked with the rate in cubic feet of acetylene per hour for which they are designed, the amount or weight of carbide necessary for a single charge, the manufacturer's name and address, and the name or number of the type of generator. 
(12)  Stationary generators. 
No person shall install stationary generators which are not either in a well ventilated one story noncombustible outside generator house, or in a well ventilated room or compartment of ample size and of construction as outlined in section 13-831(13), either in a one story building or on the top floor or roof of a multi-storied building. The storage of fuel gas cylinders in such rooms or compartments shall not exceed a total capacity of two thousand cubic feet (2,000 cu. ft.) of gas (300 pounds in case of liquefied petroleum gas). 
(13)  Inside generator rooms or compartments. 
No person shall install, operate or permit acetylene generators in violation of the following: 
(a)  The walls or partitions, floor and ceiling of such room or compartment shall be of construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour. Walls or partitions shall be continuous from floor to ceiling and shall be securely anchored. At least one wall of an inside generator room shall be an exterior wall. 
(b)  Openings from generator room or compartment to other parts of the building shall be protected by an approved self-closing fire door of the swinging type and close into a rabbet, or otherwise be made tight to prevent passage of flame around edges. Exit doors shall be located so as to be readily accessible in case of emergency. Windows, if provided in partitions, shall be wired glass in approved metal frames with fixed sash. 
(c)  A portion of the exterior walls equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the combined areas of the enclosing walls shall be of light noncombustible material such as single thickness, single strength glass. Single thickness, single strength window glass skylights, or lightly fastened roof hatch covers, swinging doors in exterior wall opening outward, sheet metal siding or lightly fastened roofs, may be accepted in part or entirely in lieu of the glass area or its equivalent, provided the required percentage of explosion venting area is thus obtained. 
(14)  Portable generators. 
(a)  No person shall use or cause a portable generator to be used in rooms of total volume less than thirty-five (35) times the total gas generating capacity per charge of all generators in the room. The gas generating capacity in cubic feet per charge shall be assumed as four and five tenths (4.5) times the weight of carbide per charge in pounds. Generators shall not be used in rooms having a ceiling height less than ten feet (10'). 
(b)  No person shall move or cause an acetylene generator to be moved by derrick, crane or hoist while charged. 
(15)  Protection against freezing. 
No person shall place or cause a generator to be placed where water will freeze. No common salt (sodium chloride) or other corrosive chemical shall be used as a protection against freezing. 
(16)  Permit required for cylinder storage. 
A permit shall be required for the storage of cylinders used in conjunction with welding or cutting operations when more than two thousand cubic feet (2,000 cu. ft.) of flammable compressed gas other than liquefied petroleum gas, three hundred pounds (300 lbs.) of liquefied petroleum gas, or six thousand cubic feet (6,000 cu. ft.) of nonflammable compressed gas is stored. 
(17)  Storage of cylinders. 
No person shall store or cause welding cylinders of fuel gas to be stored in violation of the following: 
(a)  Cylinders of fuel gases stored inside of building. except those in actual use or attached ready for use, shall be limited to a total capacity of two thousand cubic feet (2,000 cu. ft.) of gas or three hundred pounds (300 lbs.) of liquefied petroleum gas. For storage in excess of two thousand cubic feet (2,000 cu. ft.) total gas capacity of cylinders or three hundred pounds (300 lbs.) of liquefied petroleum gas, a separate room or compartment as provided for by section 13-831(9)(c) shall be provided, or cylinders shall be kept outside or in a special building. Buildings, rooms or compartments provided for such storage shall be well ventilated and be without open flame heating or lighting devices. 
(b)  Cylinders or oxygen stored inside of buildings shall comply with the requirement for oxygen manifolds covered in section 13-831(19)(a). 
(18)  Piping systems for fuel gases and oxygen. 
No person shall install or use or cause any piping system for fuel gases and oxygen to be installed in violation of the following: 
(a)  Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, piping shall be steel, wrought iron, brass or copper pipe, or seamless copper, brass, or stainless steel tubing. Piping and fittings shall comply with nationally recognized good practice except that pipe and fittings shall be standard weight as a minimum for sizes not over six inches in nominal size. 
(b)  Acetylene piping shall be steel or wrought iron pipe only. 
(c)  Oxygen piping at pressures in excess of seven hundred pounds (700 lbs.) per square inch shall be stainless steel or nonferrous tubing. 
(d)  Joints in steel or wrought iron pipe shall be welded or made up with threaded or flanged fittings; or rolled, forged or cast steel, or malleable iron fittings may be used. Joints in brass or copper pipe may be welded, brazed, threaded or flanged. Joints in seamless copper, brass or stainless steel tubing shall be by approved gas tubing fittings or shall be brazed. Socket type joints in brass or copper pipe or in seamless copper, brass or stainless steel tubing shall be brazed with silver brazing alloy or similar high melting point filler metal. Cast iron fittings shall be prohibited. Threaded connections in oxygen piping shall be tinned, or made up with litharge and glycerine, or other joint compound approved for oxygen service and applied to male threads only. 
(e)  Piping shall be protected against physical damage, and allowance made for contraction, expansion, jarring and vibration. If laid underground it shall be below the frost line and protected against corrosion. Low points in piping shall be provided with drip pots and drain valves, the latter to be normally closed with screw caps or plugs. 
(f)  All piping shall be tested and proved tight at one and one-half times its maximum working pressure. Any medium used for testing oxygen lines shall be oil-free. 
(g)  All buried pipe and tubing and outdoor ferrous pipe and tubing shall be covered or painted with a suitable corrosion resisting material. 
(19)  Manifolding of cylinders. 
No person shall install, use or cause welding cylinders to be used in violation of the following: 
(a)  Oxygen manifolds shall not be located in an acetylene generator room. Oxygen manifolds shall be located at least twenty feet (20') away from both highly flammable material, such as oil or grease and combustible gas cylinders unless the combustible gas cylinders are separated by a fire-resistive partition constructed as specified in section 13-831(9)(c). 
(b)  The aggregate capacity of oxygen cylinders connected to one manifold inside a building shall not exceed six thousand cubic feet (6,000 cu. ft.). More than one such manifold may be located in the same room provided the manifolds are at least fifty feet (50') apart. 
(c)  An oxygen manifold connected to cylinders having an aggregate capacity of more than six thousand cubic feet (6,000 cu. ft.) shall be located outside, in a separate building, or in a separate room constructed in accordance with section 13-831(9)(c) with no combustible material within twenty feet (20') of the manifold. 
(d)  Oxygen manifolds with service pressures not exceeding two hundred pounds (200 lbs.) per square inch gage shall be marked: 
Low Pressure Manifold 
Do Not Connect High-Pressure Cylinders 
Maximum Pressure—250 PSIG 
(e)  The aggregate capacity of fuel gas cylinders connected to one manifold inside a building shall not exceed three thousand cubic feet (3,000 cu. ft.) of gas or three hundred pounds (300 lbs.) of liquefied petroleum gas. More than one such manifold may be located in the same room provided the manifolds are at least fifty feet (50') apart. 
(f)  A fuel gas manifold connected to cylinders having an aggregate capacity of more than three thousand cubic feet (3,000 cu. ft.) of gas or three hundred pounds (300 lbs.) of liquefied petroleum gas shall be located outside, in a separate building, or in a separate room constructed in accordance with section 13-831(9)(c). 
(20)  Hose and hose connections. 
No person shall use or cause welding hose or welding hose connection to be used in violation of the following: 
(a)  Hose shall be capable of withstanding a hydrostatic pressure of at least eight hundred pounds (800 lbs.) per square inch. 
(b)  A single hose having more than one gas passage, a wall failure of which would permit the flow of one gas into the other gas passage shall not be used. 
(c)  Single and double hose except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section shall be identified by exterior colors using green for oxygen hose, red for acetylene, LP-Gas and other fuel gases and black for inert gases and air hose. 
(d)  When two hoses are joined by a web to form integral lengths of double hose, the color of both hoses shall be red and the exterior surface of oxygen hose shall be smooth to the touch while fuel gas hose shall be corrugated or ribbed. 
(e)  When parallel lengths of oxygen and acetylene hose are taped together for convenience and to prevent tangling, not more than four inches out of each eight shall be covered by tape. 
(f)  Hose connections shall be clamped or otherwise securely fastened in a manner that will withstand, without leakage, twice the pressure to which they are normally subjected in service but in no case less than a pressure of three hundred pounds (300 lbs.) per square inch. 
(g)  Hose shall be inspected frequently for leaks, burns, worn places, loose connections or other defects, which may render the hose unfit for service. Where hose shows excessive wear or has been subjected to flashback it shall be inspected and tested at twice the normal pressure to which it is subjected in service but in no case at less than two hundred pounds (200 lbs.) per square inch before being returned to service. Defective lengths of hose shall be discarded. 
(Ord. of 12-4-89; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05)  
ARTICLE IX. - FIRE DISTRICTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. enacted Feb. 5, 1973, effective March 5, 1973, provided that the ordinance was a revision of the fire district ordinance, contained in paragraph 500 of the building code, superseded by the state building code as provided in § 19-395(e) of the General Statutes. 
 
Sec. 13-901. - Fire District No. 1. 
The portion of the city included within the following boundaries shall be known as Fire District No. 1, namely: beginning at the intersection of the center of Sea Street, extended easterly with the Harbor Line; thence through the center of Sea Street to the center of Hallock Avenue, through the center of Hallock Avenue to the center of Lamberton Street, through the center of Lamberton Street to the center of Cedar Street, through center of Cedar Street to the center of Rosette Street; thence northerly along the Light Industry Zone boundary, which boundary, and all other Zone boundaries herein referred to, is shown on a map entitled "City of New Haven Zoning Maps" (consisting of a series of section maps, numbered 1 to 20) and dated March 1, 1971, which accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance where referred to and which is on file in the Office of the City Clerk, and may be viewed in that office during normal working hours, to the center of the intersection of Spring Street and Union Avenue; thence through the center of Union Avenue to the center of Columbus Avenue; thence through the center of Columbus Avenue to the center of Church Street South; thence through the center of Church Street South to the center of Lafayette Street; thence through the center of Lafayette Street to the intersection of Washington Avenue; thence through the center of Washington Avenue to the intersection of Daggett Street; thence through the center of Daggett Street to the center of Congress Avenue; thence easterly through the center of Congress Avenue to the center of Vernon Street; thence through the center of Vernon Street to the center of Sylvan Avenue; thence westerly through the center of Sylvan Avenue to the center of Ward Street; thence through the center of Ward Street to the center of Legion Avenue; thence through the center of Legion Avenue to the center of the intersection of Howe Street and Howard Avenue; thence through the center of Howe Street to the center of George Street; thence through the center of George Street to the center of Dwight Street; thence northerly through the center of Dwight Street through the center of Chapel Street to the BA zone boundary; thence westerly along the BA zone boundary to the intersection with the BB zone boundary; thence westerly along the BB zone boundary to the intersection with the BA zone boundary; thence westerly along the BA zone boundary to Pendleton Street, northerly along Pendleton Street to Whalley Avenue, and easterly along the BA zone boundary to the intersection with the BB zone boundary; thence easterly and northerly along the BB zone boundary to the intersection with the BA zone boundary; thence northerly along the BA zone boundary to the center of the intersection of Shelton Avenue and Munson Street; thence northerly through the center of Shelton Avenue to the center of Division Street; thence easterly through the center of Division Street to the center of Mansfield Street; thence southerly through the center of Mansfield Street to the center of Munson Street; thence westerly through the center of Munson Street to the center of Winchester Avenue; thence southerly through the center of Winchester Avenue to the center of Webster Street; thence westerly through the center of Webster Street to the center of Ashmun Street; thence northerly through the center of Ashmun Street to the center of Munson Street; thence westerly through the center of Munson Street to the intersection of the BA zone boundary; thence southerly along the BA zone boundary to the center of Tower Parkway; thence through the center of Tower Parkway to the center of York Street; thence through the center of York Street to the center of Ashmun Street; thence through the center of Ashmun Street to the center of Lock Street; thence through the center of Lock Street to the center of Canal Street; thence northerly through the center of Canal Street to the center of Sachem Street; thence through the center of Sachem Street to the center of Whitney Avenue; thence through the center of Whitney Avenue to the center of Trumbull Street; thence through the center of Trumbull Street to the intersection of the BA zone boundary; thence northerly along the BA zone boundary to the IL zone boundary; thence northerly and easterly along the IL zone boundary to the intersection of James Street and State Street; thence through the center of James Street to the center of Market Street; thence through the center of Market Street to the center of Haven Street; thence southerly through the center of Haven Street to a point 100 feet north of the northerly street line of Grand Avenue; thence easterly by a straight line to the intersection of James Street and the BA zone boundary; thence easterly along the BA zone boundary to Front Street, southerly along Front Street to the center of Exchange Street, westerly along Exchange Street to the intersection of the RM 1 and BA zone boundary, westerly along the BA zone boundary to the center of Exchange Street; thence westerly through the center of Exchange Street to the intersection with Ferry Street and the BA zone boundary; thence westerly along the BA zone boundary to the center of James Street; thence westerly by a straight line to a point in the center of Haven Street 85 feet south of the southerly street line of Grand Avenue; thence southerly through the center of Haven Street to the center of Exchange Street; thence easterly through the center of Exchange Street to the center of James Street; thence southerly through the center of James Street to the center of Chapel Street; thence through the center of Chapel Street to the center of Ferry Street; thence southerly through the center of Ferry Street to the U.S. Harbor Line; thence easterly along a straight line to the intersection of the BC and IH zone boundaries and the U.S. Harbor Line on the eastern bank of the Quinnipiac River; thence easterly along the IH zone boundary to the center of Lenox Street; thence through the center of Lenox Street to the center of Quinnipiac Avenue; thence through the center of Quinnipiac Avenue to the center of Townsend Avenue; thence northerly through the center of Townsend Avenue to the center of Woodward Avenue; thence through the center of Woodward Avenue to a point approximately 750 feet south of the intersection of Woodward Avenue and Park Lane, thence by a straight line 90° westward to the westerly boundary of the East Shore Parkway right of way; thence in a northerly direction along said westerly boundary of the East Shore Parkway right of way to a concrete monument set in said westerly boundary of the East Shore Parkway right of way at coordinates North 6549.86 and East 1127.75 on the U.S. Harbor Coordinate System for New Haven Harbor; thence by a straight line bearing north 82 degrees, 08 minutes, 000 seconds west to the U.S. Harbor Line; thence by a straight line to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. of 2-5-73)  
Sec. 13-902. - Fire District No. 2. 
Reserved  
Sec. 13-903. - Outside fire limits. 
Any portion of the city not included within the boundaries set forth in section 13-901 shall be designated Outside Fire Limits. 
(Ord. of 2-5-73)  
Sec. 13-904. - Appeals. 
(1)  Any owner of property, which property is located within the boundaries described in section 13-901 and 13-902 of this Code, or the authorized agent of such owner, who is aggrieved by the inclusion of said property in said boundaries may appeal to the fire prevention code appeals board and said board may exempt said property from inclusion in said boundary, provided that upon the granting of any such exemption, said board may attach any conditions or safeguards for any proposed development or redevelopment of said property as it deems necessary or desirable. 
(2)  In determining whether an exemption should be granted under this section, said board shall base its decision upon specific findings of fact as to the following factors: 
(a)  The extent to which any proposed development or redevelopment of said property promotes the public interest and the general welfare of the citizens of New Haven; 
(b)  The nature of the surrounding area and the extent to which any proposed development or redevelopment might create a fire threat to such surrounding area should the exemption be granted; 
(c)  The extent to which the petitioner would suffer exceptional difficulty or undue hardship should the exception not be granted; 
Provided, however, said board shall not grant any exemption unless alternative methods of satisfying the objectives of this article exist and will be utilized in any proposed development or redevelopment of said property. 
(3)  Any appeal under this section shall be submitted to the fire prevention code appeals board by written petition of the party claiming to be aggrieved, which petition shall be filed with the fire marshal and shall request a hearing and set forth a brief statement of the grounds for the appeal. On receipt of such petition, the fire marshal shall notify said board to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner not less than two (2) days written notice thereof. The hearing shall be commenced not later than thirty (30) days after the day on which the petition was filed. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why an exemption should be granted. 
(4)  The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decision of the board, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the fire marshal and shall be open to reasonable public inspection. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the general statutes. 
(Ord. of 2-5-73)  
Chapter 14 - FOOD-SERVICE AND RESTAURANT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Aug. 1, 1977, expressly amended the Code by revising Ch. 14 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-5, 14-11—14-17, had pertained to the same subject matter and had been derived from Ord. of April 7, 1964, § 1—11. 
Ch. 14 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Certain provisions of Public Health Code adopted by reference. 
The regulations adopted and promulgated by the public health council of the State of Connecticut relative to the inspections of restaurants and food service establishments: (a) Sanitation of Places Dispensing Foods and Beverages (Section 19-13-B42); (b) Catering Food Service (Section 19-13-B49); (c) Itinerant Food Vending (Section 19-13-B48); (d) Sanitation of Food Stuffs (Section 19-13-B40); and (e) Chapter 341, State of Connecticut, Health Statutes, Consumer Protection, (Section 19-208), analysis of food, and the regulations adopted and promulgated by the public health council of the State of Connecticut relative to the inspection of grocery stores, bakeries, and meat, fish and vegetable markets, forming part of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, by reference, are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Sec. 14-1.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Food-service or restaurant establishment means: 
(1)  Any premises or areas where food or beverages, or both, are prepared and sold or otherwise distributed to the public for consumption on, about or off such premises; 
(2)  Any premises or areas where groceries, bakery products, confectioneries, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits and dairy products are sold, offered for sale or kept for sale; 
(3)  Any premises where food or beverages, or both, are prepared in bulk or in individual portions for service in bulk or in individual portions at another location; 
(4)  A truck, automobile, pushcart or other vehicle from which food or beverages are dispensed, which vehicle has no fixed location and has not permanent connection to water supply and sewage disposal systems; 
(5)  Any premises having facilities for the preparation, service or delivery of food and beverages, though used only intermittently or temporarily for the same; and 
(6)  Any premises used to conduct a catering food service, said service being one which involves the sale or distribution of food or drink prepared in bulk at one geographical location for service in individual portions at another or which involves preparation and service of food on public or private premises not under the ownership or control of the operator of such service. 
But does not mean or include: 
(1)  Premises which meet the definition set forth in subsections (1) through (5) above only because beers, wines and spirits are sold in unopened cans or bottles in such establishments or because food or beverages are dispensed in such premises solely in coin-operated vending machines; or 
(2)  Premises primarily devoted to the sale of newspapers, magazines or drugs, whether ethical or proprietary, and sundries where food and confectioneries prepared and packaged elsewhere are sold. 
(b)  Constructed or construction shall include the construction, expansion, remodeling or renovation of any premises in whole or in part for use as a food-service or restaurant establishment. 
(c)  Director shall mean the director of public health appointed pursuant to section 127 of the Charter of the City of New Haven and section 19-75 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or his designated representative; provided, that the powers and duties of the director under section 14-16 shall be nondelegable. 
(d)  Premises shall mean a building, or any space within a building, or area adjacent to a building or portion of a building, used as a food-service or restaurant establishment. 
(e)  Shared kitchen means: 
(1)  Any licensed retail or wholesale food establishment, that leases, rents, or otherwise makes their commercial kitchen space available for utilization by individuals or business entities for food preparation, temporary extra production capacity, menu planning, training, taste testing, product development, food packaging, food storage or any other food-related purpose that is secondary or incidental to the establishment's primary business activity of retail or wholesale food establishment. 
(2)  Any establishment used as a place of business for the exclusive or primary purpose of utilizing, leasing, or renting its commercial kitchen space to individuals, or business entities, for food preparation, temporary extra production capacity, menu planning, training, taste testing, product development, food packaging, food storage or any other food-related purpose; and does not hold a valid retail food establishment license. 
(f)  Shared kitchen user means any person or business entity who utilizes, leases, or rents kitchen space at any licensed shared kitchen that: 
(1)  Does not add any additional equipment to the shared kitchen that requires professional installation or plumbing and/or electrical modifications; 
(2)  Does not make any structural changes to the building; 
(3)  Does not otherwise make any changes to the existing shared kitchen that would require an additional inspection; 
(4)  Does not operate beyond the approved hours of operation for the existing shared kitchen. 
(g)  Micro-food business means: 
(1)  A small business entity involved in the production of food for wholesale and/or retail sales that grosses less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) in sales annually that: 
a.  Is a shared kitchen user. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77; Ord. of 1-8-79, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-89; Ord. of 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1859 , 4-15-19)  
Sec. 14-2. - Restaurants and food-service establishments; grocery stores, bakeries, meat, fish and vegetable markets; plans of construction; approval. 
When any food-service or restaurant establishment is hereafter constructed, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, showing layout arrangements, and construction materials of all areas, and the location, size and type of fixed equipment and facilities shall be submitted to the director for approval before such work is begun. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Sec. 14-3. - Director of health; right of entry. 
The director shall be permitted to enter, at any reasonable time, any food-service or restaurant establishment within the City of New Haven for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Sec. 14-4. - Violations; penalty. 
A licensed shared kitchen shall ensure that any person engaged in the business of a shared kitchen user on the licensed premises is in compliance with all equipment, food, and fire safety requirements set forth in the Municipal Code of New Haven and any rules promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77; Ord. No. 1859 , 4-15-19)  
Sec. 14-5. - Temporary food service operations. 
[The provisions of this section shall apply to temporary food service operations.] 
(1)  Definitions. 
(a)  Temporary food service operation means any food service establishment as defined by section 14-1.1(a) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, as amended, which is intended to or does continue in operation for a period not to exceed two (2) successive weeks at one (1) or more locations in connection with a carnival, circus, public exhibition, festival, celebration or similar transitory event. 
(b)  Director means the director of the department of public health for the City of New Haven appointed pursuant to section 127 of the Charter of the City of New Haven, Connecticut and section 19a-200 of the Connecticut General Statutes or his designee(s). 
(c)  Person means one (1) or more individuals, any type of partnership, joint venture, corporation, association and all other entities such as a limited liability company organized under the laws of the State of Connecticut. 
(2)  License required; fee. No person shall conduct a temporary food service operation without a license issued by the director. The application for this license shall be in form and substance as required by the director. A license is required for each event. A license fee schedule is set out in section 17-20 of this Code. 
(3)  Director's right of entry and/or inspection. 
(a)  The director may enter upon and/or inspect any temporary food service operation to determine compliance with the rules and regulation of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, this section 14-5 et. seq. or other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the department of health for the City of New Haven and/or to insure the health and safety of the public. If the director finds that such operation is being conducted in violation of any of the aforementioned requirements or in a manner that is adverse to public health and safety, then he shall issue an order that the person conducting such operation take such corrective action as the director may prescribe and within the time period specified in this order. If this order is not complied with, then the director shall issue a written order requiring the cessation of such temporary food service operation forthwith. In addition, the director may deny a subsequent license for such a temporary food service operation. 
(4)  Penalty for violation. Any person who shall operate a [temporary] food service without having applied for and received a license, or whose license has been suspended, as provided in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each offense. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(5)  Appeal from director's order. Any person aggrieved by an order of the director issued pursuant to this section 14-5 et. seq. may appeal such order to the commissioner of health for the State of Connecticut pursuant to section 19-103 of the Connecticut General Statutes as amended, or as hereafter amended. No such appeal shall stay the order appealed from, unless the commissioner of health for good cause shown and on notice to the director issues an order granting such a stay. 
(Ord. of 10-7-98; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 14-6. - Notification of non-alcoholic (juice bar) events by café owners. 
(a)  As used in this section, "juice bar or similar facility" means a café, or an area within a café, in which nonalcoholic beverages are served to minors, in accordance with CGS Section 30-22c. 
(b)  The holder of a café permit shall notify, in writing, or by facsimile, the chief of the New Haven Police Department in advance of specific dates and hours of any scheduled event at which the premises or a portion thereof will be used as a juice bar, or similar facility. Such notice shall be received not later than forty-eight hours prior to the scheduled event. 
(c)  The chief of the New Haven Police Department shall designate a law enforcement officer to attend any such scheduled event at the cost of such permit holder. The cost of said police personnel shall be paid by the café permit holder by sixty (60) days of invoice. 
(d)  Failure of the holder of the café permit to adhere to all sections under this Section shall result in punishment by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, the city reserves the right to commence all appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to, collecting all debts owed to the city. 
(e)  The holder of the café permit may appeal the fines imposed under this section to the board of police commissioners, and shall file his/her a notice of appeal with the office of the chief administrative officer ("CAO"). 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall exempt the holder of a café permit from compliance with any other provision(s) in this code. The presence of alcoholic liquor, or the sale or dispensing to, or consumption of, alcoholic liquor by a minor at a juice bar or similar facility is prohibited, as set forth by the general statutes. 
(g)  The CAO shall have the right to develop regulations related to this section. The regulations may be amended from time to time, subject to the approval from the board of aldermen, and shall be made available to the public by the police department and/or the office of the CAO. 
(h)  If any clause of this section is or becomes illegal, invalid or unenforceable because of present or future laws or any rule or regulations or by any governmental body, or entity, including any court of law, the remaining part of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby and shall be in full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. 1633, 8-2-10 )  
Secs. 14-7—14-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
 
Sec. 14-11. - Required; display. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food-service or restaurant establishment, in the City of New Haven, who does not possess a valid license issued to him by the director. Such a license and the rating received after periodic inspection must be displayed in a conspicuous place where customers may easily read it. No license issued under this chapter may be transferred from one person to another person, business or establishment. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Sec. 14-12. - Fees; expiration. 
(a)  A schedule of license fees for a license issued to a food-service or restaurant establishment is set out in section 17-20 of this Code. 
(b)  If more than one such establishment is operated by the same owner, a separate license shall be required for each such establishment licensed. Licenses so issued under this section shall expire on April thirtieth of each year and may be renewed upon payment of the annual fee specified section 17-20 of this Code. Any establishment that does not renew a license upon written notification shall be assessed a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Religious organizations which prepare and distribute food solely for delivery to and/or service at soup kitchens and/or homeless shelters located in New Haven for conveyance free of charge to needy individuals shall be exempt from annual license fees. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77; Ord. of 1-8-79, § 2; Ord. of 5-28-80, § 5; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 3; Ord. of 8-4-86; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 1a; Ord. of 12-4-89; Ord. of 8-5-96, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 14-13. - Application; filing, fees. 
At the time of a shared kitchen user application, the shared kitchen identified in such application and the shared kitchen user must comply with the regulations adopted and promulgated by the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut relative to the inspections of food service establishments, and the Municipal Code of New Haven and any rules promulgated thereunder. 
If at the time of a shared kitchen user application: 
(1)  The shared kitchen identified in such application has been cleared by the zoning and building departments, the department's signature shall not be required and the shared kitchen's proof of license shall suffice within the meaning of this section 14-13 as a pre-condition for obtaining a license. 
(2)  Within the twelve-month period prior to the application date, the shared kitchen identified in such application passed its most recent inspection by the fire marshal, the inspection within the meaning of this section 14-13 shall not be required as a condition for obtaining a license. The date and certified proof of inspection shall be provided by the identified shared kitchen. 
(3)  Within the six-month period prior to the application date, the shared kitchen identified in such application passed its most recent inspection by the water pollution control authority such that the premises and equipment and food safety operations comply with the requirements of the Municipal Code of New Haven and any rules promulgated thereunder, the inspection within the meaning of this section 14-13 shall not be required as a condition for obtaining a license. The date and certified proof of inspection shall be provided by the identified shared kitchen. 
The shared kitchen user application shall become operative ninety (90) days following its effective date to allow affected city departments and the water pollution control authority to establish and streamline an official implementation process. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77; Ord. of 5-28-80, § 6; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 3; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 1b; Ord. of 8-5-96, § 2; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 1859 , 4-15-19)  
Sec. 14-14. - Premises and equipment; investigation prerequisite to issuance of licenses. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the director shall inspect the premises and equipment of the applicant, and if the same are found to be in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, and other applicable statutes, ordinances, or rules and regulations of the New Haven Board of Health, he shall issue the applicant a valid license. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Sec. 14-15. - Periodic inspection after issuance. 
The director shall periodically inspect the premises, equipment, and operation of all persons holding a valid food-service or restaurant license. If he finds that any licensee is operating in violation of the public health code of the State of Connecticut, or other applicable statutes, ordinances or rules and regulations, he shall issue an order to the licensee forthwith to take such measures as are necessary for full compliance with the said code. All licenses issued under the terms of the chapter may be suspended or removed by the director for a violation by the licensee, of any of the terms of said code or other applicable statutes, ordinances, or rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Sec. 14-16. - Hearing before director on suspension, revocation or nonissuance. 
If after notice of violation, a licensee shall fail to comply with any order issued pursuant to section 14-15, within a reasonable time as stated in such notice, the director shall issue an order suspending or revoking the license required by this chapter. Said order shall become final and nonappealable ten (10) days after receipt by the licensee thereof unless the licensee affected by such order within such ten (10) day period, files with the director a written request for a hearing before the director. Such hearing shall be commenced not later than ten (10) days from the filing of such written request, and the director shall after considering the evidence produced at such hearing, sustain, modify or reverse the order of suspension or revocation. Any applicant denied a license under the provisions of this chapter may likewise file within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice of such denial a written request for a hearing before the director, which hearing shall commence within ten (10) days after the receipt of such request by the director. In the absence of such a request for hearing, a notice of denial of application for a license under this chapter shall become final ten (10) days after receipt thereof by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Sec. 14-17. - Appeal from nonissuance, suspension or revocation. 
Any person or persons aggrieved by an order of the director issued after a hearing, as provided in section 14-16, which order denies, revokes or suspends any license issued or required under this chapter, may appeal to the commissioner of health of the State of Connecticut from such order, pursuant to section 19-103 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, or as hereafter amended. No such appeal shall stay the decision appealed from, unless the commissioner of health, for good cause shown and on notice of the director, issues an order granting such a stay. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77)  
Secs. 14-18—14-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FOOD POLICY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Established. 
The New Haven Food Policy Council is established and composed of eleven (11) members, ten (10) appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of alderman, and one (1) aldermanic representative elected by the board of alderman. At its initial formation, three (3) members shall serve for a one-year term, four (4) shall serve for a two-year term, and four (4) members shall serve for a three-year term. Subsequent council members, in addition to the aldermanic representative, will be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of alderman for a three-year term that may be renewed. The council may recommend prospective appointees to the mayor and board of alderman. The ten (10) members of the council appointed by the mayor shall include: one (1) member of the department or organization administering the council; six (6) members of the community personally engaged in the production and distribution of food, or in the effects of food on the local economy and health of city residents. Members may be chosen from the following fields: hunger relief, nutrition, businesses in the food sector, farming, and institutional food management; three (3) of the members of the council shall be selected from the public at large. Additionally, for the council's initial formation, two (2) temporary members will also be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of alderman for a one-time, three-year term, to participate in the establishment of council goals and objectives. The two (2) temporary members of the council shall include: one (1) member of the community personally engaged in food production, distribution, or in the effects of food on the local economy and health of city residents and one (1) member selected from the public at large. Three (3) years after its initial formation and every three years thereafter, the board of aldermen will evaluate the council on the basis of previous annual reports. As long as the council meets its goals or makes reasonable progress toward them, the council will be reauthorized for another three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 1384, 6-6-05)  
Chapter 15 - HARBOR AND WHARVES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 15 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Charter reference— Authority to construct, maintain wharves, docks, § 46. 
Cross reference— Construction requirements for wharf structures, building code Pars. 608.9—608.91. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Authority of director of public works over wharves, appurtenances. 
The director of public works shall have charge and control of the wharf property belonging to the city, including all the wharf piers, bulkheads, and structures thereon, and all the slips, basins, docks, water fronts, land under water, and structures thereon, and the appurtenances, easements, uses, reversions and rights belonging thereto, which are now possessed or owned by the city, or to which the city is or may become entitled, and shall have exclusive charge and control of the repairing, building, rebuilding, maintaining, altering, strengthening, leasing and protecting of said property, and every part thereof, and of all the cleaning, dredging and deepening necessary, in or about the same. 
(Code 1928, § 796)  
Sec. 15-2. - Dockmaster appointed by director of public works; duties. 
The director of public works shall have power to appoint a dockmaster, who shall perform such services as may be prescribed by the city ordinances or by said director. 
(Code 1928, § 796)  
Sec. 15-3. - Assignment of berths by dockmaster. 
The dockmaster shall promptly designate and assign in the order in which application is made, suitable and convenient berths as far as practicable, for the use of such vessels and watercraft as may require the same for the reception or discharge of passengers, merchandise, or other property therefrom, and for the necessary repair or safety of any vessel or watercraft. 
(Code 1928, § 808)  
Sec. 15-4. - Handling of wharfage tickets by dockmaster; transmittal, reports to public works director. 
It shall be the duty of the dockmaster, in the presence of the captain or person in charge of each vessel, to punch in triplicate the wharfage tickets, for wharfage due to the city from all vessels and watercraft that may be moored within the limits of his district, and to transmit each day to the director of public works, unless otherwise ordered by said director, ticket number two, giving the date, name, home port, and the description of the vessel, the name and address of the owner, agent or consignee thereof, and the wharf, pier, or bulkhead at which such vessel or watercraft is located, and shall submit therewith a statement showing the amount of accrued wharfage, cash and credit. Ticket number one shall be retained by the dockmaster; number three shall be delivered to said owner, agent, consignee or representative. 
(Code 1928, § 809)  
Sec. 15-5. - Returns by dockmaster to treasurer. 
The dockmaster shall make return to the treasurer, at such an hour as may be designated by the director of public works, on Tuesday of each week, or as much oftener as may be required by the board of finance, of all wharfage or cranage collected by him during the previous week, and shall render to the director of public works a statement, as often as once a month, and as much oftener as may be required by said director, of all wharfage and cranage due to the city, which has accrued during the period since the last report, specifying the amount accrued at each particular wharf, pier, or bulkhead. 
(Code 1928, § 810)  
Sec. 15-6. - Acceptance of gratuities by dockmaster. 
The dockmaster is expressly prohibited, under the penalty of immediate dismissal from his position, from receiving or demanding, directly or indirectly, any fee, gratuity, compensation or article of value of any nature or kind, for the assignment of a berth to a vessel at any pier, slip or wharf property whatsoever, or for the performance of or omission to perform any of the duties required of or appertaining to the position of dockmaster. 
(Code 1928, § 811)  
Sec. 15-7. - Notice by dockmaster that unloading cargo will endanger harbor facilities. 
No person shall discharge any cargo on said wharf, or any pier, bulkhead, or wharf structure belonging to said city after notice signed and served by the dockmaster upon the owners, consignees, master, or other officer or stevedore of such vessel stating that such pier, bulkhead or structure will be endangered by the placing of additional cargo thereon, under a penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be recovered from the owner, master, consignee, stevedore or other officer in charge of any such vessel, severally and respectively. 
(Code 1928, § 797)  
Sec. 15-8. - Permit required for deposit of waste, refuse on harbor facilities. 
No person shall deliver, receive or place any manure, ashes, cellar dirt, garbage, offal, dead animals, or refuse of any kind on said wharf or any pier, bulkhead, wharf structure, or reclaimed land belonging to said city, without first obtaining a special permit from the department of public works, to be applied for in writing, under a penalty of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to be recovered from the owner, agent, or consignee of such vessel or of the articles specified above for each offense, and a further penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day for each and every day after placing the same on said wharf, pier, bulkhead, wharf structure or reclaimed land until the same is removed, to be recovered from such persons severally and respectively. It shall be the duty of the dockmaster to enforce this section and report any violations thereof. 
(Code 1928, § 798)  
Sec. 15-9. - Removal of goods placed on facilities; notice to remove by public works director. 
Any person that shall land or place any goods, merchandise or material of any kind on said wharf, or any pier, bulkhead or other wharf structure belonging to said city, shall remove the same therefrom without unnecessary delay, and within twenty-four (24) hours after the director of public works or some person by his authority shall have served upon the owner, shipper, or consignee of such cargo a written notice to remove the same, under a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day for each and every day during which any part of said goods, merchandise or material shall remain upon such pier, bulkhead or structure, after the expiration of said twenty-four (24) hours, to be recovered from such owners, shipper, or consignee, severally and respectively. 
(Code 1928, § 799)  
Sec. 15-10. - Duty of users of wharves, facilities to remove goods on order of director. 
Any person using said wharf, or any pier, dock or wharf structure of said city, does so with the understanding and under the agreement and condition that the dockmaster will prevent any accumulation of material upon the piers, wharves or bulkheads; and whenever any pier, wharf, or bulkhead shall be encumbered or obstructed in its free use by any vessel, merchandise or material, in transit or otherwise, or by any structure, encumbrance or obstruction, not authorized or permitted by this chapter, the director of public works is authorized to require the owner, agent, consignee or person occupying or in charge of such to remove the same without delay. Upon receiving such order, the owner, agent, consignee or person in charge of the vessel, merchandise, material, structure, encumbrance or obstruction, as the case may be, in reference to which said order or direction was given, shall comply with the same without delay, and in default thereof, the director of public works may employ such assistance as may be necessary to carry into effect his order or decision by the removal of such vessel, merchandise, material, structure, encumbrance or obstruction in respect to which the order was given. All expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal, and for storage of merchandise or materials thus removed, shall be paid by the owner, agent, consignee or person in charge, and the amount thereof shall be a lien upon the same in favor of the city. 
(Code 1928, § 812)  
Sec. 15-11. - Authority of director to remove, impound goods left on facilities. 
Any person using said wharf or any pier, bulkhead or other wharf structure belonging to said city, does so with the understanding and under the agreement and condition that all goods, merchandise and materials of every kind encumbering said wharf, or any pier, bulkhead, or other wharf structure, after the time designated for the removal thereof shall have expired, shall be liable to be removed by the authority of the director of public works to any warehouse or yard, at the sole risk and expense of the owner of any such goods, merchandise or materials, and all expense incurred for such removal and storage, or otherwise, shall be and become a lien thereon, and such goods, merchandise or materials will not be delivered to the owner until the expense of such removal and storage has been paid. 
(Code 1928, § 800)  
Sec. 15-12. - Permit to unload brick, stone, sand, similar materials required. 
No brick, stone, sand or gravel or similar material shall be unloaded on any wharf property unless a permit therefor shall be issued by the director of public works. 
(Code 1928, § 801)  
Sec. 15-13. - Precautions required in unloading sand. 
No person shall discharge from any vessel any sand or similar material at said wharf or any pier, bulkhead or other wharf structure belonging to said city unless canvas or similar material shall be extended from the vessel's side to the bulkhead or wharf structure at which such vessel is being unladen, to prevent the falling of sand into the water; and if the surface of any such wharf structure is not sufficiently tight to prevent the sand or other material dumped thereon from going into the water, then no sand or similar material shall be discharged thereon from any vessel, unless canvas or similar material be first laid thereon to receive the sand or similar material, under a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense, to be recovered from the owner, consignee, master or stevedore of any such vessel, severally and respectively. 
(Code 1928, § 802)  
Sec. 15-14. - Goods in bulk to be immediately removed or kept from bulkhead edge. 
Any person that shall discharge any lumber, brick or other material in bulk on said wharf, or any pier, bulkhead or other wharf structure not shedded, belonging to said city, shall at once remove the same, or if not so removed, shall place it at least twenty (20) feet from the bulkhead edge, pending removal, under a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) a day for each and every day such lumber, brick or other material shall remain on the bulkhead, to be recovered from the owner or consignee of such lumber, brick or other material, or from the person placing or causing the same to be placed on such bulkhead, severally and respectively. 
(Code 1928, § 804)  
Sec. 15-15. - Flammable goods, merchandise to be covered. 
(a)  Any person that shall load, discharge or keep on said wharf, or any pier, or bulkhead belonging to said city, or that shall allow to remain on any lighter, barge or other craft moored to the wharves, piers or bulkheads of the city, any cotton, turpentine, rosin, hay, straw, or other inflammable merchandise, shall cover the same with tarpaulins or other more permanent or substantial material; and a penalty of not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day or fraction of a day that such cotton, turpentine, rosin, hay, straw or other inflammable merchandise shall be permitted to remain uncovered as provided in this section, shall be recovered from the owner of such material, lessee or occupant of any pier, wharf, or bulkhead on which such inflammable merchandise may be left thus exposed in contravention of the terms of this section or from the owner of such material, lessee or occupant of any pier, wharf or bulkhead, to which shall be moored any lighter, barge or other craft upon which inflammable merchandise shall be left uncovered. 
(b)  Any person that shall load, discharge or keep on said wharf, or any pier, or bulkhead belonging to said city, or that shall allow to remain on any lighter, barge or other craft moored to the wharves, piers or bulkheads of the city, any cotton, turpentine, rosin, hay, straw, or other inflammable merchandise, does so with the understanding and under the agreement and condition that the same is covered with tarpaulins, or other more permanent or substantial material, and that a penalty of not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day or fraction of a day that such cotton, turpentine, rosin, hay, straw or other inflammable merchandise shall be permitted to remain uncovered, as provided in this section, shall be recovered from the owner of such material, lessee or occupant of any pier, wharf or bulkhead, on which such cotton, turpentine, rosin, hay, straw or other inflammable merchandise may be left thus exposed in contravention of the terms of this section or from the owner of such material, lessee or occupant of any pier, wharf or bulkhead, to which shall be moored any lighter, barge, or other craft, upon which inflammable merchandise shall be left uncovered. 
(Code 1928, §§ 805, 806)  
Sec. 15-16. - Goods, merchandise on wharves at risk of owner. 
All goods or merchandise on the wharves shall be at the sole risk of the owner. 
(Code 1928, § 813)  
Sec. 15-17. - Time limit for vehicles parked on wharves. 
No person shall allow any truck, cart, wagon or vehicle of any description to be placed or left at any time on any public wharf, pier or bulkhead, for a period beyond twenty-four (24) hours, under a penalty of five dollars ($5.00), to be recovered from the owner of said truck, cart, wagon or vehicle. Any person using said wharf, or any marginal street, or any bulkhead, pier or reclaimed land under the charge and control of the director of public works, does so with the understanding and under the agreement and condition that any truck, cart, wagon, or vehicle of any description placed or left thereon in violation of this section shall be removed by the dockmaster, to a place designated by the director, and a charge of not less than fifty cents ($0.50) per day for storage on same shall be and become a lien thereon, and such truck, cart, or wagon or vehicle of any description, will not be delivered to the owner until such fine and storage fee have been paid. 
(Code 1928, § 807)  
Sec. 15-18. - Disposal of garbage, waste near facilities prohibited. 
No person using said wharf or any pier, bulkhead or other wharf structure belonging to said city shall throw any ashes, refuse, offal, fruit, vegetables, or any other substance into the water surrounding or adjacent to such pier or bulkhead, under a penalty of not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for every such offense, to be recovered from the person actually throwing the same; or if any substance be thrown from any vessel, then such penalty shall be recovered from the owner, consignee or master of such vessel, severally and respectively. 
(Code 1928, § 803)  
Sec. 15-19. - Penalty. 
Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00), nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation, except where a different fine is otherwise specifically provided in any section thereof. Each day of violation of any said provisions shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1928, § 816)  
Secs. 15-20—15-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PORT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1322, §§ 1—16, adopted Jan. 13, 2003, pertained to the establlishment and operation of a port authority for the city. Such provisions did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as Art. II, §§ 15-31—15-46, was at the discretion of the editor. In the event of conflict between these provisions and those of Art. I, it is resumed that the most recent provisions will prevail. 
 
Sec. 15-31. - Created. 
In accordance with the provisions of Connecticut General Statues, section 7-329a to 7-329u, inclusive, the city hereby establishes the New Haven Port Authority. The purpose of the authority shall be to stimulate the shipment of freight and commerce through New Haven's port, to develop and promote the facilities within the port district and thereby to create jobs and increase the tax base of the city, to work with the city in maximizing the usefulness of available public funding by consolidating and coordinating efforts to assist the waterfront of the city and to cooperate with the state and federal agencies in connection with the maintenance, development, improvement and use of the facilities within the port district. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 1, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-32. - Definitions. 
In the interpretation of this article the following words and terms shall be taken to include the following meanings when the context shall require or permit: 
Authority shall mean the body politic and corporate created by this article and known as the New Haven Port Authority. 
Board shall mean the Board of Commissioners of the New Haven Port Authority, appointed by the mayor in accordance with this article. 
City shall mean the City of New Haven, acting through its economic development administrator or his/her designee. 
Commissioner shall mean any single member of the board of commissioners. 
Connecticut General Statutes shall mean the revision of 1958, as amended. 
District shall mean the port district more particularly described in schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof. 
Editor's note— Schedule A referenced above is not set out herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Mayor shall mean Mayor of the City of New Haven. 
Port authority legislation shall mean section 7-329a through section 7-329u of the Connecticut General Statues. 
Port facilities shall mean wharves, docks, piers, air or bus terminals, railroad tracks or warehouses, elevators, freight-handling machinery and such equipment as is used in the handling of freight, passengers and vessels, vehicles, and the establishment and operation of a port and any other works, vessels, vehicles, wharves, properties, buildings, structures or other facilities necessary or desirable for commerce and industry or waterfront development within the district or in connection with the development and operation of the same, and may include manufacturing and industrial facilities, recreation and entertainment facilities, residential facilities or other commercial facilities necessary for commerce and industry or waterfront development and located within the district. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 2, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-33. - Board of commissioners. 
The board shall consist of seven (7) commissioners, at least one (1) shall have training in civil engineering and/or training or experience in urban planning, at least one (1) shall have training or experience in finance and accounting, and at least one (1) shall have training or experience in environmental science or advocacy. The commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. One (1) commissioner shall be a member of the board of aldermen, appointed by the mayor after consultation with the president, majority leader, and minority leader of the board of aldermen. The mayor shall give due consideration to the neighborhood in which the port authority is located in appointing or approving commissioners to the board. The commissioners' responsibilities, including, but not limited to, grounds for removal from office, shall be established by the authority through bylaws passed by the commissioners of the board. Each commissioner shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses. Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years, except that of those first appointed, two (2) shall be appointed for a period of one (1) year and two (2) shall be appointed for a period of two (2) years. Any commissioner shall be eligible for reappointment by the mayor at the expiration of the commissioner's term. Each commissioner shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and has qualified. Any vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the vacating commissioner's term. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, in the event that the mayor shall appoint an official of the city to the board, and such appointment shall result from such official's position at the city, then the mayor may terminate such appointment if such official's position changes or ends, provided that concurrent with such termination, the mayor shall appoint a successor to serve the remainder of such official's term. 
The mayor may appoint up to seven (7) non-voting members to the board for the purpose of providing advice from the perspective of landowners and commercial port operators. Such non-voting members shall be representatives of port area landowners and/or commercial port operators in the port area. The non-voting members shall serve terms of the same duration and staggering as voting members. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 3, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-34. - Board officers and voting procedures. 
The board shall elect one of their number chairman, one as vice-chairman, one as secretary and one as treasurer. The board shall meet upon the call of the chairman and a majority of its members shall constitute a quorum. All meetings shall provide an opportunity for public comment. At its first meeting, the board shall adopt by-laws for the conduct of its business and shall create such committees or subcommittees as it deems necessary or expedient. The chairman of the board shall appoint committee chairmen from its ranks. The authority may employ such officers, agents, technical consultants, legal counsel or other employees as it requires from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 4, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-35. - Power and duties. 
The powers and duties of the authority shall include (without limitation) those set forth in section 7-329c of the port authority legislation, as the same may be modified from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 5, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-36. - Regulations by the authority. 
The authority may make and enforce any reasonable rules and regulations, which it may determine to be necessary for the proper development, maintenance and use of the port facilities investigations. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 6, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-37. - Investigations. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 7-329e of the port authority legislation the authority may make any investigation which it may deem necessary to enable it to effectively carry out its responsibilities. The authority may enter upon such real property within the district as it may consider necessary from time to time for the purpose of making surveys and examinations to accomplish any purpose authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 7, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-38. - Acquisition of property. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 7-329f of the port authority legislation, the authority may lease or acquire title to real or personal property and may, with the approval of the board of aldermen, condemn such real property located within the district as it deems necessary for the development of port facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 8, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-39. - Recreational trail. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 7-329b(B) of the port authority legislation, the port authority shall determine the location of the segment of the proposed trail connecting Forbes Avenue with East Shore Park. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 9, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-40. - By-laws, rules and regulations. 
The authority shall have the power to adopt, alter or repeal its own by-laws and/or, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and may provide for the appointment of such committees, and the functions thereof, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 10, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-41. - Bonds. 
The authority, with the approval of the board of aldermen, shall have the power to issue bonds in accordance with the provisions of section 7-329g of the port authority legislation, which may be secured in accordance with the provisions of section 7-329h of the port authority legislation. No such bonds or other such indebtedness created by the authority shall constitute an indebtedness of the city or any political subdivision thereof, or, shall involve or be secured with the faith, credit or taxing authority of the city or any political subdivision thereof, except to the extent that the city shall agree to guarantee the same in accordance with the provisions of section 7-329r of port authority legislation. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 11, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-42. - Rates, rents, fees and charges. 
The authority shall be authorized to fix, revise, charge and collct rates, rents, fees and charges in accordance with the provisions of section 7-329i of the port authority legislation. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 12, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-43. - City aid. 
The city may provide such aid and assistance to the authority (financial or otherwise) as it shall consider necessary or desirable from time to time to the extent of the powers set forth in the port authority legislation including in particular (but without limitation) by way of those powers set forth in section 7-329n through section 7-329q of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 13, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-44. - Indemnification and insurance. 
The city shall indemnify and hold harmless the members for any liability that may result from a member's actions while in the performance of his or her duties as a member. The board of commissioners shall maintain an errors and omissions policy in an amount and subject to the terms it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 14, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-45. - Payment in lieu of taxes. 
The port authority will assess a payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT) payable to the city on profit-making lessees of all otherwise taxable property owned by the port authority. In addition, the port authority shall pay a PILOT to the city, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes, in such an amount to be established should the port authority become profitable. However, in no case shall any payment be made unless the port authority has sufficient funds to make such payment and to operate the authority and maintain a reasonable reserve for necessary operating and/or capital expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 15, 1-13-03)  
Sec. 15-46. - Living wage. 
The port authority shall abide by the provision for a living wage set forth in this when contracting for professional services. 
(Ord. No. 1322, § 16, 1-13-03) 
Cross reference— Living wage provision, § 2-221.  
Chapter 16 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1404, adopted Jan. 3, 2006, amended and restated Arts. I, III—VI of former Ch. 16 in its entirety. Art. II of former Ch. 16 was reenacted a new chapter and is included as Ch. 30¾ of this replacement volume. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
Cross reference— Dust control and sandblasting, Ch. 31. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - State public health code adopted. 
The State of Connecticut's Public Health Code, Edition of 2000, promulgated by the Commissioner of Public Health pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 19a-36, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and made a part of the city's Code of Ordinances in every respect as though such provisions were set out in full herein. However, where any provision of the Code of Ordinances imposes a more restrictive requirement than said public health code, the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-1; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-2. - Water wells. 
(a)  No well shall be dug, driven or drilled within the city until information including the proposed location of the well, its type of construction, and the uses for which the water is to be put is registered with the department of health. 
(b)  When the construction of any registered well is completed, the owner shall file a final report as to its depth and size, pumping facilities and other pertinent information. This report shall be given to the department of public health within ten (10) days after the completion of the well's construction. 
(c)  No person shall use or permit the use of any water from a well registered under this regulation for any purpose other than that cited in the registration. 
(d)  Every person violating this section shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per offense. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Health Reg. of 7-21-36; Code of 1985, § 16-2; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-3. - Duty of owners, occupants to remove violations. 
Every owner, occupant or tenant of any premises in the city, and the agent of such person having charge of such premises, shall keep and maintain it and the street in front of its center free from any violation of this chapter. 
(Code of 1928, § 574; Code of 1985, § 16-5; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-4. - Water fluoridation. 
The state statutes and regulations contained in the State Public Health Code as amended from time to time shall be the governing authority for water fluoridation. 
(Ord. of 5-7-62, §§ 1—5; Code of 1985, § 16-6; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-5. - Environmental inspection of green space required. 
Environmental testing shall be performed on all green spaces slated for park and recreational space development, including but not limited to, playgrounds and community gardens. Such testing shall include thorough investigation of the historical uses of all former structures on the site, and analysis of potentially hazardous waste. 
(Ord. of 8-5-02; Code of 1985, § 16-8; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-6—16-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEST AND INSECT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Pesticide applications. 
State statutes and regulations issued by the State Department of Environmental Protection as amended from time to time shall be controlling authority for pesticide applications and pest control operations. 
(Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 16-32—16-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LEAD PAINT 
 
Sec. 16-61. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed herein: 
(a)  Department shall mean the New Haven Health Department. 
(b)  Director of public health shall mean the legally designated health authority of the city, or his/her designee. 
(c)  Dwelling shall mean every building or shelter used or intended for human habitation, including exterior surfaces and all common areas thereof, and the exterior of any other structure located within the same lot, even if not used for human habitation. 
(d)  Dwelling unit shall mean a room or group of rooms within a dwelling arranged for use as a single household by one (1) or more individuals living together who share living and sleeping facilities. 
(e)  Lead abatement plan shall mean a written plan that identifies the location of lead-based paint and describes how all lead-based painted surfaces will be abated and how the environment, health, and safety will be protected. The plan also identifies the location of soil containing lead and describes sampling protocol used and abatement options. 
(f)  Lead based paint shall mean: 
(1)  Any paint offered for sale for use on or in a residential dwelling which contains more than 0.06 percent lead by weight as measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry, graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrophotometry, or inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrophotometry, by a laboratory approved by the State of Connecticut Department of Public Health for lead analysis. 
(2)  Any dried film of paint containing an amount equal to or greater than 0.50 percent lead by dry weight as measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry, graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrophotometry, or inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrophotometry, by a laboratory approved by the State of Connecticut Department of Public Health for lead analysis, or a level equal to or greater than 1.0 milligrams lead per square centimeter of surface as measured on site by a X-ray fluorescence analyzer or other equipment deemed sufficiently accurate and reliable by the State of Connecticut Commissioner of Public Health. 
(g)  Lead poisoning shall mean a blood lead concentration equal to or greater than twenty (20) micrograms per deciliter of whole blood, or any other abnormal body burden of lead as defined by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(h)  Occupant shall mean any person over one (1) year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
(i)  Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
(j)  Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any dwelling unit with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
Any such person representing the owner shall be bound to comply with this article, and all rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he/she was the owner. 
(k)  Person shall mean and include any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other business concern. 
(l)  Premises shall mean a platted or unplatted lot or parcel of land, or part thereof, either occupied or unoccupied by any structure, including any building or structure on it. 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-1, App. A; Code of 1985, § 16-49; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1—3; Ord. of 5-20-98, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1434, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 16-62. - Prohibited use of lead paint. 
Lead-based paint, as defined in this article, shall not be used on any exterior surface or any wall, ceiling, floor, interior woodwork, nor on or around the interior or exterior surface of any door, window, fixture, stairs, railing or porch on any dwelling, or dwelling unit, or any building intended or used, in whole or part, for human habitation or occupancy. 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-2; Code of 1985, § 16-50; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-63. - Maintenance. 
Interior and exterior surfaces of walls, ceilings, floors, interior woodwork, doors, windows, fixtures, stairs, railings and porches of all structures shall be kept free of cracked, chipped, blistered, flaking, loose and peeling paint. 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-3; Code of 1985, § 16-51; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-64. - Hazardous conditions; declaration of emergency. 
Where the director of public health (hereinafter the "director") finds any of the following he shall issue an order to the owner of the premises or the occupant of any dwelling unit therein who possesses hazardous personal property to eliminate the hazard in accordance with methods prescribed in section 56-65: 
(1)  That the presence of lead paint upon or in any premises creates a health hazard to children. 
(2)  The presence of lead-based paint in the dwelling unit of a child with lead poisoning, as defined in section 16-61 in the dwelling unit of a child whose blood lead is twenty five (25) micrograms or more per one (1) deciliter of whole blood, or any other dwelling unit in the same building (including all staircases, hallways and porches); 
(3)  That the presence of cracked, chipped, blistered, flaking, loose or peeling paint constitutes a health hazard. 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-4; Code of 1985, § 16-52; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 4; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1434, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 16-65. - Removal of lead paint. 
(a)  Where the director determines that the presence of lead paint upon any interior or exterior premises creates a health hazard to children, he shall issue an order to the owner to eliminate the hazard. Lead paint shall be completely removed. from any surface which can be accessible to children. Cracked, chipped, blistered or peeling paint shall be completely removed. The lead paint ordered to be removed to the base surface shall be removed under such safety conditions as may be approved by the department or otherwise repaired as the department requires. In lieu of removal of lead paint, the accessible surface shall be covered with an approved durable material. Repainting a surface with a nonleaded paint without the complete removal of the existing lead paint shall not be deemed to be satisfactory compliance with this section. 
(b)  The methods used for the removal of lead paint shall not present a health hazard from fumes, dust or vapors by inhalation or absorption through the skin and mucous membranes, and shall be in accordance with federal, state and local rules and regulations, and safety standards and practices. The director has the authority to prescribe and determine such methods. Additional alternate safety methods authorized by state law shall be enforced. Tenants are to be informed of the increased danger to children that may occur during the removal of lead paint, and are to be advised to exclude the children from the site for the duration of the work, and until dust and debris have been cleaned completely from all surfaces. 
(c)  The owner of premises found to be in violation of section 16-64 shall submit a written lead abatement plan to the city health director within five (5) working days of notification of inspection results. 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-5; Code of 1985, § 16-53; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 5; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 1434, 1-2-07)  
Sec. 16-66. - Notice of violation and duties of the director of health. 
(a)  Notices of this article's violations shall: 
(1)  Be sent by certified mail as soon as practicable after detection of the violation; 
(2)  Include a statement of the detected violations; 
(3)  Require that repairs begin within seven (7) days from receipt of notice, or at such time as the director shall deem necessary, and shall be completed within a reasonable time as determined by the director; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner, his/her agent, or the occupant as the case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, agent, or occupant if a copy of the notice is served upon him/her personally, or if a copy of it is sent by registered or certified mail to his/her last known address; or if he/she is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under this state's laws; 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action, which if taken, will effect compliance with this article's provisions, and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto; and 
(6)  Be filed with the city clerk in the city's land records within five (5) days of the issuance of such notice. Upon compliance with the remedial action prescribed in said notice, the director shall file a notice with the city clerk stating that the required remedial action has been taken, and that the premises are no longer in violation of this article. Such compliance shall be recorded in the city's land records. 
(b)  The residents of a premises shall be notified that a lead poisoning hazard as defined above has been detected within the premises, and informed that all children within the premises should be tested for lead poisoning. 
(c)  No dwelling unit, which is in violation of this article, shall be rented to a new tenant until the director finds that acceptable repairs have been made in compliance with this article. 
(d)  All city-owned and leased dwelling units shall be inspected for the presence of lead-based paint, as defined in this article, in any interior or exterior area. All federally and state owned and leased dwelling units shall be subject to this article. Any violations shall be eliminated in accordance with it. 
(e)  When any premises has not been repaired in accordance with this article, the director is authorized to enter upon the premises to make repairs, or order them to be made to eradicate lead paint poisoning hazards. The owner shall be financially liable for all costs in connection with such repairs, and such costs shall be a lien upon the property. The director is authorized to apply for federal and other funds to reimburse the city for costs in cases where such reimbursement is authorized by law. 
(f)  The director shall have the authority to apply for, accept, receive and administer funds, grants or gifts from public or private agencies, including the federal government, to carry out any of the functions found in this article. Upon receiving the funds, the director shall deposit them with the city's controller. The funds are to be held in a special account established for the department's lead paint control activities. 
(g)  Where lead paint poisoning hazards are found in owner-occupied premises, and the owner(s) presents satisfactory evidence of his/her inability to pay for the cost of repairs required under this article, the director is authorized to enter upon the premises, and to make or cause such necessary repairs to be made. The City of New Haven shall attempt to recoup all costs from such property owner(s). 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-6; Code of 1985, § 16-54; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 7; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-67. - Advisory board. 
The mayor shall appoint a lead poisoning advisory committee with the board of aldermen's approval. The committee shall advance the development and adoption of policies, programs and procedures that will result in this article's effective enforcement. The committee shall serve as a vehicle to promote and coordinate lead poisoning prevention and abatement efforts involving health care providers, the health department, the housing department, the building division of the Livable City Initiative and the judicial system. The committee shall consist of ten (10) members in cluding health care providers, health department officials, representatives of the city's Livable City Initiative and its building division, and representatives of legal services and human resources. The advisory committee shall elect a chairperson who will preside at its meetings. 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-7; Code of 1985, § 16-55; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 8; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-68. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of violating this article shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day's failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 6-3-74, § A-8; Code of 1985, § 16-56; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-69. - Appeal. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 19a-229 as amended from time to time, any person aggrieved by an order issued by the city's health director may appeal to the Commissioner of Public Health not later than three (3) business days after the date of such person's receipt of such order. The commissioner shall thereupon immediately notify the health director, and examine into the merits of such case. The commissioner may vacate, modify or affirm such challenged order. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (a) above, any person aggrieved by an order regarding lead paint abatement under Conn. General Statutes section 19a-111c as amended from time to time, may appeal to the Commissioner not later than three (3) business days after the receipt of such order. 
(Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 16-70—16-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ASBESTOS CONTROL 
 
Sec. 16-91. - Asbestos inspection and abatement. 
Conn. General Statutes chapter 368l, and regulations issued by the State Department of Public Health and its Commissioner, as each is amended time to time, shall be controlling authority for asbestos inspection and abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 16-92—16-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADULT-BUSINESS CONTROLS 
 
Sec. 16-111. - Legislative finding for adult business controls. 
It is hereby found that the city contains commercial premises, commercial structures, or parts thereof, which by reason of design and their intended use are conducive to the spread of dangerous communicable disease to the public. Standards for such places must be established to protect the public by eliminating the possibility of infection or contagious disease. Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, which is a sexually transmissible disease, poses a specific danger because it is currently found to be irreversible and uniformly fatal. The disease is found to occur in discernible population groups, and the risk factors for obtaining or spreading it have been associated with high-risk sexual conduct with multiple partners. The commercial premises, structures, or parts thereof, which expose persons to the risk of infection from this disease, are necessarily subject to regulation and minimal standards in order to prevent the spread of this disease, and to protect the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-69; Ord. of 10-21-96; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-112. - Use limits. 
No commercial building, structure, premises or portion thereof, or facilities therein, shall be so constructed, used or operated to unlawfully facilitate sexual activities, nor designed or used to promote high-risk sexual conduct. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-70; Ord. of 10-21-96; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-113. - Health guidelines. 
This article's enforcement officer shall be guided by the most recent instructions, opinions and guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the United States Department of Health and Human Services relating to the spread of infectious diseases, and any other regulations that are adopted by the board relating to the control of infectious diseases. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-71; Ord. of 10-21-96; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-114. - Minimum standards for prevention of certain communicable diseases in commercial enterprises. 
No person shall occupy any commercial building, structure, premises or portion thereof, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  No partition between subdivisions of a room, portion or part of a building, structure or premises may have an aperture that is designed or otherwise constructed to encourage sexual activity between persons on either side of the partition. 
(2)  No booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment shall have doors, curtains or portal partitions. All such places shall have at least one (1) side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in that room. All such described areas shall be lighted in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public room. However, such lighting shall not be so intense that it prevents the viewing of the motion picture or other offered entertainment. 
(3)  No commercial building, structure or premises shall be so constructed that private rooms or accommodations can be offered to patrons of that business operated therein if: 
(i)  The building, structure or premises is in violation of the section 16-112 of this article, as amended from time to time; and 
(ii)  The building, structure or premises is not a validly operating hotel, motel, apartment complex or condominium. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-72; Ord. of 10-21-96; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 16-115. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms shall mean such enclosures as are specifically offered to the public, or members of that establishment, for hire or for a fee, as part of a business on the premises, which offers the viewing of the entertainment within the enclosure as part of its business. The term shall include, without limitation, such enclosures wherein the entertainment is dispensed for a fee, but a fee is not charged for mere access to the enclosure. 
The term "booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms" does not mean such enclosures that are private offices used by the owners, managers or persons employed on the premises for attending to the tasks of their employment, which enclosures are not held out to the public or members of the establishment for hire for a fee, or for the purpose of viewing entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any persons other than employees. 
(b)  Doors, curtains or portal partitions shall mean full, complete, nontransparent closure devices through which one cannot see or view the activity taking place within the enclosure. 
(c)  Open to adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room shall mean either the absence of any doors, curtains or portal partitions, or a door or other device which is made of clear, transparent material such as glass, plexiglass, or other such material meeting building code and safety standards, extending from the floor to the top of the door frame, exclusive of the door or device framing itself, so that the activity inside the enclosure may be viewed or seen by persons outside the enclosure. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-73; Ord. of 10-21-96; Ord. No. 1404, 1-3-06)  
Secs. 16-116—16-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITING THE USE OF ALL FORMS OF TOBACCO IN CITY PARKS, ON PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS AND ON ANY OTHER DESIGNATED CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1772 , §§ A—E, adopted May 18, 2015, did not specificially set out provisions for inclusion in the Code. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. VI, §§ 16-141—16-145. 
 
Sec. 16-141. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
Enforcement . All law enforcement officers of the city; the mayor of the city and/or her designees; the chief of the police department and/or his designees. 
Tobacco product . The use of any tobacco product in all of its forms, including but not limited to a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device, such as all electronic cigarettes (e-cig, e-hookah, vape pen, electronic nicotine delivery system), as well as chew tobacco and snus. 
Recreational property . Property owned by the city and which is under the supervision and control of the city's department of parks, recreation and trees and used in connection with recreational programs, including athletic facilities, parks, playgrounds, trails and other areas where people may assemble for recreational purposes. This also includes any community, recreation or senior center building located on park property. Recreational property shall not include school grounds. 
School grounds . A parcel of land or portion thereof used for school purposes and operated by the City of New Haven Board of Education. 
(Ord. No. 1772 , § A, 5-18-15)  
Sec. 16-142. - The use of any tobacco product is banned in designated public places. 
It shall be prohibited, at all times, for an individual to use any tobacco product in any form while in a city park or other city-owned recreational property, on public school grounds, or on any other designated city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 1772 , § B, 5-18-15)  
Sec. 16-143. - Enforcement. 
Members of the New Haven Police Department shall be charged with the enforcement of this article. Such officer of the department shall inform the violator of this article and take enforcement action when a violation has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1772 , § C, 5-18-15)  
Sec. 16-144. - Penalty for violation. 
Police officers or other such designated authorized officials may issue a citation for violation of this chapter. Persons receiving said citations shall be deemed to have committed an infraction and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation of any provision of this article. Such citation may be on a form as prescribed by the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1772 , § D, 5-18-15)  
Sec. 16-145. - Signage. 
City parks, city-owned recreational areas, public school grounds and other specified sections of city-owned property where tobacco use has been banned pursuant to this chapter shall be so designated by signs that give notice of those areas of prohibition. The city shall post a sign or signs on such properties stating that it is a "Tobacco-Free Zone" to indicate that said property is subject to this article. Said sign or signs shall identify this ordinance by number, and shall state the penalty amount for violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 1772 , § E, 5-18-15)  
Chapter 16½ - HUMAN SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Feb. 11, 1981, §§ 1—7, has been set forth herein as Art. I of Ch. 16½ in accordance with provisions of such ordinance. The sections thereof have been designated as §§ 16½-1—16½-7 in order to conform to the Code's current numerical system. 
Ch. 16½ was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project began in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Convalescent, etc., homes, Ch. 12; equal opportunities, Ch. 12½; fair rent practices, Ch. 12¾. 
 
ARTICLE I. - COMMISSION ON AGING 
 
Sec. 16½-1. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Commission on Aging Article." 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 1)  
Sec. 16½-2. - Findings. 
Pursuant to Section 7-127a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the City of New Haven is empowered to establish a committee to study the needs of and coordinate programs for the aging, and to make appropriations to cover the expenses of such committee. 
"Many senior residents of the community are encountering problems that diminish the quality of their life. For seniors on fixed incomes, the cost of energy and effects of inflation present particular hardships. A lack of decent affordable housing exists. The cost of health care is staggering. Inappropriate institutionalization and inadequate community-based care are significant concerns. Transportation services and employment opportunities represent yet additional difficulties. 
"To lessen the adversities confronting the senior population, local action is necessary to strengthen the senior services network as well as improve the planning, coordination, and program development of a service delivery system sensitive to the needs of seniors in the city." 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 2)  
Sec. 16½-3. - Establishment of the commission. 
There is hereby established a commission on aging, consisting of not less than fifteen (15) nor more than twenty-one (21) members. Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the board of aldermen, and shall serve without compensation. The mayor shall appoint persons to the commission who are either seniors residing in the city or residents interested in addressing problems confronting seniors. 
Of the commissioners first appointed, at least one-third ( 1/3 ) of the commissioners shall be appointed for one-year terms; at least one-third ( 1/3 ) shall be appointed for two-year terms; and the remainder shall be appointed for three-year terms. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three-year terms; however, in the event of any vacancy in the commission membership, the successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 3)  
Sec. 16½-4. - Commission's organization. 
The commissioner shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from their membership. The commission may also organize itself in whatever other manner it considers appropriate. The commission may adopt such rules and regulations as it considers necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
A majority of all members of the commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the commission's business. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 4)  
Sec. 16½-5. - Commission's powers and duties. 
The commission shall perform all duties necessary to effectuate this article, including the following: 
(a)  To study and investigate the conditions, needs and major problems of seniors as they relate to housing, education, recreation and similar pursuits. 
(b)  To establish and maintain cooperative working relationships with public and private agencies serving New Haven seniors. 
(c)  To identify gaps in services needed by seniors. 
(d)  To work with federal, state, and local agencies, both public and private, to foster the development of programs and services that address the needs of seniors and to enable seniors to live with maximum independence and enhance the quality of their lives. 
(e)  To promote cooperative program planning and development among service providers in order to improve and expand the delivery of services to the city's seniors. 
(f)  To conduct public forums to ascertain the views of seniors in developing program objectives and setting service priorities to address the needs of seniors and to raise the public awareness of the concerns of seniors. 
(g)  To issue reports and publications on its studies, research, and investigations to promote public awareness and understanding of seniors' problems and needs. 
(h)  To encourage the commitment of public and private resources to meet the needs of seniors, especially the physically and emotionally frail, as well as those in greatest economic or social need. 
(i)  To increase advocacy for the aging, particularly on issues that affect the health and welfare of seniors. 
(j)  To monitor, assess, and conduct periodic evaluations of programs and services funded through the city for their particular effect on seniors. 
(k)  To offer policy recommendations to the mayor and the board of aldermen and advise on matters that may strengthen the city's ability to respond to the varied needs of seniors. 
(l)  To assist and advise the elderly services unit of the department of human services whenever so requested. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 5; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 7)  
Sec. 16½-6. - Commission appropriations; staff. 
The commission shall have no general fund appropriations or allotments, but may draw upon the accounts and personnel of the department of human services to carry out its duties, including but not limited to its annual report, as from time to time necessity may direct. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 6)  
Sec. 16½-7. - Cooperation within city government. 
All departments, boards, commissioners, agencies, officers, officials, and employees of the City of New Haven shall cooperate with the commission in implementing this article, and the heads thereof shall furnish the commission with information in their possession when the commission, upon the approval of the mayor or his designee, so request. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 7)  
Secs. 16½-8—16½-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION ON DISABILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance of Feb. 11, 1981, §§ 1—9 provided for the inclusion of Art. II, as set out herein, except that the sections have been designated by the editor as §§ 16½-11—16½-18 to conform to the numerical sequence of the Code. 
 
Sec. 16½-11. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Commission on Disabilities Article." 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-87)  
Sec. 16½-12. - Definitions. 
Unless the context requires otherwise, 
Commission means the commission on disabilities of the City of New Haven. 
Disability means any condition or characteristic that renders a person a "person with disabilities" as defined below. 
Person with disabilities means any person who (i) has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, (ii) has a record of such an impairment, or (iii) is regarded as having such an impairment. As used herein: 
(a)  Physical or mental impairment means (1) any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory; including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or (2) any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. This term includes, but is not limited to, however, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction and alcoholism. 
(b)  Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working. 
(c)  Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or has been misclassified as having a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
(d)  Is regarded as having an impairment means (1) has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities, but that is treated by the commission as constituting such a limitation; or (2) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 2, Ord. of 4-6-87)  
Sec. 16½-13. - Findings. 
Persons with disabilities have for some time be subjected to varying levels of societal indifference and neglect. These conditions have resulted in limiting the rights and participation of persons with disabilities or have otherwise restricted their opportunities for employment, education and community services. Government at all levels is finally recognizing the needs of persons with disabilities. These needs have begun to be addressed by legislation, programs, and various forms of assistance. The responsibility of local government as well as various community institutions and organizations in responding to the needs of persons with disabilities is broad and encompassing. 
The U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare estimates that sixteen (16) per cent of the population of most cities are persons with disabilities. Given the poverty index of New Haven and the health-related consequences of poverty on any disabling condition, it is very likely that the disabled population of New Haven is much higher than the standard sixteen (16) per cent. 
Therefore, it is essential that official local action be taken to promote the effective marshalling of resources and to constructively respond to the needs of persons with disabilities. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 3; Ord. of 4-6-87)  
Sec. 16½-14. - Establishment of the commission. 
There is hereby established a commission on disabilities, consisting of fifteen (15) members appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the board of aldermen. Commission members shall serve without compensation and shall reside in the City of New Haven. Commission members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred. Membership on the commission shall include: 
(a)  Seven (7) persons with disabilities who are city residents; 
(b)  Four (4) city residents who are either relatives of persons with disabilities or citizens active in the disabled community; and 
(c)  Four (4) representatives of disabled service agencies, all of which representatives are city residents. 
Of the fifteen (15) members first appointed, five (5) commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, five (5) commissioners shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and five (5) commissioners shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, commissioners shall serve three-year terms, however, in the event of a vacancy in the commission's membership, the successor shall be appointed to serve the unexpired term of the vacating member. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 4; Ord. of 4-6-87)  
Sec. 16½-15. - Commission's organization. 
The commissioners shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from their membership. The commission may also organize itself in whatever other manner it deems appropriate. The commission may adopt such rules and regulations as it considers necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
A majority of all members of the commission constitute a quorum for conducting the commission's business. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 5)  
Sec. 16½-16. - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall perform all duties necessary to effectuate this article, including the following: 
(a)  To seek to reduce both physical and attitudinal barriers confronting persons with disabilities. 
(b)  To establish and maintain cooperative working relationships with public and private agencies serving New Haven persons with disabilities. 
(c)  To study and investigate individual or community problems which limit the rights of persons with disabilities or otherwise restrict their opportunities in employment, housing, economic status, recreation, education, health, transportation, and similar pursuits. 
(d)  To issue reports and publications on its studies, research and investigations to promote public awareness and understanding of disabled problems and needs. 
(e)  To receive complaints and grievances of persons or groups with disabilities. The commission may review, investigate, conciliate and/or refer such complaints or grievances to appropriate city, state and federal agencies or take other appropriate action within the scope of its powers. 
(f)  To work with federal, state, and local agencies as well as private, civic, religious, business, industrial, labor and other organizations, groups and persons to foster the development of programs and services that address the needs of persons with disabilities and increase opportunities and to enable persons with disabilities to live with maximum independence and enhance the quality of life of persons with disabilities. 
(g)  To promote cooperative program planning and development among service providers in order to improve and expand the delivery of services to the city's disabled. 
(h)  To conduct public forums to ascertain the views of the disabled in developing program objectives and setting service priorities to address the needs of the disabled and to raise the public awareness of the concerns of the disabled. 
(i)  To encourage the commitment of public and private resources to meet the needs of persons with disabilities. 
(j)  To increase advocacy for the disabled. 
(k)  To monitor, assess, and conduct periodic evaluations of programs and services funded through the city for their particular effect on persons with disabilities. 
(l)  To establish policy and procedures for the department of services for persons with disabilities. 
(m)  To offer policy recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen and advise on matters which may strengthen the city's ability to respond to the varied needs of persons with disabilities. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 6; Ord. of 4-6-87; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 8)  
Sec. 16½-17. - Department of services for persons with disabilities established; director. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the City of New Haven a department of services for persons with disabilities, which shall be headed by a director of services for persons with disabilities, which department shall administer and execute the activities of the commission. 
(b)  The director of services for persons with disabilities shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(c)  The director is responsible for administration of the department of services for persons with disabilities, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Administration and execution of activities and decisions of the commission; 
(2)  Provision of staff support for the commission; 
(3)  Personnel selection, staff supervision, and management of funds within the limitations of sums appropriated for such purposes; 
(4)  Enforcement of such ordinances as may, from time to time, be enacted by the board of aldermen for the provision of or improvement of services for persons with disabilities; 
(5)  Monitoring and taking appropriate action to ensure that federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to persons with disabilities are complied with in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-6-87) 
Editor's note— Prior to amendment by an ordinance of Apr. 6, 1987, § 16½-17 pertained to commission appropriations and staff, as derived from § 7 of an ordinance of Feb. 11, 1981.  
Sec. 16½-18. - Cooperation within city government. 
All departments, boards, commissions, agencies, officers, officials and employees of the city shall cooperate with the commission in implementing this article, and the heads thereof shall furnish the commission with information in their possession when the commission, upon the approval of the mayor or his designee, so request. 
(Ord. of 2-11-81, § 8)  
Secs. 16½-19, 16½-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SCHOOL READINESS COUNCIL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1315, adopted Sept. 9, 2002, deleted §§ 16½-21—16½-23, which pertained to a commission on educare (early childhood education) derived from Ord. No. 1271, adopted Sept. 18, 2000. Ord. No. 1315 further enacted new provisions which pertained to a school readiness council to read as set forth in § 16½-21. 
 
Sec. 16½-21. - Established. 
There shall be a school readiness council established pursuant to section 10-16r of the Connecticut General Statutes. In addition to the authority conferred by section 10-16r of the Connecticut General Statutes, the council shall have authority to implement the recommendations and findings of the mayor's task force on Universal Access to Early Care and Education. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02)  
Secs. 16½-22, 16½-23. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NEW HAVEN PEACE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 16½-24. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "New Haven Peace Commission." 
(Ord. of 12-21-87)  
Sec. 16½-25. - Appointment and terms of members; officers of commission; organization. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of no more than seventeen (17) members, fifteen (15) of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen, and two (2) of whom shall be elected by the board of aldermen for terms of two (2) years. 
The commission shall include up to three (3) youth members who shall serve for three-year terms, and will be nonvoting associate members unless they become electors of the city. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint twelve (12) commissioners who shall serve for three-year terms. 
(c)  In the event of a non-aldermanic vacancy, the commission shall consult with recognized groups working for peace to obtain names of qualified candidates which it shall make available to the mayor. 
(d)  Commissioners must be residents of the city. 
(e)  The commission shall be representative of the socio-economic and racial-ethnic populations of the city. No more than eleven (11) members of the commission shall be registered affiliates of the same political party. 
(f)  The members of the commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members, and shall adopt by-laws for the commission. 
(g)  For the purpose of conducting the business of the commission a quorum shall consist of those members present and voting. 
(Ord. of 12-21-87; Ord. of 1-3-89, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-92; Ord. of 3-2-99)  
Sec. 16½-26. - Functions and purpose. 
It shall be the function of the commission to: 
(a)  Support the actions taken by the board of aldermen and the mayor to protect the citizens of New Haven and lessen the danger of nuclear destruction to the city. 
(b)  Support the November 2, 1982, nonbinding referendum of New Haven voters "in favor of the President of the United States to negotiate with the Soviet Union for an immediate, permanent U.S.-Soviet freeze on all testing, production, and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems, and requesting Congress to transfer the funds saved to civilian use." 
(c)  In conjunction with the city government and its departments, educational institutions, public and private agencies, and other interested organizations, work with such city government and its organizations toward a peaceful world, through public dissemination of relevant information and through educational outreach to the schools and citizens of New Haven. 
(d)  In conjunction with the mayor or the New Haven Board of Aldermen, document the impact of the national military budget on the social services in the City of New Haven. 
(e)  Promote and support local initiatives dedicated to peace such as, but not restricted to, exchanges with other countries. 
(Ord. of 12-21-87)  
Sec. 16½-27. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall include the following: 
(a)  To design and disseminate material; to establish a resource library for peace education, including a speaker's bureau, and to assist citizens in the use of this material. 
(b)  In conjunction with the New Haven Board of Education and other educational institutions in New Haven, assist the New Haven public schools and other educational institutions in New Haven in developing peace curricula on: 
(1)  The causes of war. 
(2)  Technology of the nuclear armaments. 
(3)  The history of disarmament. 
(4)  Conflict resolution. 
(c)  In conjunction with such school administration, to support and assist teachers with such peace curriculum. 
(d)  To assist in the conduct of educational and advocacy meeting or hearings on peace-related issues by public agencies, organizations or institutions or by private persons in the City of New Haven. This shall include an effort to reach out to New Haven residents most affected by the decrease in national funding for social services: organized labor, the poor, the unemployed, minorities, and women. 
(e)  In conjunction with the mayor or other appropriate authorities, to initiate public exhibits and events in city hall, city libraries, public schools and in other locations within the city, consistent with the stated purposes of this article. 
(f)  To cooperate with public agencies at their request and with private groups in other cities and towns in programs for peace education. 
(g)  To promote mutual understanding with people in other nations consistent with the purposes of this article by supporting New Haven's Sister Cities Program and by promoting New Haven's involvement in the People's Peace Appeal. 
(h)  In conjunction with the mayor and the New Haven Board of Aldermen, to develop and recommend policy regarding the prevention of nuclear destruction to the City of New Haven and the safety of New Haven citizens to all departments, divisions, and agencies of the city including the mayor and the board of aldermen. 
(i)  To promote the enactment of legislation which furthers peace at city, state and federal levels, and to monitor the implementation of such legislation. 
(j)  To study the conversion of such nuclear and weapons-related industries to peaceful production, including the retraining of workers employed in said industries. 
(k)  To make public statements and act on matters related to peace. 
(Ord. of 12-21-87)  
Sec. 16½-28. - Appropriations; staff. 
The commission may raise funds and accept money subject to approval by the New Haven Board of Aldermen, accept gifts and services, and expend all funds received. 
(Ord. of 12-21-87)  
Secs. 16½-29, 16½-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NEW HAVEN YOUTH COMMISSION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1558, adopted Nov. 19, 2007, repealed former Art. V, §§ 16½-31—16½-33, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. V pertained to the commission on children, youth and families and derived from an Ord. of 3-6-89; Ord. No. 1272, 9-18-00. 
 
Sec. 16½-31. - Establishment of commission. 
There is hereby established a "Commission on Youth" (hereinafter called "commission"). Said commission shall consist of eighteen (18) members selected pursuant to the provisions of this section, and shall elect their own chairperson and may elect other officers as needed. 
(a)  The following persons shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen for terms of two (2) years: 
Eighteen (18) citizens who have an interest and/or understanding of the needs of young people in New Haven; experience in the area of programming around children and youth; and/or involvement with school or community activities. 
(b)  The board of aldermen shall elect two (2) of their members to serve on said commission. 
(c)  In addition, the mayor shall appoint five (5) members under age eighteen (18), as youth representatives to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1558, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 16½-32. - Mission and duties. 
The mission of the commission consists of improving the quality of life of New Haven youth and advocating on their behalf. The duties of the commission are enumerated as: 
(a)  Identify the challenges, needs and concerns of youth in the City of New Haven through outreach to young people, parents and families, school administrators, community leaders, academicians and others; identify and examine existing social, economic, educational and other barriers that adversely affect the quality of life for youth; and support, develop and propose programs that address identified needs and concerns; 
(b)  Create and develop a culture that supports youth in the city by: 
(1)  Enlisting the support and cooperation of different sectors of the community, including businesses, faith-based organizations, associations, youth organizations, government, management teams and others; 
(2)  Submitting recommendations to the mayor and board of aldermen about ways to facilitate opportunities for youth to participate in governmental processes and engage more fully in civic life; and 
(3)  Organizing and/or sponsoring public forums around issues affecting youth where both young people and adults are encouraged to participate. 
(c)  Initiate and issue formal recommendations to the mayor and the board of aldermen for community-wide goals that address the social, economic, educational and recreational needs of youth; provide yearly reports to the mayor and board of aldermen on activities, accomplishments and goals met by July 1 of each calendar year effective July 1, 2008; and 
(d)  Respond in a timely manner to requests for comments and recommendations on relevant issues referred to the commission by the mayor, board of aldermen, departments, agencies, committees and other relevant parties. 
(e)  The commission may seek other charges that are consistent with its mission. 
(Ord. No. 1558, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 16½-33. - Staff. 
The mayor shall provide appropriate staffing to the commission from existing city staff. No additional staff shall be hired. 
(Ord. No. 1558, 11-19-07)  
Secs. 16½-34—16½-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1558, adopted Nov. 19, 2007, repealed former Art. VI, § 16½-41, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. VI pertained to the department of children and family services and derived from an Ord. of April 17, 1989. 
 
Sec. 16½-41. - Department established; director. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the City of New Haven a Department of Youth, which shall be headed by a director of youth. 
(b)  The director of youth shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(c)  The director is responsible for administration of the department of youth, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Planning, coordination, administration and evaluation of services for youth. 
(2)  Personnel selection, staff supervision, and management of funds within the limitations of sums appropriated for such purposes. 
(3)  Enforcement of such ordinances as may, from time to time, be enacted by the board of aldermen for the provision of or improvement of services for youth. 
(4)  Monitoring and taking appropriate action to ensure that federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to youth are complied with by the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1558, 11-19-07)  
ARTICLE VII. - YOUTH COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 16½-42. - Established. 
There shall be a city youth council, which shall be a group of high school students organized to actively involve youth on policy issues affecting them; broaden the scope of youth leadership in city affairs; educate youth about the functions of city government; develop healthy citizenship habits for the future of the community; and promote public awareness of the strengths and abilities of youth. 
(Ord. of 8-14-02)  
Chapter 17 - LICENSES AND PERMITS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 17 was not amended by ordinance by the selected chapter review and reenactment project begun in 2006; however, selected provisions were renumbered with the permission of the city to reorganize the material of this chapter. Editor's notes explaining any renumbering accompany the affected provisions. Otherwise Ch. 17 derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Restriction on issuance of building permits for smoke, dust, odor producing equipment, see § 3-19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - LICENSES AND PERMITS IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to articles I through XIV of this chapter, and to any other articles or sections of the City Code that incorporate them by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1387, 8-1-05)  
Sec. 17-1.1. - Permit and license issuer. 
The permit and license issuer, hereinafter cited as "the issuer", is a city official who has been appointed to administer the city's permitting and licensing processes. The purposes of such appointment are to increase the efficiency of those processes, and to make it easier for persons to apply for permits and licenses issued by the city. The centralization of these activities under the issuer does not relieve the police chief, fire marshal, building official, health inspector, or any other city official, board or other authority of any obligation imposed by federal, state or local law upon such official, board or other authority to review and/or approve permits or licenses of any specific class. Likewise, the issuer is not authorized to issue a license or permit that lacks the required approval by such city official, board or other authority having cognizance of the matter under federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Sec. 17-1.2. - Controller to delegate licensing forms to issuer. 
Unless otherwise provided, the controller shall designate the issuer as the official who shall provide suitable records, forms, blanks and applications for every license and permit required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.3. - Contents of permit or license applications. 
(a)  In order to obtain a license or permit under this chapter, an interested person must file an application with the issuer, and provide all of the following information: 
(1)  Name, residence address and telephone number, business address and telephone number, sex, social security number, birth date and age of the applicant. 
(2)  The application date. 
(3)  Name and address of the principal. 
(4)  If applying as a partnership, corporation, or other entity: name, address, telephone number, employer identification number of such entity, application date, and the name, residence address and telephone number, business address and telephone number, sex, social security number, birth date and age of each partner or officer. 
(5)  The location(s), day(s) and time(s) for which the license or permit is desired. 
(6)  The nature of the activity or business for which a license or permit is desired. 
(7)  Any other information that the issuer may reasonably consider necessary for consideration of the application. 
(8)  Such other information as may be required to show that such license or permit may be issued, and would be used, in accordance with law. 
(b)  Each person to whom a license or permit would be issued, or his authorized agent, must sign the application for it, and must notify the issuer immediately of any change in the information contained in the application or provided in conjunction with it. 
(c)  Any other city official who is required by federal, state or local law to review and/or approve the application may require the applicant to provide any other information that such official may reasonably consider necessary for consideration of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.4. - Disqualification of applicant. 
An applicant will not be issued a license or permit if the police chief or his designee determines that the applicant is not a suitable person. This determination will be made on a case-by-case basis, depending upon factors that include, but are not limited to, one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  The criminal history of the applicant, specifically: 
(1)  The nature of the criminal offense or offenses for which the individual has been convicted and the relationship of that offense or those offenses to the benefit or opportunity that the individual seeks; 
(2)  The gravity of the offense(s); 
(3)  The age of the individual at the time of occurrence of the criminal offense or offenses; 
(4)  The time elapsed since the individual's conviction or release; 
(5)  Information pertaining to the degree of rehabilitation of the convicted individual; 
(6)  Any information produced by the individual, or produced on his behalf, in regard to his rehabilitation and good conduct; and, 
(7)  The public policy of this city, as expressed in New Haven Code of Ordinances section 2-852, to encourage the employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses. 
(b)  The applicant was denied a license or permit under this chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the appropriate city authority that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist. 
(c)  The applicant had a similar license or permit previously revoked by any lawful authority for just cause not inconsistent with this section. 
(d)  The applicant has named a person who has been found unsuitable under the criteria in subsection (a) as having the active management or operation of a location, facility, building or portion thereof at which the licensed or permitted activity would take place. 
(e)  The applicant has named a person who has been found unsuitable under the criteria in subsection (a) as having the active distribution, management or operation of the activity that is the subject of the application. 
(f)  Other just cause not inconsistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Sec. 17-1.5. - Conditions. 
Before the issuer may issue or renew a permit or license under this chapter, all appropriate city officials must certify that the building or location that is to be used for the activity covered by the permit or application has been inspected, and that it conforms to all relevant codes and to all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.6. - Compliance with zoning requirements. 
Before the issuer may issue or renew a permit or license under this chapter, he shall require verification that applicable zoning requirements have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.7. - Effect on neighborhood. 
Before the issuer may issue a permit or license, the police chief or his designee will investigate the neighborhood where the licensed or permitted activity is to be conducted to ensure that it will not have a negative impact on accepted community standards concerning public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.8. - Procedure for referring application to boards, commissions. 
If a board or commission is authorized to decide whether a license or permit may be granted, the applicant shall bring the application before such board or commission along with all relevant information. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.9. - Signature on licenses, permits; collection of fees; refunds. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, and before the license or permit shall be in force, the issuer shall sign it and collect all fees required by this Code and state law for such license or permit. The issuer is responsible for determining that such fees have been paid. 
(b)  If an applicant does not acquire a license or permit after paying the appropriate license or permit fee, the city shall deduct from any refund all administrative costs associated with the processing of such license or permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.10. - Numbering, conditions of permits, licenses. 
Each license or permit shall be numbered, and contain conditions that require the licensee or permittee to conform to the representations made in the application, and to comply with all terms and conditions of the license or permit, including but not limited to the municipal ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.11. - Records kept by the city. 
The city shall maintain a record of every license or permit issued, including its number, dates of issuance and expiration, the name of the licensee or permittee, the purpose for which it was issued, and any special conditions pertaining to it. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.12. - Licenses not to excuse violation of law or extend liability to city. 
No license or permit shall authorize or excuse any breach of law, or any trespass upon the rights of others. The city shall not be held liable for any damage that may be committed or caused under color thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.13. - Term. 
(a)  Each license or permit shall be issued for a period of one (1) year from its issuance date, unless a shorter period shall be specified on it or required by law. The issuer may establish a schedule for renewals of each license or permit class. In the event that a license or permit fee is based upon a one-year period, and the issuer chooses to issue a license or permit for a shorter period in order to bring its expiration date to the same schedule as (1) other licenses or permits of its class or (2) other licenses or permits, certifications or inspections associated with such license or permit, the issuer may prorate the fee. 
(b)  A person wishing to renew a license or permit shall apply for its renewal prior to its expiration date, allowing due time for the issuer and city agencies to perform their duties with respect to such application. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.14. - Licenses and permits not transferable. 
(a)  No license or permit may be transferred to a different person, location, purpose or use. 
(b)  Each licensee or permittee must notify the issuer in advance of any change in the information that was part of the approved license or permit application, any change in ownership of the licensed or permitted activity or premises, or closure or discontinuance of the licensed or permitted business, premises or activity. 
(c)  If issuance of a permit or license by the issuer was conditional upon the acquisition or retention of some other license, permit, certification or approval, then the licensee or permittee must notify the issuer immediately of the expiration, suspension, cancellation or revocation of such license, permit, certification or approval. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.15. - Suspension, cancellation or revocation by issuer. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, the issuer may suspend, cancel or revoke a license or permit at any time for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The license or permit was procured by fraud or misrepresentation of the facts. 
(2)  A breach of the terms or conditions of the license or permit. 
(3)  The licensee or permittee has failed to comply with any of the provisions or requirements of this article or of the article dealing with that particular class of license or permit. 
(4)  Any other reason which, in the opinion of the issuer, continued operation of the licensed or permitted activity would jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  The police chief and his designee shall have power to suspend, cancel or revoke any license or permit for just cause at any time after its issuance. To the extent that the police chief or his designee should seek to base a "just cause" determination upon a license- or permit-holder's criminal conviction(s), the police chief or his designee shall assess the conviction(s) according to the factors listed in section 17-1.4(a). 
(c)  The issuer shall mail written notice of any suspension, cancellation or revocation to the licensee or permittee and make a record thereof. Such action shall take effect when the licensee or permittee receives such notice. Any act done thereafter under cover of such license or permit shall subject the person so acting to the same penalty as if he had done such act without such license or permit unless the issuer's action shall be disapproved as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Sec. 17-1.16. - Appeals from official action affecting licenses, permits. 
(a)  When an application is denied, or the issuer refuses to issue or renew a license or permit, the issuer must notify the applicant of such decision in a written notice with a reason for such decision. If the decision to deny an application or to refuse to issue or renew a license or permit is based on the applicant's criminal history, the issuer must provide the applicant with a photocopy of the conviction history report with a highlight(s) of the particular conviction(s) that relates to the license or permit that the applicant seeks. Any person aggrieved by the failure of the issuer to grant him a license or permit, or by its terms or conditions, or by its suspension, cancellation or revocation, may appeal such action in accordance with subsection (c) hereinafter if, within one (1) week of receipt of written notice of the disputed action, he files a written notice of his intent to appeal with the issuer or appropriate authority. 
(b)  The disputed action will be binding upon the appellant until it has been disapproved. The board or other authority to which the disputed matter is appealed may order such modification as it deems proper and consistent with this Code. 
(c)  The aggrieved person may use either or both of the following procedures to appeal the disputed action: 
(1)  The aggrieved person may request a hearing before the issuer. The request must be made in writing within one (1) week of receipt of the written notice of the disputed action. If a hearing is requested, the issuer will set a date and a place for it, and provide the appellant with due notice in advance thereof. The appellant will have the opportunity to be represented by counsel at such hearing. 
(2)  The aggrieved person may appeal to the city official, board or other authority having cognizance of the matter under this Code. The request must be made in writing within one (1) week of receipt of the written notice of the disputed action. If no authority has supervision on the subject matter, then the appeal shall be submitted to the board of aldermen. 
(d)  If the decision to deny an application or to refuse to issue or renew a license or permit is based on the applicant's criminal history, the aggrieved person will have the opportunity to present information rebutting the accuracy and/or relevance of the conviction history report through either or both of the procedures listed in sub-paragraph (c). The board or other authority to which the disputed matter is appealed must review all information and documentation received from the aggrieved person prior to making a decision regarding the disputed action. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Sec. 17-1.17. - Penalties. 
In addition to any penalties that may be imposed for violation of state law, each violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be subject to the maximum fine authorized by section 7-148(c)(10)(A) of the general statutes as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-1.18. - Notifications. 
Annually, on or before the third Tuesday of January, the issuer shall file at the office of legislative services a list of all licenses or permits currently issued for amusement devices, game rooms, billiard rooms, brokers, and rooming houses. The list shall include the name of the licensee or permittee and the type, location and expiration of each such license or permit. Thereafter, the issuer shall file notice of any changes to said list, or new applications, at said office as such changes or applications arise. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENTS, EXHIBITIONS AND ENTERTAINMENT 
 
Sec. 17-2. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits in General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article: 
Bazaar means a place maintained by a sponsoring organization for the disposal of merchandise awards by a means of chance. 
Block party means a gathering of neighbors in a residentially zoned area where no more than three (3) blocks of any city street are closed to accommodate an event. Block parties are exempt from license fees. 
Motion picture show includes film, video, computer-generated, satellite transmission, digital transmission, fiber optic transmission, and/or DVDs. 
Performance shall include, but not be limited to, the following activities: acting, singing, playing musical instruments, pantomime, juggling, magic, dancing and reciting. 
Principal arterial shall refer to any interstate, expressway, minor arterial or collector road as identified in the City of New Haven Functional Classification road map published by the city engineer. 
Public amusement, exhibition and entertainment includes any lawful show, exhibition, dance or performance, carnival, festival, tent revival or public gathering of more than fifty (50) people, minstrels, circus or exhibition of animals or curiosities, play, pantomime or any other theatrical or dramatic performance, motion picture shows, public dance, opera, concert, or sporting event, and exhibition of gymnastics, dexterity or skill for which (1) admission is charged for participating in or witnessing same or (2) admission is not charged but a gathering or more than fifty (50) people is anticipated. 
Raffle means an arrangement for raising money by the sale of tickets, certain among which, as determined by chance after the sale, entitle the holders to prizes. 
Street performance shall refer to the performance by one or more persons in any public right-of-way or public space. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.2. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article applies to all places presenting the public amusement, exhibition and entertainment, including but not limited to theaters, regardless of their seating capacity, that are open nine (9) months or more during the year. 
(b)  This article also applies to a street performance in any public right-of-way, principal arterial or public space, as defined in section 17-2.1. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.3. - Bazaars and raffles. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 7-171 of the general statutes, the board of aldermen hereby adopts the statutory provisions of sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, of the general statutes. 
(b)  After the adoption of this section, no bazaar or raffle shall be promoted, operated or conducted in the city in a manner contrary to sections 7-170 to 7-186, inclusive, of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.4. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or entity having charge of or making use of any building, room or premises within the limits of the city to permit any public amusement, entertainment or exhibition at said place without first procuring a license for that purpose in accordance with the provisions of this article. This prohibition extends to each owner, lessee, manager, operator and its servants, agents and representatives. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a proprietor of any business establishment to promote its business by conducting an exhibition, personal appearance, speech, or dancing, acting, singing or musical performance without first procuring a license for such purpose in accordance with the provisions of this article. Notice of the event must be given at least ten (10) days in advance to the issuer. This section pertains to all live entertainment not covered by subsection (a), or other sections of this Code. In case of conflict, the other sections shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.5. - Amusement, exhibition or entertainment requiring closure of streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity making use of any public right-of-way within the limits of the city to hold any public amusement, entertainment or exhibition in said right-of-way without first procuring a permit. The director of public works shall promulgate regulations, as approved by the board of aldermen, that will be followed by the permitting issuer in approving street closures. Permits shall not be granted to close principal arterials, with the exception of Temple Street between Elm Street and Chapel Street adjacent to the New Haven Green, without approval of the board of aldermen. This section will become effective September 1, 2003. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.6. - Public works bandstands. 
Unless otherwise authorized, no one may use a bandstand without securing a permit from the issuer. A permit fee as set by the board of aldermen will be charged for each permit issued. The fee for such permit shall be specified in this chapter. The public works department shall charge an additional fee for the rental of the department's bandstand. Additionally, the user must pay insurance for the use of the bandstand, and any and all overtime or other costs required by applicable collective bargaining agreements. 
(a)  Responsibility for costs. The public works department will assume all costs for use of the bandstand when used for events it sponsors. All other city agencies or departments requesting the use of the bandstand must agree to assume all costs, including overtime costs, incurred by its use. 
(b)  Fees and costs. Persons or groups other than city agencies or departments shall be charged user charges based on the number hours in which the bandstand is being used. Besides the fee, the user must pay any and all overtime or other costs required by applicable collective bargaining agreements. 
(c)  Insurance. Besides the applicable fees and costs specified in (a) above, adequate accident and liability insurance as required by the issuer must be secured and supplied prior to use of the bandstand. 
(d)  Permit. All persons or groups renting the bandstand, including all city agencies or departments other than the public works department, shall be required to obtain a permit for that use. The issuer shall issue a permit to any person or group for the use of the bandstand upon payment of the requisite fee. However, the issuer shall not require a city agency or department seeking a permit for the use of the bandstand to pay said fee. 
(e)  Restriction of use. The bandstand shall be rented only for use on property within the city limits, or on property outside of the city limits, which is owned or leased by the city. 
(Code of 1985, sec. 27-28; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.7. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee(s) prescribed by section 17-201 for licenses required by section 17-2.4(a) of this Code, the issuer shall issue a license to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee(s) prescribed by section 17-21 for licenses required by section 17-2.4(b) of this Code, the issuer shall issue a license to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee(s) prescribed by section 17-201 for licenses required by section 17-2.3 of this Code for bazaars and raffles, the issuer shall issue a license to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.8. - Street performance—Locations; conduct. 
[The following regulations apply to the locations and conduct of street performances:] 
(1)  The board of aldermen may designate zones where street performances can take place. 
(2)  A performer may not block the passage of the public through a public area. 
(3)  If a crowd gathers to see or hear a performer such that the passage through a public area is blocked, a police officer shall disperse that portion of the crowd that is blocking the passage of the public. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any performer to totally obstruct streets and sidewalks, or to interrupt free passage along the same. 
(5)  No performer or group shall perform within such proximity of any other performer or group of performers so as to interfere with the other's performance. 
(6)  Street performing shall not infringe on events for which a permit has been issued so as to detract from the stated purpose of the other permittee or permit organization. 
(7)  Acceptance of contributions. A performer may accept contributions during the performance. 
(8)  Compliance. The conduct and behavior of all street performers shall be in compliance with the City Code and state statutes, and subject to enforcement by the city's department of police services. 
(9)  Nothing herein shall be so construed as to limit, infringe or in any way affect any of the rights or privileges of any person or persons established by the constitutions of the United States of America or the State of Connecticut. 
(Code 1928, 83, 593, 724, 725; Ord. of 2-5-62; Code of 1985, Sec. 27-18; Ord. of 8-2-88, 1—4; Ord. of 10-17-88, 20; Ord. of 4-1-91; Ord. No. 1325, §§ 4, 5, 4-21-03)  
Sec. 17-2.9. - Recovery of police expenses for traffic control and protection for entertainment-related events. 
(a)  Purpose. The City of New Haven shall seek to recover police expenses for traffic control costs for entertainment-related events from its sponsors. Further, the city shall seek to recover traffic control costs and all necessary or required police protection costs for places of amusements from the person or persons operating, conducting or promoting such places. All such police cost recovery shall be to the extent allowed by C.G.S. Section 7-284. 
(b)  Recovering police expenses for traffic control costs for entertainment-related events. 
(1)  Cost Recovery for traffic control costs for entertainment-related events: The entertainment-related event sponsor shall work with the police department's designee to memorialize a cost recovery plan that will cover charges by the police for event traffic control. The city will provide the sponsor a cost recovery invoice detailing estimated fees prior to the event. Said fees shall be estimated using the following factors: 
a.  The location, duration, route, time and date and expected size of the event; and 
b.  The expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages; and 
c.  The number of streets and intersections blocked and what portion of the streets are planned to be used for the event; and 
d.  Whether bridges or main arteries shall be involved in the event route; and 
e.  The need to detour or preempt citizens' travel on, and use of, the streets and sidewalks. 
(2)  Time when payment is due: The event sponsor shall make payment to the city, incurred in accordance with (b)(1) above in full for estimated cost recovery within (60) days after the event is held. 
(3)  Cancellation by the event sponsor: The event sponsor is responsible to notify the police department's designee twenty-four hours before the postponement or cancellation of an event. The event sponsor shall be charged for city services provided in advance of the event up through the time of notification. 
(4)  Indigency: The event sponsor shall pay all costs associated with police traffic costs under this section. To the extent there is a total or partial inability to pay said costs, the event sponsor must submit a notarized affidavit certifying as to indigent status. The event sponsor shall pay costs to the city to the best of its ability, regardless of whether said payment covers the full extent of the city's costs. 
(5)  Failure to comply: If the event sponsor fails to satisfy this obligation within the time specified in this section, the city will commence all appropriate legal action to collect all debts owed the city. In addition, under section 29-11 of the New Haven code, no future event permits shall be issued until all obligations under this section have been satisfied. 
(c)  Recovering police expenses for police protection and traffic control costs for places of amusement. 
(1)  Cost recovery for city departmental services: The person or persons operating, conducting, or promoting places of amusement shall reimburse the city for police protection when necessary or required in accordance with C.G.S. Section 7-284. The amount of such protection shall be determined by the chief of the police department or his/her designee. Any such protection shall be paid for by the person or persons operating, conducting or promoting such place of amusement. 
If First Amendment speech is a factor considered by the police in determining the amount of police protection, the police cost specifically associated with First Amendment protection (including, but not limited to, the human resources necessary for crowd control) shall not be charged to the operator, conductor or promoter. 
For traffic control costs deemed necessary by the police department, said costs shall be determined by the police department using the following factors: 
a.  The location, duration, time and date and size of the gathering; and 
b.  The expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages; and 
c.  The need to detour or preempt citizens' travel on, and use of, the streets and sidewalks. 
(2)  Time when payment is due: The operator, conductor or promoter shall make payment to the city, incurred in accordance with (c)(1) above in full within sixty (60) days after city invoice. 
(3)  Failure to comply: If the event person or persons operating, conducting or promoting such place of amusement fails to satisfy this obligation within the time specified in this section, the city will commence all appropriate legal action to collect all debts owed the city. 
(d)  Appeal. The person or persons operating, conducting or promoting such place of amusement or entertainment-related event may appeal the charges stated in the cost recovery invoice to the board of police commissioners, and shall file his/her notice of appeal with the office of the chief administrative officer ("CAO"). 
(e)  Administrative regulations. The CAO shall develop administrative regulations related to this section. The regulations may be amended from time to time, subject to the approval from the board of aldermen, and shall be made available to the public by the police department and/or the office of the CAO. 
(f)  Severability. If any clause of this section is or becomes illegal, invalid or unenforceable because of present or future laws or any rule or regulations or by any governmental body, or entity, including any court of law, the remaining part of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby and shall be in full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. 1634, 8-2-10 )  
ARTICLE III. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND GAME ROOMS 
 
Sec. 17-3. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits In General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-3.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following meanings apply: 
Game machine means any machine or device operated by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, or other means of payment for the purpose of amusement, recreation, skill or chance, such as electronic game machines, video games, pin ball, or other similar devices. The term "game machine" does not include a bowling alley or jukebox. 
Game room means any building or portion thereof, which is used for purposes including, but not limited to, the operation of three or more game machines by the general public or specific invitees. 
Jukebox means any machine or device operated by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, or other means of payment for the purpose of emitting audio or images for amusement or entertainment. The term "jukebox" includes any machine or device, including but not limited to, videodisc, DVD, CD-R, DVD-R, MP-3, or other playback and/or recording formats. 
Peepshow or panorama means any device, which upon insertion of a coin or by other means, exhibits or displays a picture or view on film. 
Distributor means any person or entity that owns or distributes any amusement device, whether on his own behalf or for another, within the city. 
Operator means any person or entity owning, managing or conducting a place of business in the city, which keeps or maintains one (1) or more amusement devices to be used by the public or specific invitees. 
Amusement device or device means a game machine, jukebox, peepshow or panorama. The city reserves the right to expand upon this definition to include new contrivances as the state of technology develops. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism judicially determined to be a gambling device, or otherwise declared contrary to law. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-3.2. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to sell, lease or rent amusement device(s) within the city without first obtaining a distributor's license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person or entity that owns, manages or conducts a place of business in the city, to keep or maintain three (3) or more amusement devices without first obtaining a game room operator's license therefor, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person or entity that owns, manages or conducts a place of business in the city, to keep or maintain one (1) or two (2) amusement devices without obtaining an operator's license for each device. Not more than one (1) device may be operated or placed in operation under one (1) such license. If the operator owns, manages or conducts a place of business for three (3) or more amusement devices, the license issued under subparagraph (b) above is sufficient to meet the license requirements of this article. An individual license for each amusement device under this subparagraph is not required. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-3.3. - Application. 
(a)  In order to obtain a distributor's license, an interested person must file an application with the issuer. In addition to the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code, the applicant must include the description or type of amusement device(s) to be covered by the license. 
(b)  In order to obtain an operator's license, an interested person must file an application under oath to the issuer. In addition to the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code and the information required by subsection (a), the applicant must provide all of the following information: 
(1)  Name and business address of the distributor of each amusement device. 
(2)  Address where each amusement device is to be displayed or operated. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-3.4. - Issuance. 
Upon approval of the application, and payment of the fee(s) in accordance with section 17-201 of this Code, the issuer shall issue a license to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-3.5. - Duties. 
In addition to the requirements and duties applicable to all licenses and permits issued by the issuer, and to other duties expressed in this article: 
(a)  A licensee may substitute one amusement device for a similar one under the license. 
(b)  An operator's license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously on the front of or on the wall above the location of the amusement device on the premises where it is to be kept or operated, together with the name and address of the distributor. However, if an operator's license is issued under section 17-3.2(b) for three (3) or more amusement devices, only one such notice shall be placed permanently and conspicuously on the premises. When the operator is the owner of the amusement device he is not required to post the name and address of the distributor. 
(c)  No person to whom a license has been issued under this article shall permit any other person to operate his business or display his license, nor shall such other person operate under or display such license. 
(d)  Each operator shall maintain good order in his place of business in accordance with accepted community standards regarding public health, safety and welfare, and shall not permit any amusement device to be used for gambling. 
(e)  Each distributor shall submit annually to the issuer a list of all amusement devices placed within the city. The list shall be alphabetized by street address, and shall indicate the number and type of amusement device(s) at each address. On the tenth day of each month the distributor shall submit a similarly constructed supplemental list showing additions and removals of such amusement devices to the issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE IV. - AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS 
 
Sec. 17-4. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits In General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following meanings apply: 
Auctioneer means an individual who calls bids at an auction. 
Auction means a transaction conducted by means of exchanges between an auctioneer and the members of his audience. It constitutes a series of invitations for offers for the purchase of goods or articles of personal property made by the auctioneer, offers by members of the audience, and the acceptance of the highest or most favorable offer. 
(b)  The provisions of this article do not apply to any sale authorized by law, or conducted pursuant to an order or under the authority of any court. Additionally, persons selling their own household goods are exempt from the license and permit requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.2. - Auction permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to expose or offer for sale any goods or articles of personal property by competitive bidding or at public auction within the city without obtaining a permit for those purposes in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.3. - Auctioneer license required. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to engage in any business as an auctioneer without obtaining a license for that purpose in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.4. - Disqualification of applicant. 
An applicant will not be issued a license or permit if the police chief or his designee determines that the applicant is not a suitable person. This determination will be made on a case-by-case basis, depending upon factors that include, but are not limited to, one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(b)  The factors listed in section 17-1.4 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.5. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee in accordance with section 17-201 of this Code, the issuer shall issue a permit or license to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 21-5 of the general statutes, the city shall not require any license fee from any blind person, resident of this state, for the privilege of selling within its limits goods, wares and merchandise, manufactured by him with his own hands. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.6. - Term of auction permit. 
Every auction permit issued under this article shall expire within sixty days following its issuance date unless revoked sooner as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.7. - Suspension, cancellation or revocation. 
In addition to the reasons listed in section 17-1.15 of this Code, the issuer may cancel, suspend or revoke such permit or license for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  Participation in false bidding at any auction. 
(b)  Misrepresentation of the quality, kind or value of any article at any auction. 
(c)  Substitution of any article in lieu of that offered to and purchased by the bidder at any auction. 
(d)  False representation or pretense of the purchase, history or character of any goods, wares or merchandise at any auction. This includes any statements that the articles are in whole or in part, goods sold for, belonging to or purchased from a bankrupt or insolvent person, company or corporation, or damaged goods, or goods saved from fire. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-4.8. - Duties of the auctioneer. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale by auction a stock of merchandise that is being represented or advertised in any way as that belonging to or kept in the business of another person, firm or corporation without being listed in an inventory, and filed with a notarized affidavit when applying for a permit to the issuer. The inventory must set up the quantity, quality, kind and grade of each item. In the case of an individual, said affidavit shall be made by him as such; in the case of a firm, it shall be made by one of the partners; and in the case of a corporation, it shall be made by a principal officer of the corporation. The issuer shall keep such inventory and affidavit on file as public records. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE V. - BILLIARD TABLES AND BOWLING ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 17-5. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits In General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-5.1. - Permit required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or keep open a public billiard or pool room having at least one billiard table without having first secured a permit to do so as provided for by section 53-280 of the general statutes and this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to keep or use, or suffer to be kept or used, for hire, in any premises occupied by him, or under his control, any pool table, billiard table or bowling alley without a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Any person who conducts, maintains or keeps open a public billiard or pool room without a permit issued pursuant to this article will be fined or imprisoned or both in accordance with section 53-280 of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-5.2. - Application. 
In addition to the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code, in order to obtain a permit under this article, an interested person must provide all of the following information in the application he files with the issuer: 
(a)  Description of the place where the room is to be located. 
(b)  Number of tables or alleys to be used. 
(c)  Proprietor's name. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-5.3. - Issuance. 
(a)  Before a permit may be issued to conduct a public billiard and pool room, the applicant shall pay to the city the fees prescribed by section 17-201 of this Code and section 53-280 of the general statutes. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application and compliance with subsection (a), the issuer may issue a permit to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article and section 53-280 of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-5.4. - Suspension, cancellation, or revocation. 
In addition to the reasons listed in section 17-1.15 of this Code, the issuer may suspend, cancel or revoke such permit for cause after it has been issued for use of one (1) or more pool tables, billiard tables or bowling alleys for purposes of gaming or gambling. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE VI. - BROKERS 
 
Sec. 17-6. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits In General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-6.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Antique means an object with special value because of its age, especially a work of art or handicraft that is more than one hundred (100) years old. 
Article means any item regardless of value, including but not limited to gold or gold-plated ware, silver or silver-plated ware, watches, jewelry, precious stones, coins, junk, old metals, scrap, rags, waste paper and all other secondhand articles. 
Broker means any person who engages in the business of buying and/or bartering articles from the public and reselling them to the public. The term "broker" includes all those whom the city previously classified as secondhand dealers, antique and/or precious metal dealers, pawnbrokers, junk dealers and swap shop dealers. 
Wholesaler means a person in the business of selling tangible personal property to be resold at retail or raw materials to be manufactured into suitable forms for use by consumers. 
(b)  This article does not apply to loans made upon stock, bonds, notes or other written or printed evidence of ownership of property or indebtedness to the holder or owner of any such securities. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 21-100 of the general statutes, this article does not apply to the purchase of such items from a wholesaler by a manufacturer or retail seller whose primary place of business is located in Connecticut. 
(d)  This article does not apply to any dealer in motor vehicles as defined in chapter 246 of the general statutes, any scrap metal processor as defined in section 14-67w of said statutes, and to any dealer in antique household furniture, china or glassware. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-6.2. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person, corporation or partnership to engage in business as a broker before obtaining a currently valid license from the issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-6.3. - Application. 
In accordance with relevant state statutes and this article, an interested person must provide all of the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code and all of the following information in the application he files with the issuer: 
(a)  A valid Connecticut state tax number. 
(b)  Description of any merchandise to be sold. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-6.4. - Disqualification of applicant. 
(a)  An applicant will not be issued a license or permit if the police chief or his designee determines that the applicant is not a suitable person. This determination will be made on a case-by-case basis, depending upon factors that include, but are not limited to, one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or convicted for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of the crime of larceny, or receiving or being in possession of stolen property within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant has named a person who has been convicted as described in subsection (1) and/or (2) as having the active management of a building, room or premises in which the business takes place. 
(4)  Each of the factors listed in section 17-1.4 of this Code. 
(b)  The police chief may take the fingerprints of an applicant for such license and, if such fingerprints are taken, shall submit them to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a national criminal history records check. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-6.5. - Fees. 
(a)  Before a license may be issued under this article, the applicant shall pay to the issuer the fee required by section 17-201 of this Code. 
(b)  Upon issuance of a license under this article, the licensee shall file the bond required by section 21-40 of the general statutes with the issuer for his approval. The bond, with competent surety, shall be in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed. Upon his approval of such bond, the issuer shall turn the bond over to the controller. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-6.6. - Duties. 
(a)  Each broker must receive proof of the identity of the person depositing, pledging or selling the article before he takes, receives or purchases it. Such identification must include a photograph, an address if available on the identification, and an identifying number. 
(b)  Each broker must keep a record in which he must note, at the time of each transaction, a description of the article purchased and the price paid for it, the name and address of the person selling, purchasing, pawning or bartering it, a general description of such person, and the date and hour such article was received. This record must be maintained for police inspection. All entries in such record must be made in English. 
(c)  Each broker must provide a memorandum or note containing the entry made pursuant to this section to the person who pawns, pledges or sells an article. 
(d)  Each broker must pay for any property received by pawn, pledge or purchase only by check, draft or money order, except when he cashes a check, draft or money order for the person who is pawning, pledging or selling the property. When the broker cashes a check, draft or money order, he must require proof of identity as required by subsection (a) above. 
(e)  At the time of making any purchase each broker must deliver to the person selling the articles a receipt containing the information required to be recorded in subsection (b) above, the amount paid for any goods sold, and the name and address of the purchaser. 
(f)  No broker may purchase any goods from a minor who is not accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(g)  No broker may loan money at any higher rate than that provided by state statute. 
(h)  Brokers of precious metals, including gold or gold-plated ware, silver or silver-plated ware, platinum ware, watches, jewelry, precious stones and coins, may not dispose of them at the brokerage or at public sale for at least ten (10) days upon receiving them. 
(i)  No broker may dispose of any article left with him in pledge for money loaned in less than two (2) months from the day when the same is left in pledge. Any article may be sold or disposed of at the brokerage or at public sale after advertisement in a daily newspaper published in the city at least once two (2) days before the sale. The advertisement must state the number of the pledge ticket representing the property offered for sale, and the date when such ticket was issued. 
(j)  Each broker must make weekly a sworn statement of his transactions describing the articles received, and setting forth the name and residence and a description of the person from whom the goods were received. This statement must be provided to the police chief or his designee at police headquarters in New Haven on Monday, no later than 12:00 noon. Any broker who willfully fails to make such report shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) per offense. Each day that a broker fails to submit such report once due shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-6.7. - Rights of police. 
(a)  The police chief or his designee may examine the broker's record-keeping system, place of business and all articles of property therein at any time. 
(b)  Any municipal police officer performing such examination may require any employee on the premises to provide proof of his identity. 
(c)  When a law enforcement officer seizes an article from the broker's premises, he shall give the broker a duly signed receipt for it, including a case number, a description of the article, the reason for the seizure, the name and address of the officer, the name and address of the person claiming a right to the article prior to the broker, and the name of the broker. If the broker claims an ownership interest in such article, he may request its return by filing a request for such article with the law enforcement agency in accordance with the provisions of section 54-36a of the general statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE VII. - FLEA MARKETS AND TAG SALES 
 
Sec. 17-7. - Provisions of Articles I and XI apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits In General, and of Article XI, Vendors, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-7.1. - Definitions of flea market and flea market manager. 
For the purposes of this article, the following meanings apply: 
Flea market means an offering of goods, wares or merchandise for sale, located on private property not devoted to residential use: 
(1)  By two (2) or more vendors for one (1) or more days; or 
(2)  By one (1) or more vendors for three (3) or more consecutive days; or 
(3)  By one (1) or more vendors for nine (9) or more days during any twelve-month period. 
Flea market manager means the person who owns, controls or is otherwise authorized to operate a flea market upon the private property. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-7.2. - License required; exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a flea market unless the manager of the flea market is licensed as a managing itinerant vendor pursuant to sections 21-27 through 21-35 of the general statutes, and as a managing vendor pursuant to this article. 
(b)  In the event that the provisions of the above subsection are complied with, no vendor selling goods within the established boundaries of a flea market only shall be required to obtain a vendor's license pursuant to section 17-11.2 of this Code. Nothing in this subsection shall exempt either the managing vendor or vendor from complying with all other applicable requirements of state or municipal law. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-7.3. - Prerequisites. 
At least ten (10) days prior to commencement of the flea market, such manager in its capacity as managing vendor shall submit the following items to the issuer: 
(a)  A weekly report of the complete list of participating vendors. 
(b)  A certified statement that all vendors, including the managing vendor and all such agents operating under section 21-28(c) of the general statutes, are acting in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations and municipal ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-7.4. - Fee. 
Before a license may be issued under this article, the applicant shall pay the fee prescribed by section 17-201 of this Code to the issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-7.5. - Tag sales. 
(a)  "Tag sale" means an offering of personal goods for sale on private property devoted to residential use, for a maximum period of two (2) consecutive days, by one (1) or more people residing at such property. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "tag sale", "garage sale" and "yard sale" are the same. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "personal goods" means household items and clothing purchased by or given to the seller for his personal consumption. 
(c)  A "tag sale" is not an "auction", "bazaar", or "raffle" as such terms are used elsewhere in this chapter. 
(d)  Up to four (4) tag sales may be held at such property during a twelve-month period, provided that no more than two (2) such sales may he held in the same month, no more than one (1) such sale may be held during the same week, and such sales may not be held in more than two (2) consecutive weeks. 
(e)  No license is required for sales that comply with all of the conditions and limitations contained in subsections (a), (b), and (d) of this section. 
(f)  Any sales that do not comply with all of the conditions and limitations contained in subsections (a), (b) and (d) of this section are not tag sales and are, therefore, subject to applicable licensing or permitting requirements, and fees, stated elsewhere in this article, chapter or Code. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE VIII. - PRIVATE PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES 
 
Sec. 17-8. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits In General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-8.1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following meanings apply: 
Garage means every place of business where six (6) or more motor vehicles are stored, housed or parked in return for compensation. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle propelled or drawn by any power other than muscular, except aircraft, motor boats, road rollers, baggage trucks used about railroad stations, agricultural tractors, farm implements and such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks. 
Parking lot means any place, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure used in whole or in part for storing or parking six (6) or more motor vehicles in return for compensation. 
(b)  The provisions of this article do not apply to garage owners or lot owners who rent parking space exclusively on a monthly basis, and parking lot or garage facilities owned by or leased to the city. 
(c)  The provisions of this article apply to parking lots and garages governed by this article regardless of their number of available spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-8.2. - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to conduct, operate or maintain a parking lot or garage as defined herein without obtaining a license for those purposes in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-8.3. - Application. 
In order to obtain a license under this article, an interested person must file an application with the issuer, and provide all of the following information in addition to the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code: 
(a)  The name under which, and the place where, the parking lot or garage is to be operated. 
(b)  Whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant, and if leased, the name and residence and business address of each owner or part owner thereof. 
(c)  A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for storing motor vehicles. 
(d)  The hours during which motor vehicles may be stored. 
(e)  The hours during which parking attendants will be on duty at the lot or garage. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-8.4. - Issuance. 
Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee(s) prescribed by section 17-201 of this Code, the issuer shall issue a license to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-8.5. - Duties. 
(a)  The licensee shall perform the following duties upon issuance of the license: 
(1)  Rate increase: There shall be no increase in parking rates unless and until they are filed with the issuer. 
(2)  Signs displayed: The licensee shall maintain at each entrance to such parking lot or garage a permanently affixed sign suitable to apprise persons using the same, of the rates charged for parking. When more than one (1) rate is charged for parking, the figure for each shall be of the same size and dimension. The figures shall measure not less than six (6) inches in height and three (3) inches in width. The sign shall state the opening and closing hours when motor vehicles can be stored, as well as the operator's duties to the owners of the motor vehicles. These duties shall not extend beyond the regular posted hours of attendance. 
(3)  Claim checks: The licensee and his agents, servants and employees shall offer the operator of a motor vehicle a check when the vehicle is accepted for parking or storage in the garage or lot. The check number shall correspond with a coupon placed on the motor vehicle. 
(4)  Fire protection: Each licensee of a garage or parking lot shall have a foam fire extinguisher on the premises to protect the public and their property. 
(5)  Notice of claims: Each licensee shall immediately notify the police of any claim of loss, theft or conversion occurring upon his premises. 
(6)  Each licensee shall post its permit on the premises. 
(7)  Each licensee shall post a phone number for after-hour contact and/or emergency. 
(b)  The licensee shall be held liable for any motor vehicle stored or parked in his parking lot or garage, by or through his own fault, and that of his employees. This liability shall not apply while the vehicle is under the operator's direction and control. 
(c)  The licensee may disclaim liability for the loss of or damage to personal property left or contained in motor vehicles by appropriate contractual provisions in the parking ticket. The disclaimer is effective provided a sign giving notice to that effect is posted in the parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE IX. - SALES DOOR-TO-DOOR 
 
Sec. 17-9. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits In General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-9.1. - License required. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to go from door-to-door for the purpose of selling or soliciting orders for the sale of merchandise, services, subscriptions, or any combination thereof, without prior specific request by an occupant of the premises, or without first securing a home solicitation license from the issuer. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 21-38 of the general statutes, any person engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this article will be fined the maximum amount allowed by said statute. Each day that a person operates in violation of this article constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-9.2. - Application. 
All applications for a home solicitation license shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the issuer. The application shall include all of the following information in addition to all of the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code: 
(a)  A valid Connecticut state tax number. 
(b)  A description of the merchandise, services or subscriptions to be sold. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-9.3. - Conditions. 
(a)  The applicant shall file a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with the issuer to be held by the controller. A copy of the receipt showing payment of said bond, a picture of the applicant suitable for inclusion in the license identification, and the licensing fee, if any, must be filed with the application. 
(b)  The police chief or his designee shall investigate the applicant's business conduct, including but not limited to inquiries to any police department, better business bureau or consumer protection department, and the neighborhood where the solicitation is to be conducted, to ensure that the proposed solicitation would not have a negative impact upon the public safety, health and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-9.4. - Issuance. 
Upon finding that the facts stated in the application are true and complete, and upon payment of a fee as prescribed by section 17-201 of this Code, the issuer shall issue a dated and signed license in accordance with the provisions of this article. The license identification shall include the full name of the licensee and a photograph of the licensee. The licensee shall carry the license identification on his person, and the license shall be exhibited to anyone requesting to see the same at any time while engaged in the activities authorized by such license. The license shall be personal and nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-9.5. - Prohibited acts. 
No licensee shall: 
(a)  Conduct door-to-door sales before 9:00 a.m. or after sunset. 
(b)  Imply that having a license constitutes an endorsement or recommendation by the city. 
(c)  Advertise in any manner that they have obtained a license from the city. 
(d)  Use any false or deceptive inducements. 
(e)  Misrepresent to a prospective customer that he is being given a special, introductory price or discount, or any other concession. 
(f)  Misrepresent that anyone, whether connected with the seller or not, is interested in seeing that the prospective customer gets a bargain, special price, discount or any other concession. 
(g)  Substitute any product or material, or deliver or apply a product of a different brand, grade, or quality from that represented by any sample, illustration or model. 
(h)  Give any guarantee that is not specific, clear and definite, or which shall misrepresent or mislead the customer to believe that the manufacturer or anyone else is the guarantor of the product, or give any guarantee unless the same is in writing. 
(i)  Start installation or apply a small portion of the product with the misrepresentation that it is a try out or test, or any other reason, where it is in fact done so that the seller can claim partial performance, or that work has actually begun on the job, and induce or force the purchaser into the terms of the contract. 
(j)  Misrepresent or mislead the prospective customer into believing that insurance or some other form of protection will be given if the customer is in any way unable to make the payments agreed upon. 
(k)  Misrepresent or mislead the customer into believing that the signing of any completion slip, financial statement, advertising agreement, contract, bond, promissory note, or any other document, either before or after completion of the job, will impose no obligation on the customer, or that such signing will relieve or end some or all of the seller's obligations. 
(l)  Ask or require the customer to sign a completion slip before the installation or job is completed in accordance with the terms of the contract. 
(m)  Gain entry or access into the prospective customer's home or onto his property under the guise of any governmental inspection right or duty, or the misrepresentation that the licensee has such authority, or under the guise that the licensee is an employee of a public utility, or is authorized to appear by any school authority. 
(n)  Fail to disclose that the offered price does not include delivery or installation, if such is the fact. 
(o)  Fail to disclose in writing all financial arrangements, interest, service fees, credit investigation costs, and any building or installation permit fees, or that the promissory note or any other similar instrument will be placed with a financial institution or collection agency. 
(p)  Misrepresent through the use of any pictures, drawings or illustrations, scare tactics, demonstration devices or claims which threaten or imply any physical, mental or bodily harm. 
(q)  Misrepresent that maintenance, service or repairs and replacement parts will be readily available within the customer's immediate trade area. 
(r)  Disparage or degrade any of the seller's own products or services in order to attempt to induce the customer to buy higher priced products or material from the seller. 
(s)  Misrepresent to the purchaser that his property is or will be condemned if no work is done, or that his property is or will be in danger if no work is done. 
(t)  Promise or give any money as an inducement for making the sale, or promise to represent that the licensee will make the down payment. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-9.6. - Soliciting by children. 
No child under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be allowed to engage in soliciting or other conduct under this article, unless they have been issued working papers by the issuing authority, or are otherwise permitted to do so under state and/or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-9.7. - Duties. 
All persons licensed under this article shall furnish a copy of all written documents to the purchaser, who is requested to sign at the time of the signing. Before beginning work of any kind, the licensee must enter into a contract or performing firm agreement with the purchaser as to the price and work to be done, provided that no written contract shall be required where work to be done is of an emergency nature, and the total cost does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). Any such agreement shall include therein a complete statement as to all of the following: 
(a)  Specific work to be done. 
(b)  Material to be used, describing it by brand name if possible, and by weight, size and color. 
(c)  Guarantees and warranties made or represented to the buyer in writing, setting forth by whom guaranteed or warranted, and any and all exclusions and limitations as to costs to repair replacement of parts, service charges and labor charges. 
(d)  The time in which the work is expected to be completed. 
(e)  All financing, including the initial cost, any time charges, together with the amount of payment, the time at which the payments will begin, and length of time for which they will continue. 
(f)  A statement agreeing to restore and repair any part of the purchaser's property that is destroyed or damaged, where such damage results from the acts of the contractor, or of the seller, or any of their agents or employees. 
(g)  A statement that the fact that the licensee has a license from the city does not constitute an endorsement of the person, product or service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE X. - SALES: FIRE, LIQUIDATION, CLOSING OUT 
 
Sec. 17-10. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and PermitsIn General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following meanings apply: 
Advertise means methods of conveying information to the general public including but not limited to newspapers, magazines or other publications, books, notices, handbills, posters, bills, circulars, pamphlets, letters, signs, placards, cards, labels, or electronic media including but not limited to radio and television. 
Closing-out sale, as defined in section 21-35a of the general statutes, means all sales advertised or held forth under the designation of "going out of business", "selling out", "liquidation", "lost our lease", "forced to vacate", "moving to a new location", or any other designation of like meaning. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.2. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to advertise or conduct any sale of goods, wares or merchandise at retail in the city by expressly or implicitly representing such sale as a closing-out sale without first obtaining a license for that purpose in accordance with section 21-35d of the general statutes, and the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In accordance with section 21-35j of the general statutes, this article does not apply to or affect sales or persons conducting such sales pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction, or to any sheriff, constable or other public or court officer, or to any other person acting under the license, direction or authority of any state or federal court selling goods, wares or merchandise in the course of their official duties, or to end of the season sales, or to sales limited to closing out a particular brand or line of goods. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.3. - Application, inventory and affidavit. 
(a)  In order to obtain a license under this article, an interested person must file an application with the issuer, and provide all of the following information in addition to the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code: 
(1)  A valid Connecticut state tax number. 
(2)  Period of time during which the proposed sale is to continue, which shall not exceed sixty (60) successive days from the date of issuance of said license. 
(3)  All taxes ever previously levied or assessed on the stock of goods set forth in the inventory. 
(b)  The application shall be attached to an inventory containing a complete and accurate list of the stock of goods, wares and merchandise on hand to be sold at such sale. The inventory shall contain the cost price of each respective article with the date of its purchase and identity of the seller(s). If the applicant, or entity that he represents, purchased the goods, wares or merchandise for a lump sum, or under other circumstances making the list price impracticable, said inventory shall state the lump sum paid for the items and the circumstances of the purchase. 
(c)  The inventory shall be attached to a notarized affidavit stating that the information set forth in the inventory is true and accurate to the knowledge of the affiant. The affidavit shall include the names and addresses of the principals, such as the partners, officers, directors, principal stockholders and owners of the business and the inventoried merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.4. - Issuance. 
Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee prescribed by section 17-201 of this Code, and in compliance with section 21-35d of the general statutes, the issuer shall issue a license to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.5. - Term. 
(a)  The license shall not exceed sixty (60) successive days from the issuance date. 
(b)  In accordance with section 17-201 of this Code, the issuer may charge a prorated fee for a license with a term shorter than sixty (60) days. The term may be extended to a total of sixty (60) days upon payment of the discounted amount. The extension may not exceed sixty (60) days from the original issuance date. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.6. - Supplemental license. 
(a)  The issuer has discretion to issue a supplemental license extending a closing-out sale by a period not to exceed thirty (30) days beyond the initial sixty-day term. A licensee must apply for the extension during the term of the original license by providing all of the following information: 
(1)  The amount of the goods, wares and merchandise listed in the original inventory that have been sold since the initial license was issued. 
(2)  The amount of goods, wares and merchandise listed in the original inventory that still remain in the possession of the licensee for sale. 
(3)  The amount of additional time being requested. 
(b)  The licensee shall submit an affidavit or otherwise demonstrate to the issuer that no goods, wares or merchandise were added to the stock of merchandise listed in the inventory filed pursuant to section 17-10.3(b) of this Code, and since the issuance date of the initial license. No supplemental license shall be granted if there was such an addition. 
(c)  The issuer has discretion in determining the length of the extension. However, he shall not exceed thirty (30) days from the expiration of the original license. Upon approval of the supplemental license and payment of the per diem fee prescribed by section 17-201 of this Code, the issuer shall issue the supplemental license. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.7. - Rights of police. 
The police chief or his designee shall verify the details of the inventory filed pursuant to section 17-10.3(b) of this Code, and the affidavit filed pursuant to section 17-10.6(b) if an extension is applied for, and the items sold during the closing-out sale. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-10.8. - Prohibited acts. 
The issuer may refuse to issue a license under this article, or suspend, cancel or revoke such license after it has been issued, for violation of any of the following acts: 
(a)  No one shall make any false or misleading statement in the application, inventory or renewal application filed pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The stock of merchandise shall be limited to that listed in the inventory filed under section 17-10.3(b) of this Code. 
(c)  Nothing shall be offered or sold at any sale that was added to the stock of merchandise listed in said inventory, or added to such stock within sixty (60) days prior to the filing of the initial application. 
(d)  Upon demand by any authorized city official, all persons shall furnish the complete facts concerning the stock on hand, and all other information that said official shall reasonably require in order to make a thorough investigation of every phase of said sale as they relate to the rights of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), 12-17-01)  
ARTICLE XI. - VENDORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1819, adopted April 19, 2017, repealed the former article XI, §§ 17-11—17-11.12, and enacted a new article XI as set out herein. The former article XI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(J), adopted Dec. 17, 2001. 
 
Sec. 17-11. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions of Article I, Licenses and Permits in General, of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following meanings apply: 
Cedar Street or Cedar Street special vending district means all that area contained in and adjacent to Cedar Street between York Street and Congress Avenue. 
City means the City of New Haven and any of its employees. Wherever the title of a city officer, official or employee is used in this section, the title of the officer, official or employee shall mean and include such person and his or her deputy or other authorized subordinates. 
Conveyance means any pushcart, stand, food truck, trailer cart, or vehicle used by a vendor in the street or public sidewalk. 
Downtown or downtown special vending district means all that area lying north of the right-of-way center line of Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard, west of the right-of-way center line of State Street, south of the right-of-way center line of Trumbull Street, east of the right-of-way center line of Prospect Street, south of the right-of-way center line of Grove Street, south and east of the right-of-way center line of Tower Parkway, and east of the right-of-way center line of Howe Street. 
Food truck means any motor vehicle as defined in the general statutes equipped with facilities for cooking and selling food. 
Licensed vendor means the holder of a valid vendor license which allows that person to vend. 
Long Wharf Drive or Long Wharf Drive special vending district means all that area contained in and adjacent to Long Wharf Drive between Canal Dock Road and Sargent Drive. 
Managing vendor means any person who conducts, manages or organizes a show for purposes of exhibition and sale at a temporary location that is open to the general public and at which goods, wares or merchandise are on display and offered for sale by vendors. 
Managing vendor license means the license issued by the city to a vendor which allows him or her or it to conduct, manage, or organize vending anywhere in the city in accordance with this article. 
Parking site license means the bi-annual license issued by the city to a licensed vendor to vend in a specific parking space location either in the downtown special vending district or in the Long Wharf Drive special vending district, in accordance with this article and its special vending district regulations. 
Public place means any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, any public park, square, space or grounds, any publicly owned or leased land or buildings. 
Pushcart means any wheeled vehicle or device, other than a motor vehicle, used by a vendor in a public place, which may be moved with or without a motor and which does not require registration by the department of motor vehicles. 
Sachem Street or Sachem Street special vending district means all that area contained in and adjacent to Sachem Street between Prospect Street and Mansfield Street. 
Sidewalk site license means: 
(1)  The bi-annual license issued by the city to a licensed vendor to vend in a specific sidewalk location either in the Cedar Street special vending district or in the Sachem Street special vending district, in accordance with this article and its special vending district regulations. 
(2)  The bi-annual license issued by the city to a licensed vendor to vend on the sidewalk in the downtown special vending district, in accordance with this article and its special vending district regulations. 
Special vending district means an operational area designated by the city within which a licensed vendor may operate in accordance with its special vending district regulations. 
Stand means any movable, portable or collapsible structure, framework, table, container, basket or other equipment or device, other than a vehicle, used by a vendor in a public place for the purpose of displaying, keeping or storing any goods or merchandise or any article used in the business of vending. Stands shall be required to have four (4) functioning wheels such that they can be quickly moved in the event of an emergency. 
Temporary location means any tent, booth, building or other nonpermanent structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business hours for a period of at least nine (9) months in each year. 
Trailer cart means any conveyance larger than a pushcart, eight (8) feet in length and five (5) feet in width, which is towed to a location by a vehicle where the vendor will be operating inside or next to the vending conveyance. 
Vend or vending means to peddle, hawk, sell, barter or lease; to offer to sell, barter, or lease; or to display for sale, barter, or lease any goods, wares, merchandise, or services, or enter into any business transaction. 
Vendor means: 
(1)  Any person who engages in selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or from any animal, conveyance or vehicle. 
(2)  Any person who engages in selling goods, wares and merchandise from a temporary location. 
Vendor license means the annual license issued by the city to a vendor which allows him or her or it to vend in the city in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.2. - Vendor license required. 
(a)  Any person who engages in vending upon the public streets or upon any state highway, except limited access highways, within the city or any land abutting such streets or highways is required to obtain a vendor license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person who sells or exposes any goods, wares or merchandise for sale at a temporary location must obtain a vendor license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person who engages in the activities of a managing vendor must obtain a managing vendor license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The following are exempt from the requirements of this article: tag sales, house-to-house sale of newspapers and magazines, restaurant seating on a sidewalk served by a kitchen in an abutting structure, general sales, and fairs, auctions or bazaars by nonprofit organizations, religious groups or government. 
(e)  Pursuant to section 21-37 of the general statutes, the following sales are exempt from the requirements of this article: sales by farmers and gardeners of the produce of their farms, gardens and greenhouses, including fruit, vegetables and flowers, or to the sale, distribution and delivery of milk, teas, coffees, spices, groceries, meats and bakery goods, to sales on approval, to conditional sales of merchandise, or to the taking of orders for merchandise for future delivery when full payment is not required at the time of solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.3. - Application. 
(a)  In order to obtain a vendor license under this article, an interested person must file an application with the issuer, and provide all of the following information in addition to the information required by section 17-1.3 of this Code: 
(1)  A valid Connecticut state tax number. 
(2)  A statement describing the kind and character of the merchandise, services, samples or subscriptions being offered for sale. 
(3)  The proposed location(s) at which the merchandise, services, samples or subscriptions are to be offered. 
(b)  Additionally, an applicant must supply all of the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's photograph, with proof of his or her identity and address. 
(2)  If selling food, a valid health permit from the city health department. 
(3)  If a conveyance is to be used, a photograph and description of it, including its dimensions. 
(4)  If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of it, with copies of the applicant's motor vehicle registration and operator's license. 
(5)  If a leased motor vehicle is used, a copy of the applicant's leasing agreement. 
(6)  Proof of the applicant's insurance, as set forth in vendor license regulations. 
(7)  Disclosure of person or persons having any ownership interest in the vending enterprise for which a permit is being requested. 
(8)  A valid state sales and use tax permit. 
(9)  A site plan showing the location of the vending conveyance in relation to curbs, sidewalks, and public infrastructure, including but not limited to hydrants, bus stops, traffic signals, handicapped ramps, crosswalks, utility poles, street trees and adjacent property lines and building entrances. 
(10)  Payment of the applicable license fee or fees, as prescribed in section 17-201 of this Code and published annually in the city's general fund budget document. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.4. - Disqualification of applicant. 
The background check described in section 17-11.5 of this Code may be waived by the police chief or his designee for an applicant seeking a vendor license for a period of five (5) or fewer consecutive days. Only one (1) waiver per calendar year shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.5. - Conditions. 
The police chief or his designee shall investigate an applicant's business, including but not limited to making inquiries to any police department, better business bureau or consumer protection department, and in the neighborhood where the vending is to be conducted, to ensure that the proposed vending will not have a negative impact upon the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.6. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon finding that the facts stated in the application are true and complete, and upon payment of the license fee prescribed in section 17-201 of this Code as published annually in the city's general fund budget document, the issuer shall issue a dated and signed vendor license in accordance with this article. The vendor license shall include the full name and a photograph of the licensed vendor. The licensed vendor shall carry the vendor license on his person, and the vendor license shall be exhibited to anyone requesting to see the same at any time while the licensed vendor is engaged in the activities authorized by such vendor license. The vendor license shall be personal, nonassignable, nontransferable, and nonsubleasable. 
(b)  The issuance of such a vendor license does not constitute an endorsement of the person, product or service by the city. 
(c)  Pursuant to section 21-30 of the general statutes, any resident of this state who has resided within the state for a period of two (2) years next preceding the date of application for such vendor license, and who is a veteran who served in time of war as defined by section 27-103 of the general statutes, shall not be required to pay any license fee for the privilege of buying, selling or vending goods, wares or merchandise from a temporary location, as defined in section 17-11.1 of this Code, within its limits. The city may defer issuance of such vendor license for a period not to exceed seven (7) days for purpose of investigation. Lapel pins, buttons, flowers, small flags and similar novelties, and books and magazines, shall not be construed to be goods, wares and merchandise within the meaning of this section. Such person must show separation papers to qualify for the exemption. 
(d)  Prior to issuance of such a vendor license for a food truck or other conveyance containing cooking equipment, the applicant shall obtain a permit to sell food from the health department and arrange for an inspection by the fire marshal of the vending conveyance to be used. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.7. - Suspension, cancellation or revocation. 
(a)  In addition to the reasons listed in section 17-1.15 of this Code, the issuer may suspend, cancel, or revoke a vendor license, managing vendor license, parking site license, or sidewalk site license for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensed vendor engaged in conduct of a character likely to mislead, deceive or defraud. 
(2)  The licensed vendor engaged in any untruthful or misleading advertising. 
(3)  The licensed vendor engaged in any breach of decorum including, but not limited to, intimidation or verbal, physical, and/or sexual harassment. 
(4)  The licensed vendor does not have a valid health permit from the city health department. 
(b)  The police chief or his designee shall have the authority to revoke the license of any licensed vendor convicted of violating any provision of this Code, relative to the storing, handling or sale of food, or any similar regulation, or for any other proper cause, upon the presentation of written notice to the applicant establishing such proper cause. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.8. - Special vending districts. 
(a)  The city shall establish special vending districts in the areas of Cedar Street, downtown, Long Wharf Drive, and Sachem Street, as defined in section 17-11.1 of this Code. As deemed necessary by the city, the city may designate additional special vending districts when the number of licensed vendors seeking to engage in vending in a given area exceeds the number of licensed vendors that the city physically can accommodate in that location, or when regulating the location of licensed vendors is necessary to accommodate other commerce, traffic, public safety, or public health concerns. 
(b)  Vending is prohibited in the parking lots contained within the Long Wharf Drive special vending district. Vending by pushcart or stand is prohibited in the Long Wharf Drive special vending district. Use of electricity generators is prohibited in the Long Wharf Drive special vending district. 
(c)  Vending by food truck is prohibited in the Cedar Street special vending district and the Sachem Street special vending district. 
(d)  Vending by food truck or trailer cart is prohibited in the downtown special vending district and in the Long Wharf Drive special vending district, except where explicitly authorized in each special vending district by regulation adopted pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
(e)  On or about December 1, or at such other time as the city shall establish, the city bi-annually shall conduct a lottery process to grant and issue parking site licenses for designated parking spaces in the downtown special vending district and the Long Wharf Drive special vending district, and sidewalk site licenses for designated sidewalk locations in the Cedar Street special vending district and Sachem Street special vending district, to licensed vendors who wish to vend in those special vending districts for the following two (2) calendar years. The city shall charge such fees for parking site licenses and sidewalk site licenses as described in section 17-11.19 of this Code, and receive said fees in such manner as it shall set by regulations adopted pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
(f)  On or about December 1, or at such other time as the city shall establish, the city bi-annually shall grant and issue sidewalk site licenses to licensed vendors who wish to vend by pushcart or stand in the downtown special vending district for the following two (2) calendar years. 
(g)  Within special vending districts, licensed vendors who receive designated parking spaces or designated sidewalk locations pursuant to subsection (e) of this section must locate in the parking space or sidewalk location assigned to them. Licensed vendors who wish to vend by pushcart or stand in the downtown special vending district pursuant to subsection (f) of this section must locate their conveyance in accordance with applicable provisions as to location contained within section 17-11.9 of this Code. 
(h)  The city shall adopt special vending district regulations to implement the provisions of this section. 
(i)  Parking site licenses and sidewalk site licenses are personal, nontransferable, and nonsubleasable, but may be shared or assigned with the prior written approval of the issuer according to regulations adopted pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.9. - General vending regulations. 
All licensed vendors shall comply with regulations promulgated by the city and subject to change from time to time, including, but not limited to, the regulations set forth in this section. Licensed vendors shall be required and agree to comply with such regulations as a condition of obtaining a vendor license: 
(1)  Each conveyance used for vending shall be equipped with a publicly-accessible trash container, not smaller than four (4) feet tall by two (2) feet wide by one (1) foot deep, affixed to it for disposing of trash, litter, garbage, refuse and other waste connected with the vending operation. 
(2)  No licensed vendor shall leave any location without first picking up and removing all trash and refuse remaining from vending sales. No refuse or litter is to be deposited in public waste receptacles. Each licensed vendor must collect and remove all refuse and litter from its location at the end of its business each day. 
(3)  No licensed vendor shall use, set up or attach any crate, carton, rack, or device of any kind to increase the selling display capacity of the conveyance used beyond the above maximum size requirements as set forth is section 17-11.10 for pushcarts, section 17-11.12 for trailer carts, section 17-11.13 for food trucks, and section 17-11.14 for stands of this Code. 
(4)  Vending locations outside of special vending districts must be at least one hundred (100) feet from any other vending conveyance and no more than two (2) locations are allowed on each side of any given block. 
(5)  No licensed vendor selling food shall stop, stand, park, place or allow his conveyance to be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any business selling prepared food items. No licensed vendor selling general merchandise items, including but not limited to clothing, jewelry, cosmetics, phone accessories, purses, wallets, and sunglasses, shall stop, stand, park, place or allow his or her conveyance to be closer than one hundred (100) feet of businesses selling general merchandise items. 
(6)  Vending shall not be conducted within twenty (20) feet of any building entrance, exit, or alcove, driveway, mailbox, traffic signal, bus stop, or loading zone. 
(7)  No conveyance used in vending shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any intersection to assure clear and unobstructed vision for pedestrians and vehicles at corners. No food truck, trailer cart, or other conveyance used in vending shall be located within twenty (20) feet of any fire hydrant. 
(8)  No licensed vendor shall leave any conveyance or stand unattended during hours engaged in sales, nor shall any conveyance be left on the sidewalk overnight. Vendors shall not engage in vending between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
(9)  Vending is prohibited on either side of Broadway between York Street and Broadway's intersection with Whalley, Goffe, and Dixwell Avenues, on either side of Elm Street between York Street and Park Street, and on either side of Chapel Street between Temple Street and Park Street. 
(10)  Vending is prohibited in all residential districts (RS-1, RS-2, RM-1, RM-2, RH-1, RH-2, and RO) and in all PDDs and PDUs, unless otherwise specifically permitted by ordinance. 
(11)  No licensed vendor shall block, obstruct or interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the lawful use of sidewalks or highways or ingress or egress to and from any property. 
(12)  Each licensed vendor shall display in a prominent and visible manner its vending license and, if applicable, its parking site license or sidewalk site license issued by the city while conducting business on a sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(13)  Each licensed vendor shall wear a photo identification badge on his/her person at all times while conducting business. 
(14)  Each licensed vendor shall obtain and maintain insurance and a valid health permit as required by the city and set forth by regulation. Each licensed vendor shall be required to keep a copy of his or her current insurance certificate and health permit on his or her conveyance, and produce them for inspection upon request. 
(15)  Licensed vendors shall be prohibited from engaging in sale of nuisance products including, but not limited to, items commonly known as silly string, an aerosol can from which string-shaped foam-like material may be sprayed, and smoke bag or instant smoke, a plastic bag or tube-like container holding material which when exposed to air produces a quantity of smoke-like emission. 
(16)  No merchandise or service shall be displayed, sold or provided by a licensed vendor to an occupant of any vehicle on city streets. 
(17)  No licensed vendor shall shout, hawk, cry out or make any noise, or use any sound-amplifying device, including a radio, music, or other sound-amplifying system audible to others, or use flashing or moving lights. Non-flashing, stationary lights illuminating a conveyance are permitted solely during night-time vending operations. 
(18)  Licensed vendors are not allowed on the grounds of any school unless as part of a school-authorized function. 
(19)  All goods, wares, or merchandise vended shall be contained upon or within the conveyance used by the licensed vendor or contained upon the person of said licensed vendor. In no case shall any good, wares or merchandise be placed directly upon a street, sidewalk or public place. 
(20)  Any awning or umbrella attached to a vending conveyance must be at least seven (7) feet above the sidewalk. 
(21)  No conveyance shall provide or allow any dining area, including but not limited to tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup counters, unless a proposal for such seating arrangements is submitted with the permit application and approved by the city. 
(22)  Each licensed vendor shall protect the public right-of-way from damage due to its vending operation. As a condition of city licensing and operation, a licensed vendor shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred in cleaning the licensed vendor's location. 
(23)  Each licensed vendor shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees from and against all actions, lawsuits, claims, damages, losses, judgments, liens, and expenses, including but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting directly from said licensed vendor's activities in New Haven. 
(24)  Generators used by licensed vendors selling food products must be well maintained and must comply with the city's noise ordinance set forth in title II of chapter 18 of this Code and specifically the noise levels in section 18-75 of this Code. Licensed vendors must make good-faith efforts to mitigate or reduce the noise that such generators make. 
(25)  Licensed vendors shall remove all grease, water, food or food scraps, cooking wastes and litter from each of the operational areas at least daily and dispose of them as provided by the city pursuant to its regulations. No licensed vendor selling food products shall empty grease, food product, or gray water into any catch basins or onto any streets or sidewalks in the public right-of-way. 
(26)  Vending in city parks shall be prohibited in accordance with subsection 19-5(2) of this Code unless permitted by the director of parks or his/her designee. 
(27)  Vending on sidewalks and streets within twenty-five (25) feet of a city park shall be prohibited unless permitted by the director of parks or his/her designee in conjunction with a city-permitted event taking place in that park. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.10. - Pushcarts. 
(a)  A licensed vendor, including a restaurant vendor, shall not vend from a pushcart unless it complies with the standards set out in this subsection. The height of the pushcart, including canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures, shall not exceed ten (10) feet. The maximum length of the pushcart shall be eight (8) feet, and maximum width shall be five (5) feet. Each pushcart shall have a minimum of two (2) wheels and no more than four (4) wheels and shall be functional and decorative. 
(b)  Pushcarts shall be built of durable materials that are easy to keep clean and are appropriate for exterior use and which will withstand strong winds. If wood is used it shall be painted or otherwise coated to create a glossy finish. No bare or pressure treated wood without an additional glossy finish coating is permitted. Each pushcart shall have stability features such as brakes or chocks to firmly fix its location. Pushcart tongues (including, but no limited to, hitches, or handles) must detach and be stored out of the way or be folded away while the pushcart is stationary and in use. Pushcarts are to be open and the licensed vendor shall not stand in, be partially or fully enclosed by, or operate within the pushcart. 
(c)  Pushcart vending or sidewalk sales shall not be conducted in front of the entrance or exit to any building or driveway, within twenty (20) feet of any building entrance, exit, or alcove, driveway, mailbox, fire hydrant, traffic signal, bus stop, or loading zone. 
(d)  Pushcarts are to be located fully within the boundaries of the paved sidewalk surface and/or tree belt while on public space, provided, however, that on those streets where no paved sidewalk exists, carts shall be so placed as to not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No part of any pushcart may extend over the curb line, nor shall it be positioned in such manner as to obstruct a crosswalk, handicap ramp, fire hydrant, driveway or access to any building. Pushcarts must be positioned to allow an unobstructed pedestrian walkway at least five (5) feet in width, or in accordance with section 17-45 of this Code. Where a five (5) foot width does not exist, vending shall be prohibited. 
(e)  No conveyance, enclosed or open, larger than a pushcart's maximum size of eight (8) feet in length and five (5) feet in width, shall be permitted on any sidewalk unless otherwise permitted by special vending district regulation. Vending conveyances exceeding pushcart maximum size must adhere to the same regulations as food trucks. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.11. - Vending forbidden adjacent to New Haven Green during a declared festival. 
(a)  The mayor may, for purposes of public safety, convenience and welfare, declare as a festival any event to be held on the New Haven Green which in its past occurrence has been heavily attended, or which the mayor reasonably anticipates will be heavily attended. A festival declaration must be specific as to date, time of commencement and time of ending of the event. 
(b)  Notice of the festival declaration must be published in the major newspapers of this city, and given to the board of alders no more than fourteen (14) and no less than seven (7) days before the date of the festival. 
(c)  For the duration of a festival, no vendor may vend any goods, wares, services or merchandise on the streets or sidewalks up to the opposite curb line of Elm, Chapel, Church and Temple Streets, or fifty (50) feet from any intersection adjacent to the Green. However, vending may occur from vehicles or carts in the streets adjacent to the opposite curb from the Green in places where parking is permitted. While such declaration is in effect, the city shall provide such police protection as shall be necessary to protect all pedestrians walking between the Green and the above-described streets. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.12. - Trailer carts. 
If otherwise lawfully licensed and operated pursuant to federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, a licensed vendor may move a trailer cart from place to place by towing it with a motor vehicle. Motor vehicles shall not be driven over curbs, onto sidewalks or otherwise to situate conveyances within vending locations. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.13. - Food trucks. 
(a)  Food trucks must not exceed ten (10) feet in width, including any side extensions or awnings. 
(b)  Food trucks parked in metered parking spaces on city-owned property must not exceed twenty (20) feet in length including the length of any trailer hitch, trailer, trailer cart, or other extension. 
(c)  Food trucks parked in non-metered parking spaces on city-owned property must not exceed twenty-six (26) feet in length, including the length of any trailer hitch, trailer, or other extension. If a food truck is parked on private property, the food truck with attached trailer or other extension must not exceed forty (40) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.14. - Stands. 
Stands shall not be larger than four (4) feet, nine (9) inches high (exclusive of wheels), five (5) feet, eight (8) inches long, and three (3) feet, six (6) inches wide. Each stand must be equipped with four (4) functional wheels for its mobility. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.15. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement over vending of food products by licensed vendors shall be carried out by staff of the police department, the health department, the office of building inspection and enforcement, the department of transportation, traffic and parking, the fire department, the department of public works, and such other city officials as the police chief shall designate. 
(b)  Enforcement over vending of nonfood products by licensed vendors shall be carried out by staff of the police department, the office of building inspection and enforcement, the department of transportation, traffic and parking, the department of public works, and such other city officials as the police chief shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.16. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who engages in the activities defined in subsection (1) under "vendor" in section 17-11.1 of this Code without the vendor license required by subsection 17-11.2(a) of this Code shall be fined the maximum amount allowed by section 21-38 of the general statutes. 
(b)  Any person who engages in the activities defined in subsection (2) under "vendor" in section 17-11.1 of this Code without the vendor license required by section 17-11.2(b) of this Code shall be fined or imprisoned or both pursuant to section 21-35 of the general statutes. 
(c)  Any person who engages in the activities defined in "managing vendor" in section 17-11.1 of this Code without the managing vendor license required by section 17-11.2(c) of this Code shall be fined or imprisoned or both pursuant to section 21-35 of the general statutes. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of section 17-11.8 of this Code or those regulations adopted by the city in accordance with section 17-11.8(h) of this Code shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation: Suspension of a parking site license or sidewalk site license for a period of thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Second violation: Suspension of a parking site license or sidewalk site license for a period of ninety (90) days. 
(3)  Third violation: Cancellation or revocation of a parking site license or sidewalk site license for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.17. - Vending by children. 
No child under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be allowed to engage in vending unless he or she has been issued working papers by the appropriate city authority, or is otherwise permitted to do so under state and/or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.18. - Lease of interest in sidewalk and street to encourage commercial development; use by vendors. 
(a)  Pursuant to sections 7-148(c)(3)(A) and 7-148(c)(6)(C)(vi) of the general statutes, the city may grant a license to abutting property owners for the use of sidewalks and streets for the purpose of encouraging commercial development. Such license shall be granted only upon approval by the board of alders of the general terms and conditions of such license. 
(b)  No licensed vendor licensed under this article may operate on a sidewalk or street area where a license for the commercial use of such property has been granted by the city to an abutting owner pursuant to said statutes, except as may be provided in the lease. 
(c)  If the city has granted a license to an abutting owner for commercial use of property under the general statutes cited hereinbefore, a licensed vendor operating only on a sidewalk or street area of said property is not required to obtain a license under this article as long as the owner authorizes such operation pursuant to the license. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.19. - License fees and additional vending fees. 
(a)  Fees to become a licensed vendor shall be set forth in section 17-201 of this Code and published annually in the city's general fund budget document. 
(b)  The vendor license application fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) or the maximum allowed under the general statutes for this type of license, whichever is higher. There shall be a per diem fee for short term vendor licenses of four (4) or fewer consecutive days. 
(c)  For vendors who use food trucks and trailer carts located in the Long Wharf Drive and downtown special vending districts, there shall be an annual parking site license fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) that will allow vending in designated parking spaces as identified by the city and assigned according to the means set forth pursuant to section 17-11.8(h) of this Code. Vendors who use food trucks and trailer carts in the Long Wharf Drive special vending district shall pay to the city an annual electricity fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) if they require electricity to provide or supply their goods or services, including the cooking, reheating, or preparation otherwise of food, in a designated parking space as identified by the city and assigned according to the means set forth pursuant to subsection 17-11.8(h) of this Code. 
(d)  For vendors of pushcarts and stands located in the Cedar Street, downtown, and Sachem Street special vending districts, there shall be an annual sidewalk site license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) that will allow vending, either generally or in designated sidewalk locations as identified by the city and assigned according to the means set forth pursuant to subsection 17-11.8(h) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Sec. 17-11.20. - Vending advisory council. 
There shall be a vending advisory council, which shall consist of licensed vendors who wish to advise the city on policy matters relating to vending within the city. The city shall adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
ARTICLE XII. - OUTDOOR SEATING 
 
Sec. 17-12. - Reserved.  
Sec. 17-12.1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Outdoor seating means any seating or other related obstructions within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.2. - Permit required. 
Effective August 1, 2004, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain outdoor seating within the city's public right-of-way without obtaining a permit as required by this article. Outdoor seating shall comply with all requirements set forth herein. Moreover, said permit shall not be transferable in case of a change of operators. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.3. - Insurance. 
Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall secure insurance naming the city as an additional insured party. The policy shall protect the city against all claims resulting from the permittee's actions and/or negligence. The permittee, his successors and assigns shall maintain the policy in full force as long as outdoor seating exists. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage caused by the outdoor seating to sidewalks or other public property. Should the operator of any establishment with outdoor seating change, the new operator shall demonstrate insurance independent of the previous operator. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.4. - Inspection. 
The city shall reserve the right to inspect permitted outdoor seating at any time to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.5. - Regulations. 
The director of public works shall develop regulations for the issuance of outdoor seating permits. The regulations may be amended from time to time subject to approval of the board of aldermen, and shall be available from the permit issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.6. - Annual fee. 
Before a permit may be issued under this article, the applicant shall pay to the issuer an annual fee prescribed by section 17-201 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.7. - Renewal. 
Permits shall be renewed annually. The permit issuer shall collect and maintain information from each permit applicant when permits are initially issued. In subsequent years it shall not be necessary for the applicant to provide detailed information unless there are any changes to the documentation submitted with the original permit request. If there are no changes, the applicant shall submit a written permit renewal request, an updated insurance certificate, the required permit fee and any other relevant information requested by the issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.8. - Suspension, cancellation or revocation by issuer. 
Outdoor seating permits shall be subject to the provisions of section 17-1.15 of this chapter regarding suspension, cancellation or revocation of permits, for cause. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Sec. 17-12.9. - Penalties. 
Each violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be subject to the maximum fine as set forth in section 17-1.17 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04)  
Secs. 17-13—17-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - OUTDOOR PAY PHONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 8, 2001, enacted provisions which regulated the location and installation of outdoor pay phones. Such provisions, designated as §§ 17-24a—17-24p, were redesignated by the editor as §§ 17-34—17-50, to preserve the numbering system used in this chapter. This article was formerly numbered as Art. XXIII and was renumbered with the permission of the city to allow the grouping together of similar subject matter 
 
Sec. 17-34. - Definitions. 
The following words or terms shall have the following meanings for this section: 
Agreement. A written contract between the owner, installer, operator, and/or maintainer of an outdoor pay phone and the city, containing terms, conditions, fees due the city from the owner, installer, operator, and/or maintainer of an outdoor pay phone for operating an outdoor pay phone, etc. that is acceptable to the city. 
Application. A written application, available at LCI, to install, operate and maintain an outdoor pay phone. 
City. The City of New Haven. 
Chief. The Chief of Police for the City of New Haven. 
Department. Department of public works or its designee. 
Director. The director of LCI or the designee(s) of the director. 
Owner. A natural person or business entity that owns, leases, or is otherwise responsible for the installation, operation and/or maintenance of an outdoor pay phone. 
Excavation permit. An authorization by the department to install an outdoor pay phone by opening a specific street or sidewalk for a time period set forth below. 
Outdoor pay phone permit. An authorization to operate and maintain a outdoor pay phone at a location on, over or under a street or other inalienable property of the city for a time period set forth below. 
Public nuisance. The use of an outdoor pay phone in a reoccurring manner which the chief and/or director (who may seek the advice of the chief and/or the department) has reasonable cause to believe is a threat to public health, safety and welfare of the community and/or is in furtherance of unlawful activity. 
Outdoor pay phone. A telephone and associated equipment, from which calls can be paid for at the time they are made by a coin, credit card, prepaid debit card or in any other manner, which is available for use by the public and provides access to the switched telephone network for the purpose of voice or data communications. The term "outdoor pay phone" shall include any pedestal or telephone bank supporting one (1) or more such telephones, associated enclosures, signage and other associated equipment. 
Street. A street, road, highway, right-of way, or any other thoroughfare in the city, and the sidewalk within the street lines, dedicated to public travel. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-35. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
•  Protect the public safety and welfare in the city as permitted by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
•  Regulate the placement, installation, operation, maintenance and removal of outdoor pay phones within public rights-of-way and on private property outside of a structure. 
•  Keep the streets, sidewalks and public places open and safe for public use and travel and free from encroachment or obstruction. 
•  Keep streets, sidewalks and public places free from undue noise and nuisances, and prohibit loitering thereon. 
•  Regulate the placement of outdoor pay phones in high crime areas to protect the public safety and welfare. 
•  Regulate the placement of outdoor pay phones where crimes against property are involved. 
•  Control contracts between outdoor pay phone companies and private property owners. 
•  Establish procedures to interact with local government. 
•  Establish complaint procedures. 
•  Establish procedures for removal of outdoor pay phones that violate state and municipal laws, ordinances and procedures. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-36. - Registration required. 
Any owner seeking to install or operate outdoor pay phone shall register with the city by furnishing a service plan to LCI, which shall include the following information: 
•  Name, address and telephone number of the owner and agent for service. 
•  A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) as approved by the Connecticut DPUC, and a copy of the filing with the commission. 
•  Map of proposed service area and build-out number of phones. 
•  Description of phone type(s) and capabilities. 
•  A sworn statement of intent to pay local property taxes and fees. 
•  A copy of the certificate of insurance required below. 
•  A signed hold harmless agreement required below. 
•  Name, address, telephone number and agent for service of communication provider. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-37. - Permit issuance. 
An application shall be submitted to LCI, and shall be reviewed as follows: 
(1)  LCI shall accept only a completed application, and distribute such to the city plan department, department of public works, and department of police services who shall review each outdoor pay phone application and forward their advice to LCI for consideration in its decision. LCI shall approve or disapprove a complete application within thirty (30) days of receipt. If denied, a written reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(2)  An application may be immediately denied if all required materials are not furnished with the application. 
(3)  An application shall be deemed disapproved unless approved within thirty (30) working days. 
(4)  An outdoor pay phone permit shall be valid from the date of issuance until June 30 of the following year, and thereafter may renewed for two-year periods commencing July 1. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-38. - Agreement required. 
(a)  After July 1, 2000, no outdoor pay phone shall be installed, operated or maintained in the city without the owner first having entered into an agreement with the city in a format provided by the city. The agreement shall contain a fee for operating an outdoor pay phone, as stipulated in section 17-20(19) of the Code. The city may initiate and select one (1), more, or all owners through an RFP process. 
(b)  The owner shall be required via written agreement to indemnify and, defend and save harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees arising out of or resulting directly or indirectly from the placement and use of outdoor pay phones by the public. The city may require a bond to protect the city, and may require the owner to furnish public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the risk manager, naming the city certificate holder and additional insured. 
(c)  No outdoor pay phone permit shall be issued, transferred or renewed until all fees are paid in full, and the owner is in full compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(15), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-39. - Permits required. 
(a)  After July 1, 2000, no outdoor pay phone shall be installed, operated or maintained in the city without an outdoor pay phone permit and a street/sidewalk excavation permit. An outdoor pay phone permit issued in 1999 or 2000 for any outdoor pay phone installed prior to the enactment of this ordinance [January 8, 2001] shall be effective as of the date of installation and shall be valid until June 30, 2001. An outdoor pay phone permit issued for any outdoor pay phone installed after the enactment of this ordinance [January 8, 2001] shall be effective as to the date the permit is issued and shall be valid for a period not to exceed two (2) calendar years from the permit's effective date, terminating on June 30. A street/sidewalk excavation permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. other city permits may be required. 
(b)  For each location the applicant shall furnish: 
(1)  A scaled location map showing the phone location, the nearest street number address and any public utility poles, curb cuts, bus stops, existing street furniture and other pay phones within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed location. 
(2)  If the proposed location is within five (5) feet of a property line, the location shall be furnished on an A-2 survey base at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or larger. 
(3)  Written advise of the property owner as to consent or non-consent. 
(4)  If other pay phones are located within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed location the applicant shall identify the owner of such location(s). 
(5)  Any required building, mechanical and electrical permits for an outdoor pay phone, whether on public or private property, shall be secured prior to installation. 
(c)  Renewal of any outdoor pay phone permit shall be at the discretion of the city following the submission of a request for said renewal of the permit pursuant to procedures set forth in the ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-40. - Powers of director. 
(a)  The director may issue, renew, or transfer an outdoor pay phone permit based upon a determination, in the director's sole discretion, that issuance or renewal or transfer of a outdoor pay phone permit would be in the best interests of the city and will accomplish the goals of section 16-247a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, provided that: 
(1)  No outdoor pay phone permit shall be issued until the owner submits a specific site plan for review and approval. 
(2)  No outdoor pay phone permit shall be issued or renewed for the installation, operation or maintenance of an outdoor pay phone at any location where it will unreasonably interfere with the use of a street by the public, or where it is or may be a public nuisance, or if the issuance of a permit will interfere with the city's ability to accomplish the goals of said section 16-247a. 
(3)  An outdoor pay phone permit may be conditioned upon the limitation of the type of public pay telephone service. 
(b)  The director is authorized to create policies and procedures, not inconsistent with this article, to carry out the purpose and intent of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-41. - Term; termination. 
(a)  A permit for an outdoor pay phone shall be valid for a period not to exceed two (2) years, as set forth above, unless: 
(1)  As a result of changed conditions, the outdoor pay phone unreasonably interferes or may unreasonably interfere with the use of a street by the public, or constitutes or may constitute a public nuisance; or 
(2)  Removal of the outdoor pay phone is required in connection with a street widening or other capital project; or 
(3)  The owner is in breach of contract with the city. 
(b)  The owner shall restore the sidewalk when the outdoor pay phone is removed. The time period for such removal shall be that set forth below. In the event the owner fails to remove the outdoor pay phone within the time period specified, the director may remove or cause the removal of the outdoor pay phone and order repair and restoration work which shall be performed at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  The director (who may seek advice from the department of police services and/or the department of public works) may find that a particular outdoor pay phone(s) constitutes a public nuisance. Upon written notification of such a finding, the director shall order its removal. The director, at any time, has the option to order the type of telephone service limited instead of ordering the removal of the outdoor pay phone. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-42. - Advertising. 
A permit issued hereunder shall not constitute an authorization to place advertising upon an outdoor pay phone. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-43. - Fees. 
The fee to compensate the city for the administrative expense of issuing or renewing or transferring an outdoor pay phone permit shall be stipulated in section 17-201 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(15), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 17-44. - Transfers. 
No outdoor pay phone permit issued hereunder shall be transferred except as may be authorized by the director. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-45. - Siting and clearance requirements; maintenance. 
(a)  Pedestrian passage. Sidewalk clearance shall be maintained so as to insure a free unobstructed pedestrian passage of five (5) feet or one-half (½) the width of the sidewalk, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Sidewalks and sight lines. Outdoor pay phone installations shall not obstruct nor interfere in any manner with curb cuts or crosswalks and shall be installed outside the boundaries of the sight triangle at intersections so as not to interfere with free, unobstructed passage and unobstructed lines of sight for vehicular traffic and traffic signs. 
(c)  Fire escapes and building access. An outdoor pay phone shall not be located where it will interfere with the normal operations of a fire escape nor where it will obstruct or impede the free use of any means of egress required by the building code. 
(d)  Underground vaults and sewers. An outdoor pay phone shall not be installed in such a manner so as to affect the structural integrity of an underground vault or sewer. 
(e)  Distances required. An outdoor pay phone shall not be installed within: 
Five (5) feet of a traffic sign, and the sight line to the sign shall not be obstructed: 
Five (5) feet of a traffic light and related apparatus; 
Five (5) feet of the end of a ramp of an entrance to or an exit from a wheelchair lift; 
A fifteen-foot radius of a fire hydrant nor within five (5) feet of a standpipe and/or sprinkler, siamese or wall hydrant; 
Three (3) feet of a manhole on the curbline; 
Fifteen (15) feet of a bus stop zone unless the outdoor pay phone is attached to a bus stop shelter within the zone or is installed at the building line and does not obstruct pedestrian passage on the sidewalk; 
Ten (10) feet of a driveway unless the outdoor pay phone is attached to or immediately adjacent to a building which is immediately adjacent to such driveway; 
Three (3) feet of any cellar door or located in a manner that may prevent said door from being opened to its fullest extent; 
Four (4) feet of a mailbox located at the curbline; 
Five (5) feet of a street light; 
Five (5) feet of a parking meter; 
Five (5) feet of a sign pole; 
Three (3) feet of the edge of a tree pit or planter located at the curbline; and 
Two (2) feet of the curbline. 
Local historic district: On or within three (3) feet of an improvement in a local historic district, unless approved following application to the New Haven Historic District Commission. 
Measurement from enclosures. If an outdoor pay phone is mounted in an enclosure, the distances in this section shall be measured form the side of the enclosure nearest the object in question. 
(f)  Required distance from other outdoor pay phones. An outdoor pay phone shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any other such outdoor pay phone, pedestal or structure on any one block or an adjacent corner quadrant. 
(g)  Distinctive sidewalks. An outdoor pay phone shall not be installed on or result in the destruction, damage or removal of any part of a distinctive sidewalk. For purposes of this subsection, "distinctive sidewalk" shall include, but not be limited to, a pavement of granite, slate, bluestone, brick, or a decorative treatment of cement to mimic brick, granite etc., or textured or unique cement. 
(h)  Other maintenance. The owner shall keep the outdoor pay phone free of graffiti and shall keep the outdoor pay phone and the area of a three-foot radius around the outdoor pay phone free of trash and free of snow and ice. 
(i)  Design. The city reserves the right to require equipment installed pursuant to a new or renewed outdoor pay phone permit to conform to an esthetic design specified by the city. 
(j)  Number of outdoor pay phones at any location. There shall be no more than three (3) outdoor pay phone installed on a single pedestal in a blockfront, and in conformity with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and an in-line configuration shall not exceed a footprint of thirty-five (35) inches by one hundred twenty (120) inches. 
(k)  Removal for public convenience. Where the city requires removal of an outdoor pay phone for access to an area of installation, the owner shall be responsible for all costs of removal and re-installation of the outdoor pay phone . The city will provide notice of such access needs. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-46. - Hearings; violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any owner who installs, operates or maintains an outdoor pay phone without an excavation permit, a pay telephone permit, without an agreement executed by the city, or who otherwise violates any provision of this article, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per outdoor pay phone. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint from a citizen or city department or agency that the location and use of an outdoor pay phone constitutes or may constitute a public nuisance, the director shall conduct a hearing after providing written notice of the same, at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing date, to the police department, the department of public works, the owner of the outdoor pay phone equipment, the service provider, and other interested parties to ascertain whether the location or use of the outdoor pay phone constitutes a public nuisance. If the director determines by a preponderance of the evidence presented that the location or use of the outdoor pay phone constitutes a public nuisance, the director may revoke all permits and order the removal of the outdoor pay phone, restrict the hours of operation of the outdoor pay phone, or order other relief as appropriate under the facts and circumstances. 
(c)  If the owner of the outdoor pay phone fails to appear at a hearing after notice of such, the director shall deem all allegations against the owner of the outdoor pay phone as admitted and true. 
(d)  The director may also order the removal of an outdoor pay phone which is in violation of the requirements of this article. The issuance of the removal order shall be to the owner with a copy to the public utility or private service provider whose telephone lines provide service to the outdoor pay phone. If the owner fails to remove the outdoor pay phone within ten (10) days after the order, the director shall require the public utility or private service provider to terminate service to said outdoor pay phone and shall remove or cause said outdoor pay phone to be removed at the expense of the owner. The director shall store the outdoor pay phone and, if the owner does not recover the outdoor pay phone within thirty (30) days, the director may dispose of it in a reasonable commercial manner. The owner shall be responsible for direct costs, storage costs and remediation costs, and such costs may be deducted from the revenues, if any, from the sale of the removed outdoor pay phone(s). 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-47. - Enforcement. 
LCI, the department of public works and the department of police services are empowered to enforce this article in addition to all other methods of enforcement. This article may also be enforced through the civil citation process. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-48. - Authorization to execute agreement. 
The board of aldermen authorizes the department of public works or the director of LCI, or their designees to execute agreements pursuant to this article in a form acceptable to the city. The signature of the mayor is not required. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-49. - Zoning permit required. 
No outdoor pay phone may be located in the city unless a zoning permit for the use has been issued. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Sec. 17-50. - Incentives for installation in underserved areas. 
LCI may conduct a survey of neighborhoods to determine locations in the city presently underserved or not served by outdoor pay phones, and determine if the neighborhood desires to have outdoor pay phone service. LCI may maintain a list of such locations. As an incentive to owners to locate an outdoor pay phone at such a location, for each outdoor pay phone the city shall waive the fee in section 17-38 above for such outdoor pay phones, and may reduce the fee in section 17-38 by twenty-five (25) percent on one (1) outdoor pay phone operated by the owner in an economically viable location. At the commencement of each term, the owner shall certify in writing that it has provided, and shall continue to provide outdoor pay phones at the underserved location(s). Violations of this section shall result in a one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day per outdoor pay phone fine, and may result in the forfeiture of all outdoor pay phone permits. 
(Ord. of 1-8-01)  
Secs. 17-51—17-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - (NEW) RESIDENTIAL RENTAL BUSINESS LICENSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1671 , amended former Art. XIV, §§ 17-71—17-87, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1387, 8-1-05; Ord. No. 1430, 12-18-06. 
 
Sec. 17-71. - Provisions of Article I apply. 
The provisions contained in Article I "Licenses and Permits in General", of this chapter also apply to the activities regulated by this article. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-72. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half (½) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. Where the contour of the ground level immediately adjacent to the building is interrupted by ditching, pits, or trenching, the average adjoining ground level shall be the nearest contour line parallel to the walls of the building without regard to the level created by ditching, pits or trenching. 
Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having one-half (½) of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
City shall mean the City of New Haven. 
Code enforcement officer means the director of the Livable City Initiative or his/her designee unless otherwise specified, or other city official(s) otherwise authorized to administer the licensing and inspection of residential rental property. 
Code inspector means a city employee who conducts rental housing property inspections for purposes of determining whether such property complies with minimum housing code standards as outlined in the city's applicable regulations. The code inspector works under the direction of the code enforcement officer. 
Common areas means those interior and exterior areas of the residential rental property as defined herein of which the occupants have access, including, but not limited to, entrances, exits, hallways, stairways, basements, cellars, laundry rooms, attics, porches and yards. 
Director of the Livable City Initiative shall mean the director of the city entity known as the Livable City Initiative or his/her designee unless otherwise specified. 
Dormitory means a building or a space in a building in which group sleeping accommodations are provided for more than sixteen (16) persons, who are not members of the same family, in one (1) room or a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, with or without meals, but without individual cooking facilities. 
Dwelling means any building located in the city, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. For purposes of this article, the term shall be synonymous with "residential rental property". 
Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling, and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
Mixed-use residential rental property means a property that contains space used for commercial purposes in addition to one (1) or more dwelling units. 
Occupant means any person, over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
Owner means any person, who either alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and to the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he/she was the owner. 
Owner-occupant means and includes any dwelling where the owner resides in one of the dwelling units. 
Person(s) means and includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership. 
Premises means the entire interior and exterior portions of a dwelling including the common areas thereof; and facilities and appurtenances therein, and grounds, areas and facilities held out for the use of occupants generally, or whose use is promised to the tenant/occupant. 
Property includes all lands, including all structures, improvements and fixtures thereon, and property of any nature appurtenant thereto, or used in connection therewith. 
Residential rental property means a dwelling with at least two (2) dwelling units, regardless of whether anyone is currently residing in each unit. 
Rooming house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing one (1) or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to four (4) or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator; provided that hospitals, homes for the aged, and other institutions licensed by the state department of health under Section 19a et. seq. of the Connecticut General Statutes shall not be regarded as rooming houses or as subject to the provisions of this article. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Temporary housing means a tent, trailer, or similar structure which is used as human shelter for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days, or more than ninety (90) days, in any calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-73. - Purposes. 
(a)  The City of New Haven (the "City") is committed to protecting the safety, health and welfare of its residents and to eliminating housing blight. Towards that end, the city's board of aldermen has adopted ordinances and regulations concerning the operation and condition of certain residential rental property within its borders, including but not limited to, section 17-71 et. seq. of the New Haven Code of Ordinances ("Residential Licensing Ordinance"). 
(b)  This article's provisions pertaining to licensing and inspection shall not apply to owner occupied residential property containing two (2) or less rental units. 
(c)  This article's provisions pertaining to licensing and inspection shall not apply to dwellings owned by the Housing Authority of New Haven, motels, hotels, rooming houses, condominiums, cooperative housing, nor temporary housing as defined in this article. 
(d)  This article's provisions pertaining to licensing and inspection shall not apply to section 8 units whose vouchers are administered by the Housing Authority of New Haven, and are within residential rental property located in New Haven. 
(e)  Dormitories as defined in the associates ordinances relating to these regulations. 
(f)  Dwelling units located within residential rental property that have been issued a certificate of occupancy within the previous three (3) years. 
(g)  This article's provisions shall not be deemed to restrict the right of the city to inspect any property pursuant to any applicable federal, state or local law or regulation. 
(h)  An owner who fails to comply with the following regulations may be penalized in accordance with the Penalties section as described below, and which are prescribed by the Residential Licensing Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-74. - License required. 
(a)  Upon adoption of this article, it shall be unlawful for owner(s) of certain residential rental property located within New Haven to operate/rent such property without obtaining a residential rental property license, subject to the exemptions set forth in section 17-73 herein. This section shall apply to the following residential rental property classifications: 
(1)  Owner-occupied dwellings containing three (3) or more rental units; 
(2)  Non-owner occupied dwellings containing two (2) or more rental units; and 
(3)  Non-owner occupied dwellings located at mixed-use residential rental properties. 
(b)  Renting/operating residential rental property without a license to do so constitutes a violation of this article, and is subject to the penalties set forth in section 17-84 herein. 
(c)  Upon the enactment of related ordinances as found in Chapter 17, Article XIII of the city's Code of Ordinances, all property owners of the above described residential rental property classifications will be notified by the city's finance department of the requirement to obtain a license in order to operate/rent such property, along with the application materials. If the property is exempt from the requirements of this ordinance, the property owner shall submit evidence as to the appropriate exemption to the city's finance department. Acceptable forms of evidence to satisfy the above mentioned exemption include, but are not limited to, a current utility bill and a government issued photo identification, which includes date of birth, expiration date and signature. 
(d)  In order to obtain a residential rental property license, the property owner or his/her agent must submit an application containing the following information concerning each residential rental property that he/she owns in New Haven: 
(1)  the owner(s) name, address, telephone number(s), and email address; 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number(s), and email address of the owner's agent, if applicable; 
(3)  Address of the residential rental property and the number of rental units in it; 
(4)  Whether the owner resides in the residential rental property; and 
(5)  The number of section 8 rental units administered by the Housing Authority of New Haven in the residential rental property, if any. 
(e)  The property owner or his/her agent must certify to the truthfulness and accuracy of the information that he/she provides in the residential rental property license application with penalty for false representation(s). 
(f)  The residential rental property owner or his/her agent must submit the completed residential rental application to the City of New Haven, Department of Finance, 200 Orange Street, New Haven, CT, Attn:____________ with a copy to Livable City Initiative, 165 Church Street, 3rd floor, New Haven, CT within the deadline specified in the notice of the licensing requirement. The completed application shall be submitted through electronic means when available. 
(g)  The residential rental property owner or his/her agent must inform the Livable City Initiative and the department of finance of any change concerning the information contained in the residential rental property application within thirty (30) days of such change. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-75. - Inspection required. 
The following residential rental property classifications must pass an inspection by a City code inspector before a residential rental property license is issued: 
(1)  Owner-occupied dwellings containing three (3) or more rental units; 
(2)  Non-owner occupied dwellings containing two (2) or more rental units; 
(3)  Non-owner occupied dwellings located at mixed-use residential rental properties. 
Any inspection of an owner-occupied dwelling containing three (3) or more rental units shall not include inspection of the owner's unit. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-76. - Fees. 
(a)  Before a residential property license is issued, the residential rental property owner or his/her agent must pay the applicable licensing fee when he/she files the application, in accordance with the instructions as provided by the city's department of finance notification, as follows: For residential, non owner occupied rental properties with two (2) to three (3) dwelling units, the fee shall be a flat fee in the amount of one hundred dollars and zero cents ($100.00). For residential rental properties with four (4) or more dwelling units, the fee shall be forty dollars and zero cents ($40.00) per dwelling unit, provided however, that in no event shall the maximum fee for any one residential rental property exceed one thousand dollars and zero cents ($1,000.00). 
(b)  If the code inspector detects at least one (1) defect during the residential rental property inspection, he/she will arrange to re-inspect the property until it fully complies with standards set forth herein. The owner shall not be penalized for the first re-inspection. A residential rental property owner will be penalized if a code inspector has to return to the owner's residential rental property more than once to determine whether all the defects detected in the inspector's initial inspection have been repaired. The owner shall be penalized fifty dollars and zero cents ($50.00) per unit for each subsequent inspection. 
(c)  The residential rental property owner or his/her agent must be present at all scheduled property inspections. If such person is not present on a scheduled date and time, the inspection will be rescheduled once. The residential rental property owner will be penalized twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per rental unit for the first scheduled appointment that he/she or his/her agent fails to attend without just cause as determined by the code enforcement officer. If the owner or his/her agent is not present at subsequently rescheduled dates and times, the residential rental property owner may be penalized in accordance with the Penalties section as described below, and which are prescribed by ordinance section 17-84 of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  The owner or his/her agent must pay all of the above applicable fees before he/she is issued a residential rental property license. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-77. - Inspection standards. 
(a)  All inspections will be performed according to a defined checklist of quality of life and life safety issues as outlined in the corresponding regulations and which shall be based on the city's Anti-Blight and Property Maintenance Ordinance, section 15-51 et. seq. of the New Haven Code of Ordinances (the "Anti-Blight & Property Maintenance Ordinance"). 
(b)  In order to obtain a residential rental property license, said property must pass an inspection involving its dwelling units, common areas, basement, exterior and yards. A license will only be issued if the residential rental property meets the requirements set forth in the city's Anti-Blight & Property Maintenance Ordinance. 
(c)  Once the owner or his/her agent submits the completed application and pays the licensing fee, the owner or his/her agent shall receive a temporary license number which confirms the application process is complete. Thereafter, a scheduling date will be arranged for a city code inspector to inspect the residential rental property, to which the owner or his/her agent must be present at each inspection. A city code inspector will conduct the inspection of the residential dwelling units, and the residential rental property's common areas, basement, exterior and yards. 
(d)  The residential rental property owner or his/her agent must provide the tenants of such property with at least seven (7) calendar days advanced notice of the inspection. The city will provide the owner or his/her agent with consent forms for each rental unit within the residential rental property. If a tenant objects to such inspection, the city code inspector needs to obtain an administrative warrant from the appropriate official at the Superior Court for the Judicial District of New Haven before the code inspector inspects the non-consenting tenant's unit. 
(e)  The code inspector will use a checklist comprised of housing related criteria to determine whether the residential rental property meets minimum housing code standards and the standards set forth in the city's Anti-Blight and Property Maintenance Ordinance, Section 15-51 et. seq. of the New Haven Code of Ordinances (the "Anti-Blight & Property Maintenance Ordinance") with respect to that criteria. The code inspector will limit his/her inspection to the checklist criteria, barring any life-threatening health or safety violation that is not covered in the checklist. The license issuer will have copies of the checklist available for the public. 
(f)  For residential rental properties with up to twenty five (25) dwelling units, the code inspector shall inspect one hundred (100) percent of the dwelling units at said Property. For residential rental properties with between twenty-five (25) and ninety-nine (99) dwelling units, the code inspector will have discretion to select and inspect a sampling of dwelling units that shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total number of dwelling units and the residential rental property, but shall never be less than twenty-five (25) units within the residential rental property. For residential rental properties with one hundred (100) or more dwelling units, the code inspector will have the discretion to select and inspect a sampling of dwelling units that shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of dwelling units at the residential rental property. With respect to the foregoing, such selection of units shall be made by a statistically random process, and is restricted to those dwelling units which have been authorized for inspection by their respective tenants. If the inspected dwelling units fail to pass inspection, the code inspector will have discretion to inspect additional dwelling units in that residential rental property. 
(g)  The code inspector shall fill out an inspection form indicating the status of each of the inspected criteria on the above-referenced checklist. The landlord or his/her agent and the respective tenant shall each receive a copy of the completed form. The city's Livable City Initiative shall keep a copy in its records for public inspection. 
(h)  If the residential rental property passes inspection, the code inspector will immediately notify the owner or his/her agent of the results. A residential rental license certificate will be sent by certified mail to the owner at the address listed in the application form. 
(i)  The code inspector will prepare a list of defects, if any, that he/she finds during the inspection, and give the list to the owner or his/her agent when the inspection is completed. If no life-threatening health and/or safety defect is found, the owner will be given thirty (30) days to repair the defect(s), unless the code inspector or his/her designee deems that more or less time is needed. Once the allowed repair time expires, the code inspector will conduct a re-inspection of the residential rental property. If all previously noted defects have not been repaired, the code inspector or his/her designee will have discretion to provide the owner with additional time to repair the defect(s), or order alternative measure(s), which may include a penalty as described below, and which is prescribed by ordinance section 17-84 of the city's Code of Ordinances. If at the time of the re inspection, the code inspector notes additional defects, not previously noted during the initial inspection, the code inspector shall provide the owner thirty (30) days to repair the newly noted defects, unless the code inspector or his/her designee deems that more or less time is needed. Once the additional allowed repair time expires, the code inspector will again conduct a re-inspection of the residential rental property. 
(j)  If the code inspector finds a life-threatening health and/or safety defect, he/she will immediately inform the owner or his/her agent. The residential rental property license will be denied or revoked, as appropriate, and the endangered tenant(s) may be relocated at the code inspector's discretion and at the city's expense. Any rental unit(s) directly affected by the life-threatening defect(s) shall not be reoccupied unless and until the life-threatening health and/or safety defect is repaired, and the city issues or reinstates the residential rental property license in writing. The owner will be liable to the city for the tenants' relocation costs, including those relating to shelter, moving and storage. These costs must be reimbursed before a license is issued or reinstated. Any owner who fails to reimburse the city for these costs will be penalized in accordance with the penalties section as described below, and in accordance with ordinance section 17-84 of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(k)  If the code inspector detects at least one (1) defect during the residential rental property inspection, he/she will arrange to re-inspect the property until it fully complies with required housing standards. The owner will not be penalized for the first re-inspection, but will be penalized fifty dollars and zero cents ($50.00), per unit, for each subsequent re-inspection. However, in the event the code inspector notes additional defects, not previously noted in the initial inspection, in any subsequent re inspection, the code inspector shall not penalize the owner for the first re inspection directly related to the additional defect(s) found and the owner shall be penalized for any subsequent re inspection directly related to the additional defect(s) noted. 
(l)  Each tenant shall be responsible for maintaining his/her respective rental unit in a clean and sanitary condition, and abide by all duties imposed on him/her by all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations including the Housing Code of the City of New Haven and the city's Anti Blight & Property Maintenance Ordinance. A tenant will be liable for all damages that he/she causes to the residential rental property. If the code inspector finds that a tenant is responsible for damages that are detected during the inspection of the residential rental property, the inspector may issue a citation and proceed to collect the associated fine as determined by a court proceeding. 
(m)  If repairs are not made within the designated time limit, a fine as authorized and set forth in the Anti-Blight & Property Maintenance Ordinance may be retroactively applied to the date that the residential rental property owner or his/her agent received the completed licensing inspection form identifying the existing defect(s) up to a period of thirty (30) days. 
(n)  No residential rental property license will be issued to a residential rental property owner unless and until the code inspector finds that all defects concerning that property have been repaired. 
(o)  The Livable City Initiative shall keep all inspection and re-inspection findings, checklists, reports and license records on file for public inspection. 
(p)  On inspection, Livable City Initiative shall distribute a document entitled "Licensing and Inspection of Residential Rental Property Owners and Occupants Responsibilities," to the landlord or his/her agent, and the tenant(s) of the residential rental property. This document is incorporated by reference in these regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-78. - Consent. 
Before a code inspector can inspect a residential rental property unit, the tenant(s) of such unit must consent to its inspection. If such tenant(s) object to such inspection, the code enforcement officer must obtain an administrative warrant from the appropriate official at the Superior Court for the Judicial District of New Haven before the code inspector inspects the non-consenting tenant's unit. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-79. - License effect. 
The code inspector will use a checklist of specific housing criteria when inspecting the residential rental property. That criteria is outlined in the City's regulations developed pursuant to section 17-81 of this article and is based on the requirements of the Anti-Blight & Property Maintenance Ordinance. The issuance or reinstatement of a residential rental property license shall constitute proof that the inspected property meets the minimum standards contained in that criteria. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-80. - Term of license. 
Once the residential rental property owner pays all applicable fees and costs, and the residential rental property has passed inspection, the property owner shall be issued a residential rental property license. The license shall be effective for three (3) years commencing from the license issuance or reinstatement date, unless otherwise voided as a result of a subsequently discovered defect or other just cause as determined by the city. Once the license term expires, or the license is otherwise voided, the license must be renewed or reinstated, as appropriate, in order to be effective. The residential licensing issuance dates shall be based upon the ward in which said property is located. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-81. - Regulations. 
The code enforcement officer shall develop regulations for the licensing and inspection of residential rental property. The regulations may be amended from time to time with the approval of the City's board of aldermen. The license issuer shall have copies of the regulations available for the public. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-82. - Transfer of license. 
Residential licenses are transferable upon the sale of a licensed residential rental property. If the ownership of a licensed residential rental property changes, the license shall transfer to such new owner(s) for the term remaining on the license and no additional re-inspections shall be required provided the new owner(s) notifies the city within ninety (90) days from the date of said transfer. Failure to notify the city of any transfer may result in the residential rental license becoming void at which time the license must be renewed or reinstated, as appropriate, in order to be effective and in compliance with the provisions herein. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-83. - Enforcement. 
The director of the Livable City Initiative is empowered to enforce the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-84. - Penalties/citations. 
(a)  Any residential rental property owner who violates the above regulations with respect to the requirement to obtain a license for a property may be penalized in the amount of $250.00 per unit or the maximum authorized by Connecticut General Statutes 7-148(c)(10)(a). 
(b)  Any residential rental property owner who violates the above regulations with respect to the inspection requirements set forth herein and in the ordinance may be penalized in accordance with applicable penalty provisions of the city's Anti-Blight and Property Maintenance Ordinance, which shall include, but not be limited to, the assessment of a fine in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day that the violation of the inspection requirements continues. The city shall follow the procedures set forth in the Anti-Blight and Property Maintenance Ordinance with respect to the enforcement of violations of the same. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prevent the City from seeking any other means available at law or in equity in order to enforce this article's provisions. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-85. - Conciliation board. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint one or more hearing officer(s), who shall not be a city employee, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section. Such hearng officer shall serve without pay. The mayor may remove any such hearing officer at any time for whatever reason he/she deems sufficient. 
(b)  If an owner who is sent citation a set forth above wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he/she may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fine(s) admitted to, in person or by mail to the city. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. Any owner who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of receipt of the citation, shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated hearing officer shall certify such owner's failure to respond to the enforcement officer. Said hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fine(s) so provided for, and shall fllow the procedures set forth in this ordinance for obtaining a court judgment. 
(c)  Any owner who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the citation, unless the owner requesting the hearing agrees to an earlier date. The hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. The city shall present at the hearing the original notice of violation and citation, a certified copy of such notice and citation, the violator's copy or a certified copy of the violator's copy issued by an enforcement officer, and such original or certified copy shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of Connecticut General Statutes, Section 52-180 and evidence of the facts contained therein. The enforcement officer may, but is not required, to appear at the hearing, but shall be required to appear if the owner specifically requests the enforcement officer's presence. An owner who wishes to contest his/her liability shall appear at the hearing, and may present evidence on his/her behalf, or the owner may request that the hearing be conducted by mail, and may submit documents and copies of reports for the hearing officer's review. The hearing officer may grant a request for a hearing by mail, or may determine at any time (including after a hearing by mail has been granted and undertaken) that a hearing in person is necessary to fairly adjudicate the matter, and that the owner must appear in person at a hearing. If the enforcement officer is not able to attend the hearing, and his/her presence has not been specifically requested by the owner, a designated city official, other than the hearing officer and other than the enforcement officer, may present evidence on behalf of the city. 
(d)  If the owner fails to appear, or fails to request a hearing by mail within the timeframe set forth herein, the hearing officer may enter a default upon finding of proper notice and liability under applicable law. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form, and with such methods of proof as he/she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his/her decision at the end of the hearing. If he/she determines that the person is not liable, the hearing officer shall dismiss the matter, and enter his/her determination in writing accordingly. If he/she determines that the person is liable for the violation(s), the hearing officer shall forthwith enter and assess the fines against such owner, and levy such fines as provided for herein. The hearing officer shall forward a notice of assessment to the enforcement officer for further action. The city shall have all rights and remedies available to it under applicable law with respect to the collection of the fines following the procedure set forth herein. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 17-86, Appeals, was repealed by Ord. No. 1671 , adopted Feb. 6, 2012.  
Sec. 17-87. - Report required. 
The director of the Livable City Initiative shall submit a report to the board of aldermen no later than three (3) months after the three-year anniversary of the enactment date of this ordinance from which this article derives. This report shall include the total cost of administration of this article, as well as an accounting of all revenues collected in association with it. Said report shall also contain data regarding units found to be in compliance and out of compliance during the three-year period, data regarding results of re-inspections and compliance by landlords and tenants with this article, and its general impact, if any, on the city's rental housing stock. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Sec. 17-88. - Regulation amendment. 
The director of the Livable City Initiative reserves the right, and shall have the authority to modify the above regulations, provided that such modification is done in conformance with federal, state and local laws and regulations, and with the approval of the city's board of aldermen. 
( Ord. No. 1671, 2-6-12 )  
Secs. 17-89—17-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - CONTACT INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR RENTAL PROPERTY INCLUDING THE REGISTRATION OF FORECLOSING/FORECLOSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— This article and the numbering of its sections have been renumbered as herein set out from former Art. XIV, §§ 17-14ï¿1/21/21/21/21/21/217-14.3, with the permission of the city to accommodate the reorganization of the articles of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 17-111. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Abandoned property means any real property which has been relinquished with the intention of not reclaiming or reassuming its ownership, occupancy or enjoyment. 
Address means a location as described by the full street number, if any, the street name, the city or town, and the state, and not a mailing address such as a post office box. 
Agent in charge means one who manages real estate, including, but not limited to, the collection of rents and supervision of property. 
Caretaker means any individual who has agreed to be responsible for performing maintenance and upkeep of real property, whether compensated or not. 
City means City of New Haven. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Director means the executive director of the city's Livable City Initiative. 
Dwelling unit means any house or building, or portion thereof, which is rented, leased or hired out to be occupied, or is arranged or designed to be occupied, or is occupied, as the home or residence of one (1) or more persons, living independently of each other, and doing their cooking upon the premises, and having a common right in the halls, stairways or yards. 
Foreclosing or foreclosure process means the legal process of mortgage foreclosure initiated by an entity holding security against the property for unpaid debt, by which the entity is proposing to take the property in lieu of the debt due to borrower default ("strict foreclosure"), or the entity is proposing a sale of the property to pay the debt due to borrower default ("Foreclosure by sale"). 
Note: The foreclosure of judgment liens, tax liens and condominium liens is not included within the scope of this ordinance. 
Foreclosing entity means the creditor (including service companies and lenders), who files the action in superior court as plaintiff and has the right to foreclose real property in lieu of unpaid debt. 
Implementation. means that the provisions of this section are effective immediately upon passage and all provisions shall be enforced immediately, but no monetary fine shall be imposed pursuant hereto until ninety (90) days after passage. 
Initiation of the foreclosure process (including "foreclosing entity who has initiated the foreclosure process") means a filing of lis pendens on the real property. 
Local means within fifty (50) driving miles distance of the real property in question. 
Non-occupant owner means every person, entity, or company, who alone or severally with others, for any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit, or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park, has become the owner by way of purchasing at a foreclosure by sale (committee deed), or is a foreclosing entity who has become the property owner by way of strict foreclosure. 
Property means any real property, or portion thereof, located in the City of New Haven, including buildings or structures situated on the property. 
Property management company means any business retained to care and maintain real property. 
Property owner means any person or entity which holds title to a property. 
Residential property means any property that contains one (1) or more dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be occupied by a person or persons for living purposes. 
Securing means measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons. 
Standing order means a sign issued by and through the New Haven Police Department that is signed by the owner which allows the police to take notice and arrest any trespassers. 
(Ord. No. 1409, 4-3-06; Ord. No. 1573, § 2, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 1583, 1-22-09)  
Sec. 17-112. - Non-occupant owner of residential property, when ownership is by purchase at a foreclosure by sale (committee deed) or when foreclosing entity has become the owner due to judgment of strict foreclosure. 
(a)  All non-occupant owners of record, when ownership is by foreclosure by sale (committee deed) or when the foreclosing entity due to judgment of strict foreclosure, must register each such residential property with the director, or his designee, on forms provided by the director, or his designee, along with the below mentioned registration fee within seven (7) days of acquiring ownership. All such registrations must: (a) state the individual owner's or agent's current phone number and mailing address located within the State of Connecticut, with said mailing address not being a P.O. Box, and, (b) certify that the property was inspected and identify whether the property is vacant, and, (c) if vacant, designate a local caretaker or local property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property, stating the individual or company's name, phone number, and local mailing address, with such mailing address not being a P.O. Box. 
(b)  The fee and registration shall be valid for one (1) calendar year from the time the registration is filed. Subsequent registrations and fees are due annually thereafter. Regardless of when a registration is to be renewed, a non-occupant owner shall update said registration form within seven (7) days from the date of any change of caretaker or property management company, any change in name, current telephone number or address of the property owner or agent, or any change in the ownership of the property (with no further registration fee to be paid at that time, unless the update is made simultaneously with an annual renewal). 
(c)  The registration fee to be paid by a non-occupant owner shall be one-hundred dollars ($100.00), which fee shall be credited to any subsequent fee payable by the non-occupant owner if in fact the non-occupant owner obtains a license pursuant to Article XIV, Residential Rental Licenses, with seven (7) days of ownership. 
(d)  Should the non-occupant owner sell the property, the non-occupant owner must provide proof of sale to the director, or his designee. Should a vacant property become occupied, the owner must provide a written notice of occupancy with the director, or his designee. 
(e)  All other rules, regulations and ordinances will be in effect, and will be subject to any and all fines, fees and penalties, including, but not limited to, those stated in Article II of Chapter 9 of the New Haven Code of Ordinances, Livable City Initiative. Further, adherence to this section does not relieve the property owner of any applicable obligations set forth in any covenant conditions and restrictions and/or home owners association rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1573, § 5, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 1583, 1-22-09)  
Sec. 17-113. - Rental license; withholding, suspension, revocation. 
(a)  Each nonresident owner of residential rental property covered by the residential rental property inspection and licensing program, who fails to file his/her current address with the city's tax assessor, may not receive a rental license from the city until he/she complies with this article. Additional penalties or fines as set forth in the residential rental licensing ordinance may be imposed for such violation. 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke a rental license from a nonresident property owner upon learning of his/her violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 6-5-06)  
Sec. 17-114. - Registration by foreclosing entity. 
(a)  Any foreclosing entity who has initiated (a) the foreclosure process on any residential property must register each property with the director, or his designee, on forms provided by the director, or his designee, along with the registration fee detailed below. This registration must be received by the director, or his designee, within seven (7) days after the foreclosing entity's initiation of the foreclosure process as defined in section 17-111, "Definitions". All such registrations must: (a) state the individual foreclosing entity's or agent's current phone number and mailing address located within the State of Connecticut, with said mailing address not being a P.O. Box, and, (b) certify that the property was inspected and identify whether the property is abandoned, and, (c) if abandoned, designate a local caretaker or local property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property, stating the individual or company's name, phone number, and local mailing address. Such mailing address shall not be a P.O. Box. 
(b)  The registration fee to be paid by a foreclosing entity, for each residential property for which it has undertaken the initiation of the foreclosure process, shall be one-hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 1573, § 3, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 1583, 1-22-09)  
Sec. 17-115. - Registration update requirement. 
(a)  A foreclosing entity shall be responsible to provide written notification to the director, or his designee, within seven (7) days from the date of any change of caretaker or property management company, any change in the name, current telephone or address of the property owner or agent, or any change in the ownership of the property (whether the foreclosing entity or any third party becomes the property owner) or if the foreclosing entity sells or otherwise assigns its debt prior to foreclosure or redemption. 
(b)  No fee for updating information shall be charged. 
(c)  All other rules, regulations and ordinances will be in effect, and will be subject to any and all fines, fees and penalties, including, but not limited to, those stated in Article II of Chapter 9 of the New Haven Code of Ordinances, Livable City Initiative. Further, adherence to this section does not relieve the property owner of any applicable obligations set forth in any covenant conditions and restrictions and/or home owners association rules and regulations. 
(d)  In the event the property is or becomes vacant the foreclosing entity must post a "Standing Order" on the Property. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § 4, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 1583, 1-22-09)  
Sec. 17-116. - Maintenance requirements. 
Properties subject to this article must be maintained in accordance with all applicable sanitary codes, building codes, housing codes, anti-blight ordinance and all local regulations and will be subject to any and all fines, fees and penalties therein, including, but not limited to, those stated in Article II of Chapter 9 of the New Haven Code of Ordinances, Livable City Initiative. Further, adherence to this section does not relieve the property owner of any compliance with applicable obligations set forth in any covenant conditions and restrictions and/or home owners association rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § 6, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 1583, 1-22-09)  
Sec. 17-117. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Failure to initially register with the director, or his designee, is punishable by a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), per day after the registration deadline. 
(b)  If applicable, failure to properly post the standing order is punishable by a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per day the violation continues. 
(c)  Violations of this Article XV shall be enforced in accordance with section 17-84 of the City of New Haven Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § 7, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 1583, 1-22-09; Ord. No. 1583, 1-22-09)  
Sec. 17-118. - Hearing/appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the requirements of this article, including any registration requirement herein, or by a decision issued by the director, or his designee, under this section, may request a hearing in accordance with section 17-85 and 17-86 of the residential licensing ordinance. Any person may appeal any finding of fact or fine as allowed by the laws of the State of Connecticut, including by appeal to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1573, § 8, 11-6-08)  
Secs. 17-119, 17-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - COMMERCIAL WASTE COLLECTORS 
 
Sec. 17-121. - Incorporation by reference. 
This article shall incorporate by reference all relevant provisions of Article I of this chapter, captioned "Licenses and Permits in General. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-122. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Collection means the act of picking up refuse at its point of generation or storage and placing it in a vehicle. 
Commercial waste collector means a person, firm, corporation or other entity that collects, recycles and/or hauls, for a fee, the solid waste, including recyclable solid waste, generated by other persons, firms, corporations, residential, business, commercial or other establishments or other entities in New Haven, and includes private haulers, and collectors as defined in the waste disposal chapter of this Code. 
Licensee means the owner(s) of the commercial waste collection business herein being regulated. 
Noise means any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set forth in this Code. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or political or administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind. 
Solid waste means refuse, litter, municipal solid waste, bulky waste and yard waste, garbage, household rubbish, ashes and any organic wastes normally produced from the handling and use of foods, except dishwater and wastewater. 
Solid waste disposal site means the location where any final treatment, utilization, processing or developing of solid waste occurs, but shall not include incineration. This term shall include, but not be limited to the city's transfer station. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-123. - Commercial waste collectors, license required. 
No commercial waste collector shall engage in the collection, haulage, transportation, recycling and disposal of solid waste or refuse generated by other persons, firms, corporations, residential, business, commercial or other establishments or other entities in New Haven, and collect a fee for such service, without obtaining a license and permit(s) from the city's license and permit issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-124. - Application. 
(a)  In order to obtain a license under this article, an interested person must file an application with the city's license and permit issuer, and provide the following and all other information that he/she requires: 
(1)  Applicant's name; 
(2)  Address of the applicant's place of business; 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of each of its directors and officers; 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of the primary contact acting as representative for the applicant; 
(5)  A description of each vehicle to be used in the business operations licensed by this article, including the make, model, manufacturer, license plate number, tare weight capacity, and number of axels of all such vehicles; and 
(5)  A list of the routes located in New Haven and the name of each other municipality in which the collector hauls solid waste. 
(b)  A licensee shall notify the license and permit issuer of any change of information supplied in its application for a license within five (5) business days of said change. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-125. - Conditions. 
Before the license and permit(s) may be issued, the following conditions must be satisfactorily met: 
(1)  The applicant shall provide proof of general liability insurance with limits of liability of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for property damage per occurrence, or five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit. 
(2)  The applicant shall secure automobile liability coverage in the amounts of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage, two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for bodily injury per person and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury per accident, or five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit for each vehicle used in the business operation licensed by this article that does not require a commercial drivers license (CDL). 
(3)  The applicant shall secure automobile liability coverage in the amounts of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury per accident, or one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit, for each vehicle used in the business operations licensed by this article that does require a commercial drivers license (CDL). 
(4)  The applicant, his/her successors and assigns shall maintain each such insurance policy in full force as long as he/she conducts business in the city. 
(5)  The applicant shall be and remain current concerning the payment of any arrearage for taxes, fees, or any other obligation to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-127. - Commercial waste collectors; license fee. 
The license fee shall be three hundred and forty dollars ($340.00) per year. Such fee shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-128. - License term. 
Unless otherwise cancelled, revoked or suspended, the license shall be valid for a one-year period. The license may be renewed, provided the licensee is in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to, this Code's waste disposal chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-129. - Commercial waste vehicles; permit required. 
(a)  A licensee shall obtain a permit issued by the license and permit issuer for each vehicle that he/she/it uses in the business operations licensed by this article. 
(b)  Vehicle permits shall be issued hereunder in the form of a sticker. Said sticker may not be transferred to any other vehicle, and must only be affixed to the vehicle for which it is issued. Stickers shall be firmly affixed in a prominent location on the left front (driver's side) of the vehicle so that it can be readily visible at all times. 
(c)  If a vehicle is put into service during the license year, the licensee shall submit the required information for this vehicle to the license and permit issuer, and shall not use the vehicle to collect, transport or dispose of waste in the city until a decal has been issued and affixed to the new vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-129. - Regulations. 
(a)  The licensee of a permitted disposal vehicle shall keep it clean and as free as possible of offensive odors. 
(b)  No permitted vehicle shall be parked in any place other than its place of business for longer than is reasonably necessary to make a collection. 
(b)  A person shall not transport solid waste in any vehicle unless it is secured so as to be spill-proof and leak-proof. 
(c)  A vehicle body designed to use a tailgate shall have the tailgate properly in place. A load of solid waste shall not overhang the sides or the rear of the permitted vehicle's body. 
(d)  Commercial waste collectors shall cooperate with the city to ameliorate noise through such methods, including but not limited to, padding dumpsters, adding plastic lids, altering pickup times, relocating dumpsters and/or any other method in which to reduce noise. 
(e)  All licensees engaged in the business operations licensed by this article shall fully comply with all federal, state and local laws and regulations as each is amended from time to time, including but not limited to, this code's waste disposal chapter. 
(b)  Each licensee shall display his/her/its name and address or his/her/its name and telephone number on all permitted vehicles used in the business operations licensed by this article. 
(c)  No commercial waste collectors may engage in the business operations licensed by this article except between the hours of 5:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays in the following areas: 
(1)  Downtown area bounded by North Frontage Street, State Street, south of Trumbull Street, Prospect Street, Grove Street, Tower Parkway and Howe Street. 
(2)  Yale New Haven Hospital area bounded by South Frontage Street, Congress Avenue, and Howard Avenue. 
(3)  Hospital of Saint Raphael area bounded by Sherman Avenue, Chapel Street, Orchard Street and George Street. 
(d)  In all other areas of the city no commercial waste collector shall engage in the business operations licensed by this article except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-130. - License renewal. 
(a)  The license may be renewed each year, provided the licensee has complied with all federal, state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to this Code's waste disposal chapter as it is amended from time to time, during the licensed term. 
(b)  The license and permit issuer shall collect and maintain information from each license applicant when licenses and permit(s) are initially issued. In subsequent years it shall not be necessary for the licensee to provide detailed information unless there are any changes to the documentation submitted with the original license and permit request. If there are no changes, the licensee shall submit a written license renewal request, an updated insurance certificate, the required license fee, and any other relevant information requested by the issuer. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-131. - Suspension, cancellation or revocation by issuer. 
Commercial waste collector licenses shall be subject to the provisions of section 17-1.15 of this Code as it is amended from time to time regarding suspension, cancellation or revocation of permits, for cause. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-132. - Penalties. 
(a)  Each violation of any provision of this article shall be considered an infraction, and be punished up to the maximum fine as set forth in state statute or this Code as each is amended from time to time. 
(b)  A notice of infraction shall be issued to the individual operator of a vehicle and he/she shall present it to the owner of the vehicle. The operator, if the operator is not the owner of the motor vehicle, shall be presumed to be the agent and servant of the owner of the motor vehicle, and operating it in the course of his/her employment. The owner shall have the burden of rebutting the presumption. 
(c)  In addition to the fine set forth in subsection (a) above, upon the licensee's second violation, the director of public works shall have the authority to suspend the commercial waste collector's license to dispose of solid waste at any waste disposal facility, or other disposal site, of the city for thirty (30) days. 
(d)  In addition to the fine as set forth in subsection (a) above, upon the licensee's third violation, the licensee's license shall be suspended for thirty (30) days, thereby prohibiting him/her/it from carrying on such business in the city for thirty (30) days. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article may result in revocation of the license issued hereunder and/or in court action. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-133. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the issuer may appeal said decision in accordance with section 17-1.16 of this chapter as it is amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-134. - Severability. 
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall rule that any provision of this article is invalid, other provisions not specifically included in said judgment shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 17-135. - Ordinance review. 
Six (6) months after enactment, the board of aldermen shall review the impact of this ordinance on commercial waste collectors, and on the business and residential residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1557, 4-16-07)  
Secs. 17-136—17-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - PEDAL CABS (PEDICABS) 
 
Sec. 17-141. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, a "pedal cab" (pedicab) is defined as a multi-wheeled vehicle propelled by human power, capable of transporting passengers other than the operator thereof and which is made available to the public as a mode of transportation. A pedal cab shall be deemed to be a type of bicycle for purposes of this article and for purposes of the application of Connecticut laws applicable to the use of bicycles on public highways. 
(b)  "Operator" means the individual who actually operates the pedicab whether as the owner, an employee of the owner or as an independent contractor. "Owner" means any person who owns, leases, or otherwise has possession of the pedicab. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-142. - Licenses and registrations required for operation of pedal cabs. 
(a)  No person shall utilize any portion of any public street or highway for the operation of a pedal cab unless said person is licensed to do so in accord with the requirements of this article as administered by the New Haven Traffic Authority. 
(b)  No pedal cab shall be operated on any portion of any public street or highway unless said pedal cab is registered by the owner in accord with the requirements of this article as administered by the New Haven Traffic Authority. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-143. - Pedal cab operator's license. 
(a)  Application for a license to operate a pedal cab or for renewal thereof shall be made to the chief of police upon a form furnished by the chief and shall contain information set out in this chapter. Licenses shall only be issued to individuals who have a valid connecticut motor vehicle driver's license and are at least eighteen (18) years-of-age, and shall not be issued to partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies or other similar legal entities. Information to be contained on said operator's application (or provided therewith) shall include: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Residence address and business address. 
(3)  Date and place of birth. 
(4)  Motor Vehicle Driver's License information, including any restrictions placed upon the applicant's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(5)  A complete set of fingerprints. 
(6)  Whether the driver has ever been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor and, if so, the details thereof. 
(7)  Whether the driver has ever been denied any form of driver's license or has had any driver's license suspended or revoked. 
(8)  Proof of worker's compensation insurance coverage in accord with Connecticut law (if applicable), proof of liability insurance in such types and such amounts as approved by the mayor including, where deemed appropriate by the mayor, provision that the City of New Haven be named as an additional insured on the relevant policy or policies of insurance. 
(9)  A valid copy of certification of completion of the League of American Bicyclists Road 1 course, or equivalent as approved by the traffic authority. 
(10)  The name of the owner(s) of the pedal cab(s) to be operated by the driver. 
(11)  Such additional detailed information as may, in the opinion of the chief of police, be necessary to evaluate the fitness of the applicant to be granted a pedal cab operator's license. 
The application form shall also require the operator to state, under oath that he has read the regulations set forth in this article; that he understands those regulations; and that he agrees to abide by them at all times. 
(b)  Should any of the above-referenced information provided by the licensee become inaccurate or outdated, the licensee shall promptly provide correct and accurate information to the chief of police in the form of an amended application. No license fee shall be charged for such an amended application. 
(c)  License fee. The annual license fee for each license to operate a pedal cab shall be as set out in section 17-201 of this chapter. 
(d)  License renewable, not transferable. An operator's license shall be valid for not more than one (1) year. Such license may not be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred. 
(e)  License to be posted. The operator's license shall state that complaints about the licensee may be made to the chief of police. The license shall be posted in any pedal cab while it is being operated by the licensee in a place where it is clearly visible to the passengers being carried therein. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-144. - Pedal cab registration. 
(a)  Application for a pedal cab registration or for renewal thereof shall be made by the owner of the pedal cab to the chief of police upon a form furnished by the chief and shall contain information set out in this chapter. Information to be contained on said application (or provided therewith) shall include: 
(1)  Name of the owner of the pedal cab. 
(2)  Business address. 
(3)  The following identifying information: 
a.  In the case of individual owners: Date and place of birth. 
b.  In the case of corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies or any other form of legally recognized entity: 
(i)  State and date of establishment or creation. 
(ii)  Certificate of legal existence or similar documentation establishing that the existence and operation of the entity is in current compliance with the laws of the State of Connecticut and the state in which it was created. 
(4)  Whether the owner has ever been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor and, if so, the details thereof. 
(5)  A serial number, vehicle identification number or similar individual identification number permanently affixed to, and by which the registered pedal cab may be identified. 
(6)  A valid copy of each operator's certificate of completion of the American League of Bicyclists in the Road 1 course, or equivalent as approved by the traffic authority. 
(7)  Proof of insurance in such types and such amounts as approved by the mayor from time to time including, without limitation, liability insurance and, if applicable, worker's compensation insurance for any employees of the owner and further including, where deemed appropriate by the mayor, provision that the City of New Haven be named as an additional insured on the relevant policy or policies of insurance. In addition, the owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of New Haven from any liability associated with the operation of the licensed pedal cab. 
(8)  A cash or surety bond or other form of security in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and to ensure prompt surrender of the pedal cab registration in the event that it is no longer in active use. A single bond or other form of security may be tendered to cover more than one registration issued to the same owner provided that the amount thereof shall, at all times, be maintained in an amount equal to two hundred dollars ($200.00) multiplied by the number of pedal cab registrations issued to the same owner. 
(9)  The fare schedule itemizing all charges which the owner and/or operator shall charge to passengers for transporting them. 
(10)  Such additional detailed information as may, in the opinion of the chief of police, be necessary to evaluate the fitness of the applicant or the pedal cab vehicle to be granted a pedal cab registration. 
The application form shall also require the signatory for the applicant to state, under oath that he has read the regulations set forth in this article; that he understands those regulations; and that the applicant agrees to abide by them at all times. 
(b)  Registration fee. The annual fee for each pedal cab registration shall be as set out in section 17-201 of this chapter. 
(c)  Should any of the above-referenced information provided by the owner become inaccurate or outdated, the owner shall promptly provide correct and accurate information to the chief of police in the form of an amended application. No registration fee shall be charged for such an amended application. 
(d)  Registration renewable, not transferable. A pedal cab registration shall be valid for not more than one year. A pedal cab registration shall be assigned to each individual pedal cab and may not be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred. Each pedal cab shall be inspected for compliance with the requirements of this article at the time of initial registration and annually thereafter at the time of registration renewal. 
(e)  Registration to be posted. The pedal cab registration shall state that complaints about the pedal cab may be made to the chief of police. The registration shall be posted in the pedal cab at all times in a place where it is clearly visible to the passengers being carried therein. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-145. - Limitation upon number of registrations to be issued. 
No more than twenty (20) pedal cab registrations shall be issued, except at the discretion of the New Haven Traffic Authority for special events. Applications for pedal cab registrations shall be processed in the order in which they are received. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-146. - Designated hours and areas of operation. 
The New Haven Traffic Authority shall determine appropriate hours of operation and acceptable streets and areas in which pedal cabs shall operate. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pedal cab at other times or in other locations than those designated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-147. - Pedal cab equipment and operation. 
Pedal cabs shall be operated in accord with the laws of the State of Connecticut applicable to the use of bicycles on the public highways and shall follow all traffic laws without limitation, and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Pedal cabs shall be equipped with the safety equipment described in C.G.S. Section 14-288 at all times. In addition, pedal cabs shall: 
a.  Display a battery or generator-operated lighted lamp or lamps upon the rear part of such bicycle at all times when lamps are required to be lit pursuant to C.G.S. Section 14-96a. Such lamp or lamps shall, when lighted, emit a red light which in clear weather shall be visible at a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet in the direction from which such pedal cab is proceeding. 
b.  Be equipped with battery or generator-operated turn signal lamps. Such lamps shall, when lighted, emit a flashing yellow light which in clear weather shall be visible at a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet, both in the direction to and from which such pedal cab is proceeding. 
c.  Be equipped with a pedal-power delivery system of chains and gears (or the equivalent thereof) sufficient to permit the Pedal cab to accelerate from a standing position at a rate which will not unduly impede the flow of traffic. 
d.  Be equipped with a hydraulic or mechanical disc brake system which will permit the pedal cab to stop safely in an emergency situation without affecting the stability of the vehicle. 
e.  Be equipped with spoke reflectors placed upon each wheel and reflective tape marking the side edges of the pedal cab at both front and rear. 
f.  Be equipped with at least one side-view or rear-view mirror designed to allow the driver to observe traffic to the rear of the pedal cab. 
g.  Be equipped with seat belts for each passenger. 
(2)  Pedal cabs shall be operated in the manner described in C.G.S. Section 14-286a and 14-288 at all times. In addition: 
a.  Turn signals shall be given by the use of the turn signal lamps required pursuant to this section. 
b.  Pedal cabs shall pick up and discharge passengers as close to the curb line of the street as possible. 
c.  Pedal cabs shall be operated in a manner which does not impede or block the normal or reasonable movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic except where necessary to comply with applicable provisions of law. 
d.  Passengers shall be required to remain seated at all times while the pedal cab is in motion. 
e.  Not more than three (3) passengers shall be permitted in a pedal cab at any time. 
f.  Pedal cabs shall be liable to pay for metered on-street or off-street parking operated by the City of New Haven in the same manner as is applicable to any motor vehicle utilizing such a metered parking space. 
g.  Operators of pedal cabs shall comply with any restrictions set forth on their motor vehicle driver's license at all times while driving a pedal cab. 
h.  A clearly-legible copy of the fare schedule shall be posted in the pedal cab at all times in a place where it is clearly visible to the passengers being carried therein. 
i.  Pedal cabs shall not be operated while the operator is under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances other than medication prescribed for the operator by a physician which does not adversely affect the ability of the pedal cab driver to operate the pedal cab. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-148. - Revocation of registration or license. 
(a)  The police chief shall also have the power to deny or revoke any registration or license issued hereunder for cause after due notice in writing to the applicant/owner/licensee and after affording the applicant/owner/licensee the opportunity to be heard thereupon. Cause shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to false information knowingly given in the application for a license or registration, physical or mental impairment which jeopardizes the safety of passengers or other members of the public, failure to maintain complete and accurate license or registration information on file, or for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. The police chief may also take criminal convictions occurring subsequent to the granting of the license or registration into account to establish cause for denying or revoking any registration or license issued hereunder, but only after assessing the conviction(s) according to the factors listed in section 17-1.4(a). In addition, a pedal cab registration shall be revoked for any pedal cab which, in the determination of the police chief, is not in active service. This authority shall be in addition to any other means of enforcement of city ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to the denial/revocation procedure authorized pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the police chief may also suspend any registration or license immediately and for a period not to exceed five (5) days if he determines that the interests of public safety so require. In any such case the owner/licensee shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard within seventy-two (72) hours following such suspension. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09; Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Sec. 17-149. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this article, and the penalty for violation of any provision, as levied by the police chief and his designees or by the director of transportation, traffic and parking and his designees, shall be a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) per offense thereafter to the maximum allowable under state statute (two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)). In any instance in which the operator or owner/licensee shall feel the penalty was unfairly imposed, he/she shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard within seventy-two (72) hours following receipt of notice of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-150. - Implementation. 
The provisions of this article are effective immediately upon passage of the ordinance form which it derives [Ord. No. 1601, passed on Nov. 5, 2009] and all provisions shall be enforced immediately. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Sec. 17-151. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions of this section, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
Except as above amended, the New Haven Code of Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09)  
Secs. 17-152—17-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLES XVIII, XIX. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 17-171—17-200. - Reserved. 
_____ 
ARTICLE XX. - FEES AND CHARGES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— § 17-20 of this article been renumbered as § 17-201 with the permission of the city to accommodate the reorganization of the provisions of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 17-201. - Permit, license and user fees. 
This section contains a listing of permit, license and user fees charged by the city: 
1. City Plan Department 
Fee 
Applications to board of zoning appeals: 
Special exception ..... $190.00 
Filing following receipt of an order to cease and desist ..... No charge 
Variance (except use variance) ..... 190.00 
Filing following receipt of an order to cease and desist ..... No charge 
Use variance ..... No charge 
Filing following receipt of an order to cease and desist ..... No charge 
Review of administrative order or decision of the zoning administrator ..... 250.00 
Renewal of approval, per section 63(h) of the Zoning Ordinance, special exception or variance (except use variance) ..... No charge 
Application to City Plan Commission: 
Application for certification or recertification of an automotive use or reuse ..... 180.00 
Application for map or text change: 
Zoning ordinance map or text change application to aldermen ..... 1,440.00 
Inland wetland regulation map or text change application to city plan commission ..... 440.00 
Planned development applications and services: 
Applications and general plans: 
Planned development unit (PDU)—Application to board of zoning appeals ..... 1,350.00 
Time extension annually ..... 675.00 
Planned Development District (PDD)—Application to board of aldermen ..... 3,350.00 
Time extension annually ..... 675.00 
Planned development processing: 
Change in development team—Change of development principals or members of professional team ..... 350.00 
Detailed plans—For a single submission for a project, or minor modification of approved general or detailed plan ..... 540.00 
Fast tracking—For planned developments—For separate submission of elements of a detailed plan to facilitate construction of a project or a project phase: 
Site preparation (must include SESC and CSPR) ..... No charge 
Footings and foundations ..... No charge 
Structural framing and/or building ..... No charge 
Final site plan, including landscaping ..... No charge 
Certificate of completion for PDD or PDU for dwellings: 
1—5 units, per dwelling unit ..... No charge 
More than 5 dwelling units ..... No charge 
Project or phase completion ..... No charge 
For institutional, commercial or industrial: 
For each tenant or project phase ..... No charge 
Project or phase completion ..... No charge 
Postponement, rescheduling and customer receipts: 
Postponement or rescheduling of public hearing before board of aldermen or its committees; Board of Zoning Appeals, City Plan or Historic District Commission at applicant's request after advertisement or notification is sent; shall include a service charge ..... 100.00 
Maps, Publication and customer service charges: 
Maps: 
Zoning ordinance map with CAM District, single copy ..... 50.00 
Additional copies purchased at same time ..... No charge 
Inland wetland map ..... 25.00 
Topographic map section for SESC filing ..... No charge 
Large format maps (B & W) ..... 50.00 
Large format maps (Color) ..... 50.00 
Large format aldermanic ward maps (B & W) ..... 25.00 
Small format (booklet) aldermanic maps (B & W) ..... 30.00 
GIS/auto CAD data for city base ..... 550.00 
GIS parcel plots/location maps electronic ..... 10.00 
Ordinances and regulations: 
Zoning ordinance text, print ..... 75.00 
Inland wetland regulations ..... 25.00 
Soil erosion and sediment control regulations ..... 25.00 
Customer service and mailing charges—Mailing fee for application, map or ordinance ..... 6.00 
Agenda fee for board of zoning appeals or city plan commission; annual rate including mailing and postage ..... No charge 
Documents and publications ..... No charge 
Application for zoning permits: 
Certificate of zoning compliance, per parcel ..... 100.00 
Certificate of appropriateness within historic district ..... 100.00 
Site plan review applications, coastal site plan review, inland wetlands & watercourses, soil erosion and sediment control applications: 
Written determination of unregulated or permitted use or activity including site plan review ..... No charge 
Class A application (minor review) ..... No charge 
Class B application (standard review) ..... 300.00 
Class C application (major project, public hearing required) (for associated notification fees see below.) ..... No charge 
Notification fee: 
City prepares, mails required Legal Notices to abutters, for each notice ..... No charge 
Applicant prepares and mails required legal notices to abutters, and furnishes a certified list of those notified, for each notice ..... No charge 
Revision of Class B or C plan ..... No charge 
Time extension for site plan permit, annually ..... No charge 
Special permit ..... 190.00 
Filing following receipt of an order to cease and desist ..... No charge 
Penalty fee for filing of application for zoning permits following receipt of cease and desist order ..... No charge 
Administrative site plan review ..... 150.00 
Flood plain development permit (FPD): 
Flood plain development permit (FPD) ..... No Charge 
Flood plain development variance (FPD) ..... 250.00 
Time extension for FPD variance, per regulation ..... 100.00 
Applications for Low and Moderate Income Housing Tax Abatements: 
1—40 Units ..... 250.00 
41—70 Units ..... 350.00 
71 units and above ..... 450.00 
Annual Compliance Fee ..... 500.00 
2. City/Town Clerk 
Fee 
Publications/Documents: 
Zoning Code ..... $32.00 
Housing Code ..... 11.00 
City Charter ..... 32.00 
Volume II, Code of General Ordinances ..... 155.00 
Supplements to City Code ..... 27.00 
Voter registration cards ..... 6.00 
Notary seal ..... 5.00 
Notary certificate ..... 10.00 
Recording fees (Established by state statue): 
Recording 1st page of any document, plus town clerk fee ..... 60.00 
Each additional page or fraction thereof ..... 5.00 
City conveyance, per $1,000.00 ..... 5.00 
Sportsmen licenses: [7] 
Dog licenses: 
Spayed or neutered ..... 8.00 
Not spayed or neutered ..... 19.00 
Election request: 
Absentee ballot list per page ..... 0.50 
Exemption report per page ..... 0.50 
Financial report ..... 5.00 
Official check list per ward ..... 2.00 
Citywide list ..... 30.00 
Official results ..... No Charge 
Financial statements ..... 5.00 
3. Engineering Department 
Fee 
Maps/Documents: 
Street index ..... $20.00 
Print of photo enlargement ..... 20.00 
Print of full size assessment or planimetric map ..... 20.00 
Print of half sheet (24? × 36?) ..... 14.00 
Print of quarter sheet (18? × 24?) ..... 9.00 
Print of topographical map—(half sheet or less) ..... 40.00 
Print of topographical map—(larger than half sheet) ..... 65.00 
Photcopy of flood or sewer strip maps (11? × 17?) ..... 4.00 
Photocopy of pages from survey book (8.5? × 11?) ..... 2.00 
Each sheet for multi-page specifications/documents ..... 1.00 
Standard details: Booklet (11? × 17?) ..... 40.00 
Standard details: CD only ..... 70.00 
New Haven specifications (boiler plate) ..... 30.00 
Color maps (40? × 36?) ..... 45.00 
Color maps (less than a sheet) ..... 30.00 
Digital copies, black and white ..... 8.00 
Digital copies, color ..... 15.00 
Longwharf fees: 
Docking fees at longwarf (per foot) ..... 5.00 
Mooring fees (per foot) (3 moorings total available) ..... 1.00 
Steam, electrical or refrigeration equipment: 
Operator, initial fee ..... 75.00 
Renewal fee, annual, one location ..... 40.00 
Renewal fee, annual, each additional location ..... 22.00 
Skilled nursing facilities: 
Inspections ..... $150.00 
4. Fire Department 
Fee 
Licenses/Permits: 
Fire hydrant use license (per day) ..... $40.00 
Fire hydrant use permits (per month) ..... 525.00 
Flammable liquid permits per year ..... 160.00 
Flammable liquid permits per year—Dealing with in vehicles ..... 160.00 
Cutting & welding permit (per year) ..... 250.00 
Telecommunications equipment: 
City of New Haven and organizations approved by the controller ..... No charge 
Government-related users ..... Set by assessor 
Private commercial users ..... Set by assessor 
Arson Reports 
Arson report including pictures/video and full page documentation ..... 525.00 
Rescue insurance recovery fees 
Light duty rescue—Personnel and equipment used to secure and protect scene ..... 375.00 
Heavy duty rescue—Same as light duty rescue but with additional equipment (hydraulic, pneumatic etc). to free victims ..... 650.00 
Technical rescue—Confined space, vertical or search and rescue (additional charges may apply) ..... 1,000.00 
Hazmat response—Response to incident where substance is determined to pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety. (Does not include damaged equipment) ..... 1,500.00 
Light vehicle fire—Customary passenger vehicles ..... 300.00 
Heavy vehcile fire—Commercial vehicles, trucks and buses ..... 450.00 
Structure fire—Commercial/Industrial ..... 750.00 
Standby rate—After initial response (security, lighting & other support requiring that equipment be held on scene), per hour ..... 75.00 
Liquor license inspections ..... 150.00 
Hood Inspections for establishments with no liquor license ..... 100.00 
Underground tank removal inspections ..... 125.00 
Skilled nursing facilities inspections ..... 150.00 
Hospital inspections ..... 500.00 
Hood inspections for establishments with no liquor license ..... 50.00 
Dry cleaners inspections ..... 100.00 
Insurance company fire investigation reports ..... 250.00 
Fire Marshal's Office 
Liquor License Renewal ..... 150.00 
Liquor License 1 Day Permit ..... 30.00 
Skilled Nursing Facilities Inspection Renewal ..... 250.00 
Retail Fireworks/Sparkler Vendor ..... 200.00 
Hotel Inspections ..... 250.00 
Hotel Inspection Renewals ..... 250.00 
Insurance company fire investigation reports ..... 250.00 
Building Plan Review 
Under 2,000 sq. ft. ..... 65.00 
2000—4,999 sq. ft. ..... 110.00 
5,000—9,999 sq. ft. ..... 400.00 
10,000—29,999 sq. ft. ..... 600.00 
30,000—49,999 sq. ft. ..... 800.00 
Over 49,999 sq. ft. ..... 1,350.00 
Fire Alarm System Plan Review 
1—4,999 sq. ft. ..... 65.00 
5,000—9,999 sq. ft. ..... 110.00 
10,000—49,999 sq. ft. ..... 215.00 
Over 49,999 sq. ft. ..... 500.00 
Sprinkler/Fire Protection System Plan Review 
1—4,999 sq. ft. ..... 65.00 
5,000—9,999 sq. ft. ..... 110.00 
10,000—49,999 sq. ft. ..... 215.00 
Over 49,999 sq. ft. ..... 500.00 
Vacant Building Registration Program 
Vacant secured (initial registration fee per building—residential) ..... $250.00 
Vacant secured (renewal fee per building for vacant—residential) ..... 500.00 
Vacant secured (initial registration fee per building—commercial) ..... 1,000.00 
Vacant secured (renewal fee per building for vacant—commercial) ..... 2,500.00 
Vacant unsecured (initial registration fee per building—(residential) ..... 375.00 
Vacant unsecured (renewal registration fee per building—(residential) ..... 500.00 
Vacant unsecured (initial registration fee per building up to 5,000 square feet—commercial) ..... 1,000.00 
Vacant unsecured (initial registration fee per building greater than 5,000 square feet—commercial) ..... 2,500.00 
Vacant abandon (initial registration fee per building—residential) ..... 500.00 
Vacant abandon (initial registration fee per building—commercial) ..... 2,500.00 
Vacant building board up services fee per building (residential) ..... 1,000.00 
Vacant building board up services per building up to 5,000 square feet (commercial) ..... 1,500.00 
Vacant building board up services greater than 5,000 square feet (commercial) ..... Minimum $3,000.00 plus labor and materials 
5. Health Department 
Fee 
Food service: 
Food service establishment license—Less than 1,500 sq. ft. of floor area ..... $150.00 
Food service establishment license—Greater than 1,501 sq. ft. in floor area but less than 3,000 sq. ft. of floor area ..... 275.00 
Food service establishment license—Greater than 3,000 sq. ft. in floor area or has a drive-up window ..... 475.00 
Food service establishment license application fee ..... 100.00 
Food service establishment license—Catering ..... 550.00 
Food service establishment license—Shared kitchen user/micro-food business—Prorated for the first year only: 
May 1—August 31 to April 30 ..... $75.00 
September 1—December 31 to April 30 ..... $50.00 
January 1—April 30 to April 30 ..... $25.00 
Itinerant food service license ..... 200.00 
Itinerant food service application fee ..... 50.00 
Itinerant food service—Vehicle inspection fee (per each vehicle to be used in business) ..... 30.00 
Food service or restaurant establishment license renewal—Late penalty fee ..... 150.00 
Temporary food service operation for an event held in one location for one (1) day only ..... 60.00 
Temporary food service operation for an event held in one (1) location for more than one (1) day ..... 125.00 
Second re-inspection ..... 100.00 
Pools: 
Public swimming pool license ..... 350.00 
Additional pool water analysis ..... 40.00 
Individual homeowner's non-public pool water analysis ..... 40.00 
Day care: 
Day care center inspection ..... 110.00 
Septic systems: 
Septic tank system permit to install or repair ..... 180.00 
Septic tank permit for each truck annually ..... 45.00 
Plus for each 1,000 gallons of discharge, or fraction thereof delivered by each truck ..... 28.00 
Clinical: 
Tuberculin skin test ..... 20.00 
Tuberculin office visit fee ..... 20.00 
Adult immunization office visit fee ..... 20.00 
Children's clinic office visit fee ..... 20.00 
Travel clinic office visit fee ..... 50.00 
Tuberculosis home visit fee ..... 60.00 
Vision screenings ..... 10.58 
Hearing screenings ..... 12.80 
Postural (Scoliosis) screenings ..... 18.14 
STD clinic ..... 10.00 
On-Site Clinic Fee 
School-based health care permit fee ..... $10,000.00 
Trailer camps: 
Trailer camps, 15,000 square feet or less ..... 875.00 
If area exceeds 15,000 square feet, for each additional square foot ..... 160.00 
Weights and measures: 
Scales large and small capacity (per scale) ..... 36.00 
Retail petroleum dispenser meter ..... 45.00 
Truck petroleum meter ..... 80.00 
6. LCI Building Division 
(a)  Fees: 
Removal or demolition of any building or structure: 
For buildings or structures not exceeding 5,000 cubic feet ..... $0.00 
For buildings or structures exceeding 5,000 cubic feet but not exceeding 50,000 cubic feet ..... 0.00 
For buildings or structures exceeding 50,000 cubic feet ..... 0.00 
Plus for each additional 5,000 cubic feet ..... 0.00 
For any building ordered demolished by governmental authority (except a building under 5,000 cubic feet) ..... 0.00 
Inspection fee ..... 0.00 
Legal occupancy analysis ..... 40.00 
Fee schedule for building permits: 
The below lines include an $0.26 cent educational surcharge as governed by CGS 2925-L-C as amended from time to time. 
Building construction (per first $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 50.26 
Building construction (per each additional $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 30.26 
Plumbing construction (per first $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 50.26 
Plumbing installation or repair (per $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 30.26 
Electrical construction (per first $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 50.26 
Electrical installation or repair (per $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 30.26 
Heating construction (per first $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 50.26 
Heating, refrigeration, ventilating or other mechanical equipment installation or repair (per $1,000.00 or portion thereof) ..... 30.26 
Sign, marquee or billboard construction, erection, repair, alteration or removal for which a permit is required by state building code costing $1,000.00 or fraction thereof ..... 30.26 
Certificate of occupancy, single and multiple dwelling ..... 30.00 
Plus for each dwelling unit in excess of 1 ..... 20.00 
Nonresidential buildings: Not more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area ..... 30.00 
Each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof ..... 20.00 
Release of Building Code Violations ..... 100.00 
No permanent or temporary certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by the office of building inspection and enforcement until the owner or builder has certified to the actual cost of the construction, erection, repair, alteration or extension for which a permit was issued and has paid to the building department any additional fee which may be due and payment of the appropriate fee has been made in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in section 17-201. 
(b)  Penalty:  Any person or individual who performs any act covered by this section without having obtained the necessary permit shall be subject to the payment of a penalty equivalent to an amount that is double the applicable permit fee as established in section 17-201.6(a). Notwithstanding the foregoing, said penalty, shall, pursuant to C.G.S. Section 29-254a, not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  Appeal. Any person or individual aggrieved by the imposition of a penalty, may appeal such action by filing a written notice of intent to appeal within (10) calendar days of receipt of the written notice of the penalty. The appeal must be taken in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 17-1.16 of this chapter. 
7. LCI Permit and License Center 
Fee 
License fees: 
Excavation license ..... $240.00 
Walk and curb license ..... 350.00 
Sandwich board sign license ..... 180.00 
Permanent patch fee: per 200 sq. ft. ..... 600.00 
Commercial waste collectors license ..... No charge 
Permit fees: 
Excavation permit ..... 95.00 
Excavation permit (for each excavation in excess of 200 square feet and up to a length of one block) ..... 150.00 
Excavation permit (for each additional block or part thereof) ..... 150.00 
Sidewalk permit (walk and curb work permit per address) ..... 40.00 
Obstruction permit: 
First month ..... 32.00 
Second month ..... 64.00 
Third month ..... 96.00 
Each additional month ..... 32.00 
Beyond 12 months—Each successive month ..... 350.00 
0 to 10 feet, for the first 12months ..... 1,000.00 
Amusements, exhibitions and entertainment: 
One day: 
Capacity under 500 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity 500 to 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity over 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Special event permit ..... 50.00 
Each day for successive days of a term exceeding one day and not exceeding three (3) months: 
Capacity under 500 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity 500 to 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity over 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Amusement, exhibition or attraction, 3 months: 
Capacity under 500 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity 500 to 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity over 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Amusements, exhibitions or attractions, 1 year: 
Capacity under 500 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity 500 to 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Capacity over 1,000 persons ..... No charge 
Amusements, exhibitions or attractions to promote business: 
Per year or fractional part thereof ..... 300.00 
Or, per performance, but not to exceed $100.00 in any one year ..... 60.00 
Amusement devices and game rooms: 
Operators of machines or devices or per machine or device ..... 55.00 
Game rooms ..... 475.00 
Distributors ..... 950.00 
Parking lots: 
Less than 50 spaces ..... 130.00 
50 to 99 spaces ..... 260.00 
100 or more spaces ..... 375.00 
Pool tables: 
Pool table (Non-machine exempt in private club) ..... 160.00 
Vendors: 
Vendors, annual license ..... 200.00 
Vendors, license for 4 or fewer consecutive days ..... 60.00 
Managing vendors: 
Managing vendors ..... 3,500.00 
Outdoor seating: 
For 2 or fewer outdoor seats ..... 55.00 
For 3 or 4 outdoor seats ..... 110.00 
For 5 or more outdoor seats ..... 160.00 
Permits valid from April 15 to November 15. Permit fees shall not be prorated. 
Tag sales: 
For sales held more than two consecutive days, per day ..... 40.00 
For sales held on the same premises more than twice during one calendar month ..... 40.00 
Auctions and auctioneers: 
Auctions (per day) ..... 125.00 
Auctioneers (per year) ..... 325.00 
Auctioneers (per day) ..... 90.00 
Bowling Alleys: 
Bowling Alleys, each, per year ..... 160.00 
Pay telephones: 
Pay telephones, operating fee ..... 125.00 
Pay telephones, permit fee, per phone ..... 112.00 
Sales: Door to door, of merchandise and/or services: 
Connecticut residents ..... 290.00 
Non-Connecticut residents ..... 350.00 
Sales of magazine subscriptions only ..... 60.00 
Closeout sales: 
No more than 15 days ..... 125.00 
No more than 30 days ..... 250.00 
No more than 60 days ..... 350.00 
Per day supplemental license ..... 125.00 
Rooming houses: 
Rooming House: 10 or fewer units ..... 125.00 
More than 10 rooming units ..... 250.00 
Residential licensing permit: 
Residential license permit, first two units ..... 200.00 
Each additional unit ..... 50.00 
2nd reinspection—Failed inspection ..... 75.00 
Failure to appear at scheduled inspection ..... 50.00 
Parades: 
Regulation of parades, processions permit ..... No charge 
Office of Building: Special Events: 
Street intersection closure fee (per-intersection closure) ..... $25.00 
Outdoor market(s) (per-location) ..... 25.00 
Block parties, festivals, etc. (per-day) ..... 50.00 
Demonstration, protest, rally, etc. (per-day) ..... 50.00 
Church services/prayers vigils (per day) ..... 25.00 
Office of Building: Amusement, Exhibition or Attraction, Three (3) Months: 
Amusement, exhibition or carnival (Per-day) ..... $100.00 
Office of Building: Vendor Enforcement Fines (Section 17-11): 
Operating without a vendor license ..... $199.00 
Failure to renew vendor license (more than thirty (30) days expired) ..... 75.00 
Failure to display vendor license in a prominent and visible manner ..... 75.00 
Failure to display photo identification badge on his/her person while conducting business ..... 75.00 
Illegal parking of vending apparatus (truck, cart, or stand) ..... 75.00 
Illegal renting of vending space ..... 75.00 
Illegal vending during a declared festival/special event ..... 75.00 
Vending within twenty (20) feet of building entrance, exit, or alcove, driveway, mailbox, traffic signal, bus stop, loading zone, intersection, fire hydrant, or crosswalk ..... 75.00 
Vending within a restricted area (SVDs, residential areas, PDDs, PDUs) ..... 75.00 
Violation of general vending rules and regulations ..... 75.00 
Livable City Initiative: Application Fees: 
Residential loan programs (except elderly emergency) ..... $25.00 
Non-for-profit development projects ..... 150.00 
Livable City Initiative: Lien Release Request Including: 
Lien release request including: anti-blight, demolition, mortgage-development/residential, property management lien, relocation ..... $50.00 
Livable City Initiative: Payoff Request Including: 
Payoff lien request including: anti-blight, demolition, mortgage-development/residential, property management lien, relocation ..... $25.00 
Livable City Initiative: Subordination/Modification Request: 
Subordination/modification request ..... $50.00 
Livable City Initiative: Legal Fees: 
Loan closing fee (development loans) ..... $500.00 
Lien processing fee including: anti-blight, demolition, property management lien, relocation ..... 150.00 
8. Parks Department 
Fee 
Entry fees:* 
*All fees plus staff time, plus 15% of total 
Adult unlimited softball per team ..... $350.00 
Use of practice field by adults—2 hours or less ..... 39.00 
Use of practice field by adults—2-4 hours ..... 50.00 
Use of lights per hour or portion thereof ..... 55.00 
League entry per team ..... 160.00 
19 years and under division ..... 90.00 
Tournament fees:* 
*All fees plus required staff time plus 15% of total 
Adult softball, tournament fee per team per game ..... 20.00 
Use of lights per hour or portion thereof ..... 55.00 
All picnic areas except Lighthouse Park: 
Picnic shelter reservation—Residents ..... 65.00 
Picnic shelter reservation—Non-residents ..... 130.00 
Open space: 
Open space reservation—Residents ..... 40.00 
Open space reservation—Non-residents ..... 75.00 
Equipment: * 
*Rental costs do not include applicable staff OT charged as necessary 
Mobile bleacher unit, per day ..... 150.00 
3 row bleachers per day ..... 55.00 
Mobile stage 1—first day includes PA system and generator ..... 350.00 
Mobile stage 1—each additional day, per day ..... 60.00 
Mobile stage 1—Extensions of length per set up ..... 85.00 
Mobile stage 2 (stage only)—First day ..... 200.00 
Mobile stage 2—Each additional day, per day ..... 60.00 
Mobile stage 3—(platform stage)—First day ..... 160.00 
Mobile stage 3—Each additional day ..... 60.00 
Mobile stage 4 (small stage)—First day ..... 150.00 
Mobile stage 4—Each additional day ..... 60.00 
Hay wagon with tractor, per day ..... No charge 
Portable light tower, per day ..... No charge 
Performance stage—First day ..... 4,000.00 
Performance stage—Each additional day ..... 1,000.00 
Standard park permit application fee: 
Residents ..... 40.00 
Non-residents ..... 75.00 
Late permit applicationfee ..... 40.00 
Coogan & Salperto Building: 
Under 4 hours—Residents ..... 250.00 
Under 4 hours—Non-Residents ..... 350.00 
Over 4 hours—Residents ..... 300.00 
Over 4 hours—Non-Residents ..... 500.00 
Lighthouse Park: 
Parking fees (resident, weekend and holidays) ..... No charge 
Parking fees (resident, weekdays) ..... No charge 
Parking fees (active and retired military) ..... No charge 
Parking fees (non-residents, weekends and holidays) ..... 25.00 
Parking fees (non-residents, weekdays) ..... 25.00 
Parking fees (out of state) ..... 30.00 
Per bus parking fee ..... 100.00 
Seasonal parking passes (residents) ..... 20.00 
Seasonal parking passes (non-residents) ..... 100.00 
Boat launch season pass (residents) ..... 30.00 
Boat launch season pass (non-residents) ..... 130.00 
Reservation permit for picnic shelter—residents ..... 75.00 
Reservation permit for picnic shelter—non-residents ..... 150.00 
Exclusive use of photo area—Residents ..... 50.00 
Exclusive use of photo area—Non-residents ..... 100.00 
Carousel per ride charge in-season (Memorial Day—Labor Day) and off-season ..... 0.50 
Unlimited carousel rides per bus for resident and non-resident students ..... 50.00 
Resident Carousel rental: 4 hours or less ..... 400.00 
Non-Resident Carousel rental: 4 hours or less ..... 500.00 
Resident Carousel rental: more than 4 hours ..... 600.00 
Non-Resident Carousel rental: more than 4 hours ..... 700.00 
Tables and chairs for 125 persons or less ..... 450.00 
Tables and chairs for more than 125 persons ..... 600.00 
Non-exclusive use of carousel during public hours ..... 250.00 
Bathhouse meeting room—up to 4 hours—residents ..... 100.00 
Bathhouse meeting room—up to 4 hours—non-residents ..... 200.00 
Bathhouse meeting room—over 4 hours—residents ..... 200.00 
Bathhouse meeting room—over 4 hours—non-residents ..... 400.00 
Ralph Walker Ice Rink—Ice Rental: 
Rentals (per 50 minutes of ice time): 
Residents (peak) ..... 250.00 
Nonresidents (peak) ..... 300.00 
Residents (off-peak) ..... 200.00 
Nonresidents (off-peak) ..... 195.00 
New Haven Public Schools—Organized including Hockey ..... 195.00 
New Haven School groups, per child, including skate rental ..... 2.00 
Skate rentals ..... 5.00 
Ralph Walker Ice Rink—Public skating: 
Children (18 and under), residents ..... 1.00 
Children, non-residents ..... 1.00 
Adults, residents ..... 1.00 
Adults, non-residents ..... 1.00 
Senior citizens ..... 3.00 
Skate rentals ..... 4.00 
Alling Memorial Golf Course: (Classifications and fees are listed in Code of Ordinances section 19-7(b)) 
Field Rentals 
Baseball Field(s) Rental(s) Each Additional Hours ..... 20.00 
Football/Soccer: Use of field—2 hours or less ..... 50.00 
Football/Soccer: Use of field—2—4 hours ..... 75.00 
Football/Soccer: Each additional hour ..... 25.00 
Use of practice field by adults—2 hours or less ..... 45.00 
Use of practice field by adults—2—4 hours ..... 60.00 
Football/Soccer: Use of lights per hour or portion thereof ..... 65.00 
Non Resident Surcharge for Field Rentals ..... 20.00 
Resident Turf Field: Use of fields 2 hours or less ..... 500.00 
Resident Turf Field: Use of fields—2—4 hours ..... 750.00 
Resident Turf Field: Each additional hour ..... 250.00 
Non Resident Surcharge (For turf) ..... 250.00 
9. Police Department: 
Fee 
Animal shelter: 
Adoptions ..... $25.00 
Vaccination(s) (($10.00) per injection for a total of up to 3 injections) ..... 30.00 
Fees for redeeming a pet ..... 25.00 
Per day charges ..... 20.00 
Miscellaneous police: 
Accident photographs, per roll of developed film (*now on disks) ..... No charge 
Accident photographs, per digital printout (3? × 5?) ..... No charge 
Accident photographs, per digital printout (4? × 6?) ..... No charge 
Accident photograph, per digital printout (8? × 10?) ..... No charge 
Fingerprinting, per two cards ..... No charge 
Criminal record check ($5.00 for initial check, $20.00 if applicant has a record) ..... 25.00 
911 radio recordings ..... 10.00 
Certified stamp ..... 2.00 
Pistol fee ..... 50.00 
Complete accident reconstruction report ..... 525.00 
Accident photographs, any size ..... 20.00 
General fingerprinting ..... 30.00 
Risk assessment and report ..... 600.00 
Video (first two (2) hours—$10.00 each additional) ..... 50.00 
Tow trucks: 
Tower's license ..... 175.00 
Tower's listing fee (to join list) (per year) ..... 2,500.00 
Pedal cabs (pedicabs): 
Registration for each cab, annual ..... 50.00 
Operator's license, annual ..... 25.00 
Fire Arms: 
Retail license ..... $250.00 
Fireworks Permit: 
Fireworks permit ..... $75.00 
10. Public Works Department 
Bulk trash: 
Per scheduled pickup—Up to 4,500 lbs. ..... 50.00 
Missed appointment ..... 20.00 
Transfer station, commercial use (provides each one-, two- and three-family dwelling get one (1) free bulk trash pickup per fiscal year) ..... 0.00 
11. Registrar of Voters 
Fee 
Complete ward list*** ..... 5.00 
Democratic list/ward*** ..... 5.00 
Republican list/ward*** ..... 5.00 
***No charge to candidates who have filed with city/town clerk or to ward committee chairs 
Street guidebooks ..... 20.00 
City-wide ward map ..... 10.00 
Individual ward map ..... 5.00 
Mailing labels per ward ..... 35.00 
Complete voter list—disk ..... 130.00 
12. Traffic and Parking 
Fee 
Traffic records: 
Traffic maintenance record, fee for records search and preparation of report ..... 75.00 
Traffic signal chart, fee for preparation of ..... included above 
Traffic signal layout, fee for preparation of ..... included above 
Residential parking: 
Each permanent decal to a maximum of 2 ..... 0.00 
Each visitor's decal ..... included above 
*Ten 1-day visitor passes provided to each permit holder. 
Additional books of 10 visitor passes ..... 10.00 
Each issuance of special event permits ..... 0.00 
Business restricted—Yearly ..... 360.00 
Business restricted—Monthly ..... 40.00 
Business restricted—Weekly ..... 12.00 
Business restricted—Daily ..... 3.00 
Business restricted—10-day booklet ..... 25.00 
Health care/home professional—Annual ..... 180.00 
Medical care—Annual ..... 30.00 
Contractor, residential zone—Weekly ..... 10.00 
Landlord—Annual (1 per entity) ..... 30.00 
Landlord maintenance—Annual ..... 30.00 
Funeral—Daily ..... 0.00 
Realtor permit—Annual ..... 60.00 
Special event school crossing guard user fee—Each 4-hour period per position ..... 50.00 
Business restricted—Monthly ..... 40.00 
Business restricted—Weekly ..... 12.00 
Business restricted—Daily ..... 3.00 
Business restricted—Ten (10) day booklet ..... 25.00 
Contractor residential zone—Annual ..... 350.00 
No parking posting fees 
One side of street, first 100 feet ..... 30.00 
Each additional 100 feet ..... 5.00 
Two sides of street, first 100 feet ..... 35.00 
Each additional 100 feet ..... 10.00 
Banners: 
Per banner, suspended across street, per event (up to 2 weeks) ..... 500.00 
Per banner, suspended across street, per event extension (up to 2 weeks) ..... 500.00 
Per ten (10) pole banners (pennants) for 2 weeks ..... 500.00 
Late fee for banners that are delivered later than 7 days prior to the installation date ..... 100.00 
Meter bag late fee—Every one hundred twenty (120) day past-due per account ..... 50.00 
Meter bags ..... 17.00 
Economic development bag user fee ..... 7.00 
Commerative signage [mandated by Ord. No. 1433, adopted Nov. 20, 2006] ..... 250.00 
13. Department of Finance 
One copy of each report will be provided to city departments and each member of the board of aldermen. Copies will be available to be viewed by members of the public at all City libraries, City Hall and be available online. First copy is Free and each additional copy as follows: 
Fee 
Budget books ..... 15.00 
Monthly financial reports ..... 2.00 
CAPER ..... 15.00 
Annual plan ..... 15.00 
5-year plan ..... 20.00 
14. City Wide 
Check return fee ..... 30.00 
Copy fee (per page) ..... 0.50 
(Code 1928, §§ 51, 483, 527, 540, 571, 572, 594, 712, 886; Ord. of 8-5-29, § 2; Ord. of 7-6-30; Ord. of 10-3-32; Ord. of 5-1-39, § b; Ord. of 10-6-41; Ord. of 4-6-42, § 2; Ord. of 11-4-48, § 2; Health Reg. of 11-23-48; Ord. of 4-2-56, § 2; Ord. of 10-7-57, § C; Ord. of 3-3-58; Ord. of 4-10-61; Ord. of 4-7-64; Ord. of 10-5-64; Ord. of 2-1-65; Ord. of 5-21-79, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-79; Ord. of 2-15-82; Ord. of 4-4-83; Ord. of 8-1-83, § 2; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 2; Ord. of 11-21-83, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 2; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 4; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 2a—e; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 2; Ord. of 12-4-89; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 4-1-91; Ord. of 9-5-95, § 2; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. of 1-8-01; Ord. of 5-30-01; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. 1(h)—(j), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1325, § 5, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1354, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 1387, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 1433, § 2, 11-20-06; Ord. No. 1551, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 1552, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 1569, 8-4-08; Ord. No. 1594, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 1596, 6-1-09; Ord. No. 1601, 11-5-09; Ord. No. 1650, 4-4-11 ; Ord. No. 1655, 5-23-11 ; Ord. No. 1747, 5-27-14 ; Ord. No. 1604 , 11-5-09; Ord. No. 1682 , 5-29-2012; Ord. No. 1764 , 3-2-15; Ord. No. 1778 , 5-26-15; Ord. No. 1797 , 6-6-16; Ord. No. 1826 , 6-5-17; Ord. No. 1839 , 5-29-18; Ord. No. 1859 , 4-15-19) 
_____
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note— These fees are controlled by Connecticut General Statutes § 26-28 as amended from time to time. 
 
Secs. 17-202—17-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - STATE BUILDING CODE AND ZONING PERMITS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— With Ord. No. 1386, adopted July 5, 2005, the city enacted a consolidated fee schedule set out herein in Art. XX of this chapter. This consolidated fee schedule has been treated as superseding former listings of fees set out in this Code. Former §§ 17-21, 17-22, of Art. XXI pertained to building code and zoning permits and fees and derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Section 
Ord. of 	 7-10-72 	1 
Ord. of 	 5-28-80 	8, 13, 14 
Ord. of 	 4-15-82 	5 
Ord. of 	 6- 6-88 	3 
Ord. of 	10-17-88 	1 
Ord. of 	 5-29-90 	
Ord. of 	 8- 2-93 	
Ord. of 	 5-24-99 	
Ord. of 	12-20-99 	
1345 	 5- 3-04 	
1356 	 9- 7-04 	
		
 
Former § 17-26 of this article has been renumbered as § 17-221 with the permission of the city to accomodate the reorganization of the articles of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 17-221. - Procedure for withholding of approval of application for building permits when real estate taxes are delinquent. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 7-148(c)(2)(B) of the Connecticut General Statutes, the office of building inspection and enforcement shall not approve an application for a building permit when taxes are delinquent for the property for which the application is made, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Upon request of the office of the building inspection and enforcement, the tax collector for the city, or such other person or persons as designated by the tax collector, shall determine if there are delinquent taxes for a property for which an application for a building permit is made and report the findings thereof in written form to the official requesting same; provided, that if the property owner, or other person responsible for payment of taxes on such property, has entered into an agreement with the tax collector for the installment payment of delinquent real property taxes for such property, said permit shall not be withheld if the payments called for in said agreement are not in default, provided further, that if the property owner, or other person responsible for the payment of taxes on such property, has filed a petition seeking relief in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court, said permit shall not be withheld during the pendency of such bankruptcy proceedings solely on the basis of the delinquent taxes owed for the subject property. 
(c)  Nothing in this section 17-221 shall be so construed as to authorize the office of building inspection and enforcement to withhold an application for a zoning permit, a demolition permit, a sign permit, a heating permit, a plumbing permit, an electrical permit, an air conditioning permit, a ventilating permit, a refrigeration permit, any other mechanical equipment permit, or any permit for equipment for which provision is made or the installation of which is regulated by the Connecticut State Building Code. 
(Ord. of 7-6-98)  
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 18 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Acts prohibited in burial grounds, §§ 19-1—19-5; offenses in parks, § 70-5; nuisances, obstructions and dangerous conditions on streets and sidewalks, § 78-31 et seq.; for traffic, see Ch. 29. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Advertising on streets, squares, etc. 
No person shall throw or drop in any of the streets or public squares of said city any posters, handbills, advertising cards, or other substances used for the purposes of advertising. 
(Code 1928, § 729; Ord. of 3-5-34) 
Cross reference— Enforcement of § 18-1 by civil officers, § 32-2.  
Sec. 18-2. - Procedure for naming of corners established. 
(a)  Pursuant to sections 45 and 49 of the Charter of the City of New Haven regarding aldermanic authority over city streets, and enactment of ordinances relative to streets, walks, squares, parks, and subject to the requirements of section 78-101 of this Code, the procedure for naming of city street corners as an honor is as follows: 
(1)  Any signage or other permanent installation on street corners, squares or other public property intended as a commemorative, memorial or honor of any sort shall require approval of the board of aldermen. 
(2)  Submissions for such approval shall be made to the full board of aldermen by a current member or members of the board of aldermen. 
(3)  Each submission shall contain: 
(i)  Plan of the site of the proposed location indicating all structures and street features as well as the proposed signage drawn to scale for review by the city. 
(ii)  Proposed wording of the signage. 
(iii)  A petition of at least two hundred fifty (250) city resident signatures in favor of the proposed naming, of which at least two-thirds ( 2/3 (one hundred sixty-six ((166)) shall be residents of the neighborhood of the proposed sign location. 
(b)  A fee for the manufacture and installation for such signage shall be paid prior to installation and following approval, according to the licenses and permits chapter of this Code. 
(c)  Any corner or street naming approved by the board of aldermen prior to the effective date of this section shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1433, § 1, 11-20-06; Ord. No. 1642, 11-15-10 )  
Sec. 18-3. - Animal fighting. 
Every person who shall suffer any animal belonging to him/her, or in his/her custody, to engage in any fight, concerning which there is, or shall be, any prize, stake or wager, or who shall keep any animal in said city for any such purpose, shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Code 1928, § 531; Ord. of 7-10-95, § 8)  
Sec. 18-4. - Arrest; giving information to evade. 
Every person who shall, with intent to prevent the detection or arrest of any person guilty or suspected of any offense, give any information or cause any information to be given to another, regarding any criminal complaint, or any order to any member of the police force, or any intended action of any police officer, or of the proximity, position, or approach of any police officer, shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(Code 1928, § 618)  
Sec. 18-5. - Barbershops; obstruction of windows on Sunday. 
No person, being the owner, lessee, manager, or operator of a barbershop in the city or the servant, agent, employee or representative of any said owner, lessee, manager or operator or a member of said firm or co-partnership or an officer of said corporation shall suffer or permit the prevention of a full, clear and unobstructed view of the interior of said shop on a Sunday through any window thereof, or from any entrance thereto or from any street or sidewalk adjacent thereto by painting or soaping of windows or by any curtain, drapery, screen or other device or contrivance whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 5-6-29, § 1)  
Sec. 18-6. - Boxing—Without gloves. 
No person shall take part in any sparring exhibition except with regulation boxing gloves approved by the state athletic commissioner or the local inspector under his/her jurisdiction. 
(Code 1928, § 529) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of athletic commissioner over boxing exhibitions, §§ 19-325—19-340 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 18-7. - Same—Training. 
No person shall train himself or another person in said city for a prize fight, as defined by the statutes. 
(Code 1928, § 530) 
State Law reference— Prize fight defined, § 53-200 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). The definition excludes boxing exhibitions licensed by the state athletic commissioner.  
Sec. 18-8. - Cigar cutters, public, prohibited. 
No person shall provide or allow to be used a common or public cigar cutter in or upon the premises of any public building, hotel, restaurant, theater, public hall or store within the city. Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each violation. 
(Code 1928, § 559)  
Sec. 18-9. - Climbing East Rock, West Rock. 
No person shall ascend, descend, climb or scale, or attempt to ascend, descend, climb or scale the face or escarpment of the cliffs or rocks commonly known as East Rock and West Rock, located in and being a part of East Rock Park and West Rock Park, respectively, in the city. Any person who shall commit any of said acts, and any person who shall help, aid, assist or encourage any other person to commit the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or both. 
(Ord. of 11-10-58)  
Sec. 18-10. - Defacing property. 
Every person who shall wilfully and maliciously bedaub or besmear any building, fence, sidewalk, post, treebox or guard, tree or shrub, premises, vehicle, statuary or fountain, or any useful or ornamental thing or structure, with any paint, filthy substance, or any injurious or disfiguring matter, or shall in any manner injure or disfigure, hack or cut any building, fence, sidewalk, post, treebox or guard, tree or shrub, premises, vehicle, statuary or fountain, or any useful or ornamental thing or structure, or shall do anything which shall injure or disfigure the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1928, § 525; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 11) 
Cross reference— Enforcement of § 18-10 by civil officers, § 32-2.  
Sec. 18-10.1. - Use of nuisance products at public events and on public property prohibited; penalty. 
Use of nuisance products, commonly known as Silly String, an aerosol can from which string-shaped foam-like material may be sprayed and Smoke Bag or Instant Smoke, a plastic bag or tube-like container holding material which when exposed to air produces a quantity of smoke-like emission, in a public place or at a public event located within the City of New Haven, shall be unlawful and punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1256, 3-6-00)  
Sec. 18-11. - Fertilizer kept in city not to be offensive. 
No person shall keep any guano or other fertilizing substance, in said city, for any purpose whatever, in such a manner as directly or indirectly to become offensive, by the effluvia arising therefrom to any person residing in the neighborhood or passing in the street. 
(Code 1928, § 570)  
Sec. 18-12. - Firearms and ammunition—Sales to children. 
No person shall sell to any child under the age of sixteen (16) years, without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such child, any cartridge or fixed ammunition of which any fulminate is a component part, or any gun, pistol, or other mechanical contrivance arranged for the explosion of such cartridge, or of any fulminate. 
(Code 1928, § 866)  
Sec. 18-12.1. - Same—Sale of pistols and revolvers. 
(a)  No person shall advertise, sell, offer or expose for sale, or have in his possession with intent to sell, any pistol or revolver at retail unless such person shall have obtained: 
(1)  A federal license as a dealer in firearms or ammunition from the bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms; 
(2)  A state permit for the sale at retail of pistols and revolvers within the city; and 
(3)  A state permit to engage in or conduct business as a seller within the State of Connecticut for the place of business in which such a sale of any pistol or revolver at retail shall occur from the state tax commissioner. 
(b)  No sale of any pistol or revolver at retail by any person qualified to conduct such a sale under subsection (a) shall be conducted in a private dwelling, no part of which is open to the general public. 
(c)  All sales of any pistol or revolver at retail by any person qualified to conduct such a sale under subsection (a) shall be conducted in premises located on property zoned as a business district or in premises for which a variance has been granted for the sale of pistols or revolvers at retail. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term "sale of any pistol or revolver at retail" means any transfer of title, exchange or barter, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of any pistol or revolver for a consideration for any purpose other than resale in the regular course of business; 
(2)  The term "pistol or revolver" means any firearm having a barrel less than twelve (12) inches in length. 
(Ord. of 12-3-79) 
Editor's note— An ordinance enacted Dec. 3, 1979, approved by the mayor Dec. 6, 1979, and effective Dec. 17, 1979, did not expressly amend the Code; hence codification herein as § 18-12.1 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 18-13. - Hitching to vehicles. 
No person shall catch hold of any teams, automobiles or horses for the purpose of being towed along by such teams, automobiles or horses, or for any other unlawful purpose. 
(Code 1928, § 538)  
Sec. 18-14. - Law enforcement officers; impersonating, obstructing, interfering with. 
No person shall fraudulently represent himself to be a policeman, or special constable; or fraudulently raise an alarm for the police, or fraudulently make use of any badge, call or signal adopted by the board of police commissioners for the use of police; or resist, hinder, obstruct, vilify, or abuse any police officer or special constable in the discharge of his duty; or raise any call, or use any signal to draw a crowd, or call help, for the purpose of hindering or obstructing the mayor or any police officer in the discharge of his duty. 
(Code 1928, § 617)  
Sec. 18-15. - Loitering—Around polls. 
No minor or other person not an elector shall loiter about any voting place during the taking of any vote, or about the place where the vote is being counted. 
(Code 1928, § 467)  
Sec. 18-16. - Same—By children at night. 
(a)  Prohibited. No children under the age of fourteen (14) years shall be allowed to loiter upon any street, alley or public place within the corporate limits of the city between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) p.m. and three o'clock (3:00) a.m., unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(b)  Responsibility of parent, guardian. No parent or guardian having the care, custody or control of any such child shall permit said child to loiter in violation of subsection (a) hereof. 
(c)  Penalty. Every parent or guardian who shall allow any child to loiter in violation of subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. 
(Code 1928, §§ 533, 534)  
Sec. 18-17. - Same—On public ways, squares, near cemeteries, public buildings, churches. 
No persons shall assemble idly and remain in crowds upon any footway, sidewalk, or crosswalks in any streets or in any of the public squares of said city, or before any church or public building, or before or within any cemetery in said city, and all persons to the number of three (3) or more so assembling, and refusing to disperse when commanded so to do by a police officer, special constable, or mayor of said city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1928, § 752)  
Sec. 18-17.1. - Loitering—Drug traffic. 
(a)  Definitions as used in this section: 
(1)  Illegal drugs means any controlled or restricted substance or drug, the sale or possession of which is prohibited by Connecticut General Statutes or any federal statute. 
(2)  Drug paraphernalia means drug paraphernalia as the term is defined in Connecticut General Statutes excluding, however, items obtained from, or exchanged at any needle exchange program authorized by the State of Connecticut or City of New Haven Health Department; and hypodermic syringes or needles in the possession of a person as part of medical treatment prescribed by a health care practitioner the license of whom is recognized by the State of Connecticut. 
(3)  Illegal drug activity means unlawful conduct contrary to any provision of federal statute, state statute or ordinances of any political subdivision of this state regarding illegal drugs. 
(4)  Public place is any area within the City of New Haven which is city, state or federally owned or controlled and which is accessible to the general public, including but not limited to buildings, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways and parking lots. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  A person is guilty of drug-traffic loitering if he or she remains in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of soliciting, enticing or procuring another to engage in illegal drug activity, and such person refuses to cease such conduct when ordered to do so by the police, or resumes such conduct after being ordered by police to cease. 
(2)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determination of whether the person intends such prohibited conduct are that he or she: 
a.  Is seen by the officer to be in possession of drug paraphernalia; or 
b.  Repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop passersby, or engages passersby in conversation; or 
c.  Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by tailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture; or 
d.  Circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to, contacts, or attempts to stop pedestrians; or 
e.  Is the subject of any court order which directs the person to stay out of any specified area as a condition of release from custody, a condition of probation or parole or other supervision or any court order, in a criminal or civil case involving illegal drug activity. 
(c)  Penalties and infraction enforcement. Any person who is found to have violated this section shall be fined not more than ninety dollars ($90.00) for each offense. Nothing herein shall prohibit police officers from issuing more than one (1) citation for violation of the provisions of this ordinance, provided that such violations are sufficiently distinct in time and place so as to render them separate violations. 
(d)  Severability. The provisions of this section are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any order, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this ordinance, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any persons or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. of 9-5-95)  
Sec. 18-18. - Lost property; duties of finders, police; procedure. 
The city hereby adopts the provisions of sections 50-9 through 50-14 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, which sections govern the duties, procedures and responsibilities arising upon the finding of lost property. 
(Ord. of 11-12-46)  
Sec. 18-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1422, adopted July 6, 2006, repealed former section 18-19 in its entirety which pertained to disturbing noise and derived from Ord. of 3-2-31; Ord. of 4-19-71; Ord. of 6-5-72; Ord. of 12-15-86, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-21-87; Ord. No. 1262, 4-3-00; Ord. of 5-7-01.  
Sec. 18-20. - Nuisances—Abatement by director of public works. 
Whenever the director of public works shall have notice of a public nuisance in said city, if the same be in any public street, square or grounds, or in or upon any flat, slip, quay, dock or public landing, he shall cause the same to be abated or removed at once. 
(Code 1928, § 684) 
Cross reference— Enforcement of § 18-20 by civil officers, § 32-2.  
Sec. 18-21. - Same—Collection of expenses for abatement. 
The expenses incurred by the director of public works, or board of health, in abating or removing any nuisances shall be paid by the city. Such expenses shall be a charge against every person causing or procuring such nuisances to exist, and against every person suffering or permitting such nuisances to be done or to exist on any premises owned by him or under this charge, and may be recovered in behalf of said city, of such persons or any of them, jointly or severally, in any proper form of action. It shall be the duty of the director of public works or clerk of the board of health forthwith to notify the corporation counsel, of any such expense, and the names of the persons chargeable therefor, and it shall be the duty of said counsel to cause proceedings to be taken to collect the same. 
(Code 1928, § 685)  
Sec. 18-22. - Obscene figures, words on property. 
Every person who shall make or draw any obscene or filthy figure, or write any obscene or disfiguring words on any building, fence, sidewalk, post, treebox or guard tree or shrub, premises, vehicle, statuary or fountain, or any useful or ornamental thing or structure, with any paint, filthy substance, or injurious or disfiguring matter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1928, § 526)  
Sec. 18-23. - Obscene posters, pictures. 
No person shall post up, display, distribute, exhibit, or attach to any billboard, fence, or other public or private property, any obscene, lewd, indecent or blasphemous or lascivious woodcut print, picture or paper. 
(Code 1928, § 730) 
Cross reference— Indecent or violent advertising of amusements, § 6-13.  
Sec. 18-24. - Police alarm system; tampering with or possessing key to. 
No person shall open any signal box connected with the police alarm telegraph except by the authority of, and with the key furnished by the chief of police, nor shall any person have or keep in his possession, without permission from the chief of police, any signal-box key. 
(Code 1928, §§ 619, 620)  
Sec. 18-25. - Posting notices, etc., on property without permission. 
No person shall post up, or affix in any manner, any bill, placard, advertisement or notice, either written or printed, upon any fence, traffic control signal, litter receptacle, bridge, wall, post, pole or upon any part of any building in said city, without the previous consent of the occupants thereof; or, if there be no occupants, without the previous consent of the owners, thereof; nor upon any building, sidewalk, curbstone, tree, fence, or post belonging to said city without consent of the director of the department of public works, nor upon any pole belonging to any telegraph, telephone or electric lighting company, without the previous consent of such company. Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the violation shall continue and shall be required to abate the violation. 
(Code 1928, § 994; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 12) 
Cross reference— Enforcement of § 18-25 by civil officers, § 32-2.  
Sec. 18-26. - Refrigerators and iceboxes; abandoning. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of said icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap lock or other device therein without first removing the said snap lock or door from said icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. of 12-7-53, §§ 1—3) 
Cross reference— Enforcement of § 18-26 by civil officers, § 32-2.  
Sec. 18-27. - Rewards, mayor, aldermen authorized to offer. 
Whenever any great crime or misdemeanor, or flagrant breach of the city ordinances is anticipated or has been committed in said city, and the offender has escaped or is unknown, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of aldermen, may, in the name and behalf of said city, publicly offer a reward not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the detection, arrest, or conviction of the offender. 
(Code 1928, § 603)  
Sec. 18-28. - Spitting in public places. 
Spitting upon the sidewalk of any public street, avenue, park, public square or place in the city or upon the floors of public conveyances, or upon the premises of public buildings, theaters, opera houses, halls and the like, except in proper receptacles, provided for said purpose, is hereby prohibited. It shall be the duty of owners, agents, corporations, or persons, having charge of said public conveyances, buildings, theaters, opera houses, halls, and the like to display in a conspicuous place and manner proper signs calling attention to this regulation, said signs to be duly approved by the board of health. Every person wilfully or carelessly violating this regulation or refusing to display said signs shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. 
(Code 1928, § 605)  
Sec. 18-29. - Steamboats; safety facilities. 
Every steamboat employed in the transportation of passengers to and from the port of New Haven shall be provided or caused to be provided by the master or owner thereof with a gang-plant at least six feet (6') wide and having a hand rail at least three feet (3') high on each side thereof, and said gang-plank shall be used in all cases for the safe and convenient landing and embarking of passengers only. 
Every owner or master of a steamboat who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each violation, and each day of failure to provide said gang-plank or cause it to be provided shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Code 1928, § 826)  
Sec. 18-30. - Street lamps—Injuring, removing, tampering with. 
No person shall wilfully, maliciously or carelessly throw down, break, deface, or otherwise injure or remove any lamp in any street or public place in said city, or the posts, iron, glass street signs, whether the same be in the lamp or attached to the post or hole or other furniture belonging to or connected with the same, or shall in like manner and without proper authority light any such lamp, or shall in like manner and without proper authority extinguish any such lamp. This section shall apply to all lamps, whether the same are commonly used or not. 
(Code 1928, § 581)  
Sec. 18-31. - Same—Poles and structures near, cables and printed matter on prohibited. 
No person shall place any pole, post or structure of any kind within ten (10) feet of a public light or lamp within the limits of the city, which can in any way obstruct the light coming from said lamp or light, or cause to be attached to such lamp or light, any rope, cable, advertisement or written or printed matter, except street and "Quiet Zone" signs. 
(Code 1928, § 580)  
Sec. 18-31.1. - Strikebreaking and employing strikebreakers. 
It shall be unlawful within the city for any person, partnership, agency, firm or corporation, or officer or agent thereof to recruit, hire, procure, supply, or refer any person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for employment in the place of employees involved in a strike, for employment in place of an employee involved in a strike. 
It is unlawful for any person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for employment in place of employees involved in a strike to take or offer to take the place in employment of employees involved in a strike. 
Any person, partnership, agency, firm or corporation violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by fine not more than one hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a term not more than sixty days, or both at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 6-3-63, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— An Ord. of June 3, 1963, §§ 1 and 2, enacted the provisions codified as § 18-31.1 above. Since said ordinance did not amend this Code, the manner of codification has been in the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 18-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1246, adopted Nov. 22, 1999, repealed § 18-32, subversive activities, derived from the 1928 Code, § 551.  
Sec. 18-33. - Swimming nude. 
No person shall swim or bathe naked in any of the waters within the city except in such places as may be designated by the appropriate city officials for that purpose. Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of five dollars ($5.00) for each violation. 
(Code 1928, § 523)  
Sec. 18-34. - Trees and shrubs—Injury to. 
Every person who shall, without the permission of the department of parks and recreation, cut, bruise, injure or destroy any tree or shrub for shade, ornament or use in any street or public square in said city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Every person who shall fasten any horse or other animal to any shade tree in any street, or who shall place or leave any horse or other animal in such a manner that it may injure any such shade tree, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1928, §§ 791, 792) 
Cross reference— Damaging or defacing public property in streets, squares, § 27-15.  
Sec. 18-35. - Same—Injury or destruction of troughs, other protective fixtures. 
Every person who shall wilfully and maliciously cut, bruise, break, injure, destroy, displace or carry away any leaden trough or other fixture placed upon or around any tree in said city for the purpose of protecting the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1928, § 793)  
Sec. 18-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 13 of an ordinance enacted Oct. 17, 1988, approved by the mayor Oct. 28, 1988, and effective Nov. 10, 1988, repealed § 18-36, concerning hanging or fastening signs, etc., to trees and shrubs, as derived from § 794 of the 1928 Code.  
Sec. 18-37. - Trespass to real property; theft, destruction of produce or plants. 
No person shall enter any yard, garden or enclosure or posted land against the will of the owner or without his permission, or to take or destroy any fruit or produce of any such yard, garden, enclosure or posted land, or destroy or in any manner injure any tree, shrub or plant therein. Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. 
(Code 1928, § 993)  
Sec. 18-38. - Violation of state building code. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate a provision of the state building code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure without obtaining a required permit or in violation of any approved plan or directive of the building inspector or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the state building code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any work in or about a building or structure after having been served with a stop order, except that work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable for a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-10-72, § 2)  
Sec. 18-39. - Regulation of consumption and possession of alcoholic liquor upon public highways, public areas and parking areas; consumption and possession in unlicensed premises prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Alcoholic liquor" has the same meaning as set forth in Section 30-1 of the General Statutes. 
(2)  "Parked vehicle" has the same meaning as set forth in Section 14-1 of the General Statutes. 
(3)  "Open container" means any open bottle; any bottle which was sealed by a liquor tax stamp, which seal has been broken, whether or not stopped; any can which has been opened in any way; any keg or dispensing device which is set up to dispense; or any glass, cup, jar, or other vessel. 
(4)  "Public highway" means a highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, or other way within and under the control of the City of New Haven and open public use, including the sidewalks of any such highway. 
(5)  "Public area" means any park (in accordance with regulations established by the board of park commissioners), plaza, mall, arena, stadium, cemetery, or other publicly-owned place which is open to the public. 
(6)  "Parking area" means lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use with or without charge. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  Except as permitted in subsection (c) hereof, no person shall consume any alcoholic liquor, or possess any open container of alcoholic liquor upon or within the limits of any public highway, public area, or parking area within the City of New Haven. For purposes of this section, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the consumption of alcoholic liquor or the possession of an open container of alcoholic liquor in parked vehicles within or upon parking area or a public highway or sidewalk is a violation hereof. 
(2)  No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor or possess any open container of alcoholic liquor in any building or room maintained for the sale, distribution, or dispensing of alcoholic liquors that does not possess a license or permit issued by the department of liquor control for the said same sale, distribution, or dispensing of alcoholic liquors if said same sale, distribution or dispensing of said alcoholic liquors is in violation of Chapter 30 of the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
(c)  Exceptions: Consumption of alcoholic liquor and possession of an open container of alcoholic liquor is permitted during any function, festival, event or celebration conducted on or within a public highway, public area, or parking area pursuant to any law, statute, ordinance, resolution or permit authorizing sale and consumption of liquor in or upon such public highway, public area, or parking area. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. of 10-24-83; Ord. of 2-17-87) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 5; restrictions on sale of alcoholic liquor, Vol. III, Tit. VI, § 42.1.  
Sec. 18-40. - Abandoned, inoperative or unregistered vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall have the stated meanings: 
(1)  Abandoned vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle which is apparently discarded or has a market value in its current condition of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less. 
(2)  Inoperable vehicle shall be a motor vehicle which is so vandalized, damaged, or in disrepair as to be unusable as a motor vehicle. 
(3)  Enforcement officer shall mean the director of the department of public works of the City of New Haven or his or her designee. 
(4)  Owner shall mean the owner of record of a piece of property as listed in the land records of the City of New Haven. 
(5)  Unregistered shall mean not having a valid registration as required by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut and/or the regulations issued by the motor vehicles department of the State of Connecticut. 
(b)  Prohibited acts; exceptions. No owner of any parcel of land located wholly or partly within the City of New Haven shall deposit, cause or permit to be deposited, retain, cause of permit to be retained, any abandoned or unregistered vehicle on such land, for more then thirty (30) days, except in a completely enclosed and secured area, provided that no part of this subsection shall be so construed as to apply to any automobile repairing, automobile sales or automobile junk dealer business licensed and authorized under the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut or the ordinances of the City of New Haven and which is operated in compliance with the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(c)  Complaint; finding; notice of violation. 
(1)  Upon complaint of any violation of this section, or information which indicates a violation of this section may exist, the enforcement officer shall personally inspect the site of the alleged violation and make a determination in good faith as to whether the alleged violation does in fact exist. 
(2)  Upon making such determination that a violation of this section does exist, the enforcement officer shall cause to be served a written notice, either personally or by mail, on the owner of the land on which such violation is determined to have occurred, setting forth the violation and ordering its correction, and shall publish notice of the violation in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the city. 
(3)  Said violation shall be deemed to have existed from the date of said notification, and said property owner shall have thirty (30) days from date of said notification to remedy said violation or be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the violation shall continue and to any penalties which shall be applicable under the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
(d)  Towing of abandoned motor vehicles. 
(1)  The chief of police shall direct the towers on the municipal towers list or such other persons as may be specifically designated by the chief of police for such purpose to remove abandoned motor vehicles as may be necessary to maintain and preserve the public health and welfare and the safety of the city and full and free access to the streets of the City of New Haven. 
(2)  The fee for towing or removing any abandoned motor vehicle under the provisions of Connecticut General Statutes section 14-150 as amended by Public Act 88-270 shall be five dollars ($5.00) per abandoned vehicle. Each person towing an abandoned motor vehicle may charge for each vehicle towed hereunder such storage fees as are set by the department of motor vehicles for such storage but the city shall not be responsible for paying to the tower such storage fees. 
(3)  Abandoned motor vehicles towed in accordance with this section or Connecticut General Statutes section 14-150 as amended by Public Act 88-270 shall be delivered by the towers to such location or locations as the city may designate. 
(e)  Requirements. 
(1)  Each person who tows abandoned motor vehicles and is not on the municipal towers list pursuant to section 19-118 of this Code shall nonetheless comply with the following ordinances and all applicable rules and regulations: Sections 29-107, 29-108(a), (b) and (d); 29-110, 29-111, 29-112, 29-114, 29-115, 29-116 and 29-117. 
(2)  Each person who tows abandoned motor vehicles and is not on the municipal towers list pursuant to section 29-118 of this Code shall not receive a license until he or she has deposited with the chief of police the following insurance policies: 
a.  A legal liability policy covering fire, theft and explosion in an amount acceptable to the board of police commissioners. 
b.  A liability policy covering the operation of applicant's business, equipment or vehicles, for any bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall be in an amount acceptable to the board of police commissioners. 
c.  Notice of change or cancellation. Each policy required herein must contain an endorsement providing for thirty (30) days notice to the city in the event of any material change or cancellation. 
(f)  Recordkeeping. The chief of police shall at all times keep and maintain records of each abandoned motor vehicle towing service rendered pursuant to the requirements of Connecticut General Statutes section 14-150 as amended by Public Act 88-270. 
(g)  Hearing. Each person whose vehicle has been towed pursuant to section 18-40 of this Code shall have a right to a hearing as provided in section 29-119(c) of this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-7-87, § 1; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 14; Ord. of 10-17-88) 
Cross reference— Enforcement of § 18-40 by civil officers, § 32-2.  
Secs. 18-41—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Noise Control Ordinances." 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-72. - Purpose. 
It is recognized that people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health, safety, welfare, or quality of life. This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote these values for the citizens of New Haven through the reduction, control and prevention of unlawfully excessive noise. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-73. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
(a)  Ambient noise or background noise means a noise of a measurable intensity which exists at a point as a result of a combination of many distant individually indistinguishable sources. In statistical terms, it is the level which is exceeded ninety (90) percent of the time (L90) in which the measurement is taken. 
(b)  Collection means the act of picking up refuse at its point of generation or storage, placing it in a vehicle, and completing the process at each location. 
(c)  Commercial zone means all commercial districts and business districts, including BA, BB, BC, BD, BD-1 and BE as defined in the zoning regulations of the City of New Haven, and all uses associated therewith permitted either as a right or as a special use. 
(d)  Compression release type braking system means any device equipped on certain commercial vehicles, including but not limited to, tractors, semi-trucks, motor carriers and buses that utilize engine compression release or engine retardants as a means of slowing or braking the speed of the vehicle in lieu of applying the clutch or brakes. These devices are also known as Jake brakes. 
(e)  Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. This term does not encompass demolitions. 
(f)  Construction equipment means any equipment or device operated by fuel, electric power, air or hydraulic pressure used in construction or demolition work. 
(g)  Daytime hours means the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays, and the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m. Sundays and federal and state holidays. Unless otherwise provided, all other hours shall be construed as nighttime hours. 
(h)  Decibel means a logarithmic unit of measure used in measuring magnitudes of sound. The symbol is dB. SPL (sound-pressure level) is defined as: 
SPL = 20 log P in dB/Po 
Where Po = 0.0002 microbars 
(i)  Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar property. 
(j)  Domestic power equipment means power saws, drills, grinders, lawn and garden tools and other similar devices. 
(k)  Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
(l)  Emergency vehicle means any motor vehicle authorized by Conn. General Statutes section 14-283 as amended from time to time and the City of New Haven to have sound-warning devices such as sirens and bells which can lawfully be used when responding to an emergency. 
(m)  Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following an emergency, or work required to protect persons or property from exposure to imminent danger. 
(n)  Impulse noise means a sound of short duration, usually less than one (1) second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
(o)  Industrial zone means all industrial districts as defined by the zoning regulations of the City of New Haven, including but not limited to IL, IM and IH Districts. 
(p)  Loud amplification device or similar equipment shall include, but not be limited to, a radio, television, stereo, record player, tape player, cassette player, compact disc player, loud speaker or sound amplifier which is operated in such manner that it creates noise. 
(q)  Motor vehicle is defined as per section 14-1(51) of the Conn. General Statutes as amended from time to time. 
(r)  Muffler means a device for abating sounds such as those produced by escaping gases. 
(s)  Noise means any sound, the intensity of which exceeds the standards set forth in this article as it is amended from time to time. 
(t)  Noise level means the sound-pressure level in decibels as measured with a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
(u)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency or political or administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind. 
(v)  Premises means any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including all appurtenances, yards, lots, courts, inner yards, and real properties without buildings or improvements, owned or controlled by a person. The emitter's "premises" includes contiguous publicly dedicated street and highway rights-of-way, all road rights-of-way and waters of the state. 
(w)  Property line means that real or imaginary line along the ground surface and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled by any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by another person, and separates real property from the public right-of-way. 
(x)  Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
(y)  Recreational vehicle means any internal-combustion-engine-powered vehicle which is being used for recreational purposes. 
(z)  Refuse means municipal solid waste, bulky waste and yard waste, garbage, household rubbish, ashes and any organic wastes normally produced from the handling and use of foods, except dishwater and wastewater. 
(aa)  Residential zone means all city-owned property used for recreational or educational purposes, all residential districts (RS-1, RS-2, RM-1, RM-2, RH-1, RH-2 and RO), any commercial district when used for residential purposes, as defined in the zoning regulations of the City of New Haven as they are amended from time to time, and all uses permitted therewith either as a right or as a special use. 
(bb)  Sound means a transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media in the form of vibrations, which constitute alterations in pressure or position of the particles in the medium, and which, in air, evoke physiological sensations, including but not limited to an auditory response when impinging on the ear. 
(cc)  Sound-level meter means an instrument used to take sound-level measurements and which should conform, at a minimum, to the operational specifications of the American National Standards Institute for Sound Level Meters, S1.4—1971 (Type S2A) as amended from time to time. 
(dd)  Sound-pressure level means twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter (20 × 10 -6 newtons/meter 2 ) and which is expressed in decibels (dB). 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-74. - Noise level measurement procedures. 
For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this article, the following guidelines shall apply: 
(1)  All personnel conducting sound measurements shall be trained in the current techniques and principles of sound-measuring equipment and instrumentation; 
(2)  Instruments used to determine sound-level measurements shall conform to the performance standards as defined in the section captioned "Noise levels" as amended from time to time; 
(3)  The general steps listed below shall be followed when preparing to take sound-level measurements: 
(i)  The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed; 
(ii)  The sound-level meter shall be calibrated before and after each set of measurements; 
(iii)  When measurements are taken out of doors, a wind screen shall be placed over the microphone of the sound-level meter as per the manufacturer's instructions; 
(iv)  The sound-level meter shall be placed at an angle to the sound source as specified by the manufacturer's instructions, and be at least four (4) feet above the ground. The meter shall be placed as to not be interfered with by individuals conducting the measurements; and 
(v)  Measurements shall be taken at a point that is located about one (1) foot beyond the boundary of the emitter's premises and within the receptor's premises. The emitter's premises include his/her individual unit of land, or ground of contiguous parcels under the same ownership as indicated by public land records. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-75. - Noise levels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any noise beyond the boundaries of his/her premises in excess of the noise levels established in these regulations as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Noise level standards. 
(1)  No person in a residential zone shall emit noise beyond the boundaries of his/her premises that exceeds the levels stated herein, and applies to adjacent residential, commercial or industrial zones. 
Emitter's zone: Residential 
Receptor's zone: Maximum level: 
Industrial ..... 62 dBA 
Commercial ..... 55 dBA 
Residential/Day ..... 55 dBA 
Residential/Night ..... 45 dBA 
(2)  No person in a commercial zone shall emit noise beyond the boundary of his/her premises that exceeds the levels stated herein, and applies to adjacent residential, commercial or industrial zones: 
Emitter's zone: Commercial 
Receptor's zone: Maximum level: 
Industrial ..... 62 dBA 
Commercial ..... 62 dBA 
Residential/Day ..... 55 dBA 
Residential/Night ..... 45 dBA 
(3)  No person in an industrial zone shall emit noise beyond the boundary of his/her premises that exceeds the levels stated herein, and applies to adjacent residential, commercial or industrial zones: 
Emitter's zone: Industrial 
Receptor's Zone: Maximum level: 
Industrial ..... 70 dBA 
Commercial ..... 66 dBA 
Residential/Day ..... 61 dBA 
Residential/Night ..... 51 dBA 
(4)  Any non-conforming use shall be deemed to be in the zone which corresponds to the actual use. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-76. - High background noise levels and impulse noise. 
(a)  If background noise levels caused by sources not subject to these regulations exceed the standards contained herein as amended from time to time, a source shall be considered to cause excessive noise if its emission exceeds the background noise levels by five (5) decibels, provided that no source subject to this article shall emit noise in excess of eighty (80) decibels at any time, and provided that this section does not decrease the permissible levels of other sections of this chapter as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of eighty (80) decibels peak sound-pressure level during the nighttime to any residential noise zone. 
(c)  No person shall cause or allow the emission of impulse noise in excess of one hundred (100) decibels peak sound-pressure level at any time in any zone. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-77. - Exclusions. 
The above restrictions of sound levels shall not apply to noise emitted by or related to: 
(1)  Natural phenomena; 
(2)  Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church; 
(3)  Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or any other alarm systems used in an emergency situation; provided, however, that burglar alarms not terminating within fifteen (15) minutes after being activated shall be unlawful. Notwithstanding the foregoing, repetitive activation of any alarm system due to malfunction or lack of proper maintenance shall not be excluded. However, the owner of an alarm mechanism will not be held liable if it is activated without his/her fault or negligence; 
(4)  Warning devices required by Occupational Safety and Health Administration or other state or federal safety regulations; and 
(5)  Farming equipment or farming activity. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-78. - Exemptions and special conditions. 
The following shall be exempt from these regulations, subject to special conditions as provided herein: 
(1)  Noise generated by any construction equipment which is operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. The building official or the director of the department of public works must approve the operation of the same during hours other than those allowed by this section. The person requesting such approval must apply for it at least seven (7) days before the date for which approval is sought. Approval may be granted if the requesting person makes an advanced payment for the actual cost of such inspection services as may be required under applicable rules and regulations as amended from time to time; 
(2)  Noise created as a result of or relating to an emergency; 
(3)  Noise from domestic power equipment such as, but not limited to, power saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools or similar devices operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, provided that noise discharged from exhaust is reasonably muffled; 
(4)  Noise from snow removal equipment, provided it is maintained in good repair and exhaust is reasonably muffled; 
(5)  Noise from demolition work conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, provided that demolition shall be exempted at all times from the noise levels set in this regulation when it is considered emergency work; 
(6)  Noise created by any aircraft flight operations, which the Federal Aviation Administration specifically preempts; 
(7)  Noise created by any lawful recreational activities, and for which the city has granted a license or permit, including but not limited to parades, sporting events, outdoor concerts, firework displays and non-amplified religious activities; 
(8)  Noise involving blasting other than that conducted in connection with construction or demolition activities, provided that the blasting is conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays, and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, at specified hours previously announced to the local public, or provided that a permit for such blasting has been obtained from local authorities; 
(9)  Noise created by products undergoing tests, where one (1) of the primary purposes of the test is to evaluate product noise characteristics, and where practical noise control measures have been taken; 
(10)  Noise generated by transmission facilities, distribution facilities and substations of public utilities providing electrical power, telephone, cable television or other similar services, and located on property which is not owned by the public utility, and which may or may not be within utility easements. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-79. - Motor vehicle noise. 
(a)  All motor vehicles operated within the limits of the City of New Haven shall be subject to the noise standards and decibel levels set forth in the regulations authorized in federal, state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to Conn. regulation sections 14-80a-1a through 14-80a-10a as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No motor or recreational vehicles shall emit noise from a loud amplification device or similar equipment which exceeds noise level standards for residential zoned areas. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-80. - Refuse collection noise. 
All refuse collectors shall comply with the noise level standards as established in this article while engaging in refuse collection at each location. For purposes of this article, the term "refuse collectors" shall be synonymous with private haulers, and all other persons that commercially engage in the collection and transportation of refuse and other debris. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-81. - Inspections. 
For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The city's health director or his/her designee is hereby authorized to make inspections of stationary or fixed noise sources, and to take measurements and make tests whenever necessary to determine the quantity and character of noise. 
(2)  The city's chief of police or his/her designee is hereby authorized to make inspections of mobile noise sources including refuse collection, demolition, construction and vehicular activities, and to take measurements and make tests whenever necessary to determine the quantity and character of noise. 
(3)  In the event that any person refuses or restricts local authorized officials from entry and free access to any part of a premises, or refuses to allow such officials to inspect, test or measure noise generated from any activity, device, facility or process, said officials may seek an administrative warrant from an appropriate court to obtain such access for the aforesaid purposes. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow or permit local authorized officials free access to any premises when they are acting in compliance with a warrant for inspection that is issued by the appropriate court. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of any warrant or court order requiring inspection, testing or measurement of noise sources. 
(6)  No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent in any way, interfere or attempt to interfere with any authorized person while in the performance of his/her duties under this article as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-82. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating this article shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per occurrence. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-83. - Variances. 
(a)  Any person residing or doing business in New Haven, who is negatively affected by the application of this article's provision(s), may seek a variance to engage in the prohibited activity. An applicant for a variance must supply the following information: 
(1)  Location and nature of activity; 
(2)  The time period and hours of operation of said activity; 
(3)  The nature and intensity of the noise that will be generated; and 
(4)  Any other information required by the appropriate city authority. 
(b)  No variance from these regulations shall be issued unless it has been demonstrated that: 
(1)  The proposed activity will not violate any Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection regulation(s) as amended from time to time; 
(2)  The noise levels generated by the proposed activity will not constitute a danger to public health, safety, welfare or quality of life; and 
(3)  Compliance with the regulations constitutes an unreasonable hardship on the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-84. - Noise variance review committee. 
(a)  A noise variance review committee is hereby established to consider variance requests. 
(b)  This committee shall consist of the city's health director, chief of police, public works director and building official or their respective designees. Additionally, the committee shall include an alderman who is appointed by the president of the board of aldermen. 
(c)  The committee shall review each variance application, and either approve or reject it within fifteen (15) days of its receipt. The approval or rejection shall be in writing, and shall state the condition(s) of approval, if any, or the reasons for rejection. 
(d)  Failure to rule on the application within the designated time shall constitute approval of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-85. - Administration. 
The city's health director and chief of police are hereby authorized to make regulations from time to time that are consistent with the State Public Health Code, and the regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection regarding noise as each is amended from time to time. Such regulations shall become effective upon the board of aldermen's approval. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-86. - Contracts. 
Any written agreement, purchase order or contract whereby the City of New Haven is committed to expending funds in return for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination thereof shall not be entered into unless such document contains provisions that any equipment or activities which are subject to the provisions of this article will be operated, constructed, conducted or manufactured without violating this article as it is amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-87. - Mediation. 
(a)  If the city's chief of police receives a complaint alleging a violation of this article by noise emanating from a construction, demolition, refuse collection or vehicular activity, he/she is expressly authorized to mediate such dispute within forty-eight (48) hours, provided that the following conditions apply: 
(1)  He/she is satisfied that the complainant is aggrieved by the alleged violation; 
(2)  There are reasonable grounds to believe that there is a violation of this article; and 
(3)  He/she determines that the particular facts and circumstances suggest that such mediation may result in a satisfactory resolution of the complaint. 
(b)  Nothing herein is intended to affect or in any way limit any other procedures established elsewhere in this article, limit any other powers granted to the local authorized officials, or require the city's chief of police to invoke the mediation powers herein established. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-88. - Effect on other regulations. 
All of the city's zoning regulations which are more stringent than those set forth herein shall remain in full force and effect. If any word, clause, paragraph or section of this article is held to make the same unconstitutional, this article shall not thereby be invalidated, and the remainder of it shall continue in effect. Any provision herein which conflicts with the Connecticut General Statutes or the state's Public Health Code as each is amended from time to time is hereby repealed, inasmuch as said statutes and code shall take precedence over this article. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-89. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the city's health director or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enforce this article regarding stationary or fixed noise sources. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the city's chief of police or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enforce this article regarding mobile noise sources, including refuse collection, demolition, construction and vehicular activities. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, all local authorized officials, including but not limited to zoning enforcement officers, shall have the authority to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Sec. 18-90. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision rendered by the issuer may appeal said decision in accordance with the procedure set forth in the Licenses and Permits chapter of this Code as it is amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1422, 7-6-06)  
Secs. 18-91—18-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITING GRAFFITI AND SALE OF SPRAY PAINT TO MINORS, AND REQUIRING THE LIVABLE CITY INITIATIVE TO PROMOTE AND PROMULGATE REGULATIONS TO PREVENT GRAFFITI AND PROVIDE FOR ITS PROMPT REMOVAl. 
 
Sec. 18-111. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
Enforcement. All law enforcement officers of the city; the mayor of the city and/or his designees; the chief of the police department and/or his designees; and the director of the Livable City Initiative and/or his designees. 
Graffiti. Any inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance. This article shall not be construed to prohibit easily removable chalk markings on public sidewalks and streets used in connection with traditional children's games. 
Graffiti implement. Any aerosol paint container, broad tipped indelible marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
Indelible marker. Any felt tip marker, china marker or similar device that is not water soluble, which has a flat or angle writing surface of one-half (½) inch or greater. 
(Ord. No. 1570, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 1575, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 18-112. - Graffiti restricted; penalty; violator responsible for restoration of property. 
(a)  No person shall write, spray, scratch or otherwise affix graffiti upon any property, public or private, in which another has an interest and without the prior consent of such other person. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be cited for an infraction and fined in accordance with the General Statutes of the State, in addition to any criminal penalties which may be imposed pursuant to Chapter 952 of the General Statutes, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  When apprehended, the violator will be responsible for the cost of restoring the property to the condition it was in prior to the defacement. 
(Ord. No. 1570, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 1575, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 18-113. - Possession of graffiti implements in designated public places; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in or upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city unless otherwise authorized by the city. The illegal possession of spray paint shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) per offense thereafter to the maximum allowable under state statute (two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 1570, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 1575, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 18-114. - Prohibition of spray paint to minors; prohibition of purchase of spray paint on behalf of minors; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful, within the city limits of New Haven, to sell spray paint cans to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years of age. Merchants shall be required to view photo identification from the purchaser as proof of age. The illegal sale of spray paint cans to minors, or purchase of spray paint on behalf of a minor child, shall be punishable by a fine fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and an additional ($50.00) per offense thereafter to the maximum allowable under state statute (two hundred fifty ($250.00)). (The illegal sale of spray paint cans to minors, as well as the above-mentioned crimes, shall be investigated, catalogued and enforced by the chief of police and/or his designees.) 
(Ord. No. 1570, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 1575, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 18-115. - Develop and implement regulations to prevent graffiti and provide for prompt removal. 
The director of the Livable City Initiative (LCI) and/or his designees shall develop, promote and promulgate regulations to prevent unlawful graffiti and provide for its prompt removal wherever it should be affixed, whether on public or private property. Under LCI's "Graffiti Program," these regulations shall specify the city agencies which will be assigned to affect the immediate removal of graffiti when it is affixed on various categories of structures within the city. The regulations will also detail the partnerships that will be promoted with the State of Connecticut, special services districts, commercial business owners and other important parties to help ensure the success of the citywide graffiti prevention and removal efforts, as well as with the police department, which is charged with pursuing all criminal aspects of graffiti violations. The regulations will also provide for the undertaking of broad-based city outreach efforts to the community to promote graffiti awareness, prevention techniques and an ongoing dialogue on this coordinated anti-graffiti effort. 
(Ord. No. 1570, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 1575, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 18-116. - Annual assessment and reporting requirement. 
(a)  Six (6) months after this article takes effect, the director of LCI and the chief of police shall be required to report back to the board of aldermen on the status and effectiveness of the city's new regulations implemented under the "Graffiti Program." As part of the report, the police department will provide data on number of graffiti incidents during this time period, statistics and insights into proliferation of graffiti, as well as number of arrests. LCI will incorporate the police department's data in presenting figures on number and type of graffiti incidents, as well as the scope and overall cost of the city's graffiti removal efforts in evaluating whether the new regulations and action plan have been successful in curbing graffiti and providing for its immediate removal where it has occurred. 
(b)  One (1) year after filing of the initial report, and on an annual basis, the director of LCI, in conjunction with the police department, shall submit an annual report with tbe board of aldermen providing the aforementioned data and assessing the impact of city efforts in combating and removing graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 1570, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 1575, 12-1-08)  
Sec. 18-117. - Severability. 
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause or provision of this article to be invalid, such decision shall affect only such section, clause or provision so declared invalid, and shall not affect any other section, clause or provision of this article. Except as above amended, the New Haven Code of Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1570, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 1575, 12-1-08)  
Secs. 18-118—18-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - COLLATERAL CONSEQUENCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Discrimination against persons previously convicted, § 2-851 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of New Haven or any department, agency, or office thereof, unless specifically excluded by this section. 
Collateral consequence means a collateral sanction or a discretionary disqualification. 
Collateral sanction means a non-discretionary penalty, disability, or disadvantage, however denominated, imposed on an individual as a result of the individual's conviction of an offense that applies by operation of law whether or not the penalty, disability, or disadvantage is included in the judgment or sentence. The term does not include imprisonment, probation, parole, supervised release, forfeiture, restitution, fine, assessment, or costs of prosecution. 
Conviction means any sentence arising from a plea or verdict of guilty, including a sentence of incarceration, a suspended sentence, a sentence of probation or a sentence of unconditional discharge. Conviction also includes a ruling of juvenile delinquency by a juvenile court. Convicted has a corresponding meaning. 
Discretionary disqualification means a penalty, disability, or disadvantage, however denominated, that a decision-maker in a civil proceeding is authorized, but not required, to impose on an individual on grounds relating to the individual's conviction of an offense. 
Offense means a felony, misdemeanor, violation, infraction, serious juvenile offense, or delinquent act under the law of Connecticut, another state, or the United States. 
Person may extend and be applied to communities, companies, corporations, public or private, limited liability companies, societies, and associations. 
Reentry initiative means the City of New Haven's Prison Reentry Initiative or its designated successor entity. 
( Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Sec. 18-127. - Interpreting ordinances; ambiguity, decision to disqualify. 
(a)  An ordinance creating a collateral consequence that is ambiguous as to whether it imposes a non-discretionary collateral sanction or authorizes a discretionary disqualification shall be construed as authorizing a discretionary disqualification. 
(b)  In deciding whether to impose a discretionary disqualification, the city shall undertake an individualized assessment to determine whether the benefit or opportunity at issue should be denied the individual. In making that decision, the city shall consider: 
(1)  The nature of the criminal offense or offenses for which the individual has been convicted and the relationship of that offense or those offenses to the benefit or opportunity that the individual seeks; 
(2)  The gravity of the offense(s); 
(3)  The age of the individual at the time of occurrence of the criminal offense or offenses; 
(4)  The time elapsed since the individual's conviction or release; 
(5)  Information pertaining to the degree of rehabilitation of the convicted individual; 
(6)  Any information produced by the individual, or produced on his behalf, in regard to his rehabilitation and good conduct; and 
(7)  The public policy of this city, as expressed in New Haven Code of Ordinances section 2-852, to encourage the employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses. 
( Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Sec. 18-128. - Identification, collection, and publication of New Haven laws regarding collateral consequences. 
(a)  The reentry initiative: 
(1)  Shall identify or cause to be identified any provision in this city's Code of Ordinances and Zoning Ordinances which imposes a collateral sanction or authorizes the imposition of a disqualification, and any provision of law that may afford relief from a collateral consequence; 
(2)  Not later than ninety (90) days after the effective date of Ord. No. 1673 [April 2, 2012], shall prepare or cause to be prepared a collection of citations to, and the text or short descriptions of, the provisions identified under paragraph (1); and 
(3)  Shall update or cause to be updated the collection every twelve (12) months starting January 1, 2013. 
(b)  The reentry initiative shall include or cause to be included the following statements in a prominent manner at the beginning of the collection required by subsection (a): 
(1)  This collection has not been enacted into law and does not have the force of law. 
(2)  An error or omission in this collection, or in any reference work cited in this collection, is not a reason for invalidating a plea, conviction, or sentence or for not imposing a collateral sanction or authorizing a disqualification. 
(3)  The laws of the United States, other jurisdictions, and municipalities that impose additional collateral sanctions and authorize additional disqualifications are not listed included in this collection. 
(4)  This collection does not include any law or other provision regarding the imposition of or relief from a collateral sanction or a disqualification enacted or adopted after [insert date the collection was prepared or last updated]. 
(c)  The reentry initiative shall publish or cause to be published the collection prepared and updated as required by subsection (a). 
(d)  The collection described in subsection (c) shall be available to the public on the Internet without charge not later than fourteen (14) days after it is created or updated. 
( Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Secs. 18-129—18-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PROHIBITING TOBACCO IN CITY PARKS, ON PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS AND ON ANY OTHER DESIGNATED CITY-OWNED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
Enforcement. All law enforcement officers of the city; the mayor of the city and/or her designees; the chief of the police department and/or his designees. 
Tobacco product. Means any tobacco product in all of its forms, including but not limited to a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device, including all electronic cigarettes (e-cig, e-hookah, vape pen, electronic nicotine delivery system), as well as chew tobacco and snus. 
Recreational property. Property owned by the city and which is under the supervision and control of the city's department of parks, recreation and trees which is used in connection with recreational programs, including athletic facilities, parks, playgrounds, trails and other areas where people may assemble for recreational purposes. This also includes any community, recreation or senior center building located on park property. Recreational property shall not include school grounds. 
School grounds. A parcel of land or portion thereof used for school purposes and operated by the city board of education. 
(Ord. No. 1844 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 18-142. - The use of any tobacco product is banned in designated public places. 
It shall be prohibited, at all times, for an individual to use any tobacco product in any form while in a government building, playground, sports field, school ground or Lighthouse Point Park. The city may establish designated smoking areas within these tobacco-free zones. 
(Ord. No. 1844 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 18-143. - Enforcement. 
Members of the city police department shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter. Such officer of the department shall inform the violator of this article and take enforcement action when a violation has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 1844 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 18-144. - Penalty for violation. 
Police officers or other such designated authorized officials may issue a citation for violation of this chapter. A citation issued for a first offense shall be a warning only. Persons receiving subsequent citations shall be deemed to have committed an infraction and shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation of any provision of this article. Such citation shall be on a form as prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1844 , 5-18-15)  
Sec. 18-145. - Signage. 
City parks, city-owned recreational areas, public school grounds and other specified sections of city-owned property where tobacco use has been banned pursuant to this chapter shall be so designated by signs that give notice of those areas of prohibition. The city shall post a sign or signs on such properties stating that it is a "tobacco-free zone" to indicate that said property is subject to this article. Said sign or signs shall identify this article by number, and shall state the penalty amount for violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 1844 , 5-18-15)  
Chapter 19 - PARKS, RECREATION AND TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1406, adopted March 6, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 19 in its entirety. Former §§ 19-21—19-25, pertaining to the New Haven Coliseum Authority, and former Art. II, pertaining to the convention and visitors commission, have been deleted as being obsolete. The deletion of former §§ 19-21—19-25 was ratified by Ord. No. 1597, adopted Aug. 3, 2009, which repealed these former sections. 
The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Board shall mean "board of park commissioners." 
(2)  Director shall mean the director of the parks department or his/her designee(s). 
(3)  Parks department shall mean the "department of parks, recreation and trees." 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-1; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-2. - Parks department; created. 
Pursuant to city charter section 113 as amended from time to time, there shall be a parks department in the City of New Haven. It shall consist of a director, a board of park commissioners and department employees. 
(Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-3. - Parks department; director. 
Pursuant to city charter section 117 as amended from time to time, the director shall have charge, control, management and use of all public parks, squares and open places included in the city's park system. 
(Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-4. - Parks department; board. 
Pursuant to city charter sections 114 and 115 as each is amended from time to time, the board shall consist of the mayor and eight (8) commissioners. It shall provide policy advice concerning the use, preservation and enjoyment of all city parks and recreation areas to the director and evaluate such policies. 
(Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-5. - Rules of conduct and prohibited acts. 
(a)  All parks and other facilities under the jurisdiction of the board of park commissioners and the parks department will be governed and controlled by the following rules of conduct, and by other rules and regulations set forth herein pertaining to specific parks or facilities. 
(b)  Any person who violates, assists or encourages the violation of any of the following rules in any park, playground or other facility under the jurisdiction of the board of park commissioners, or the parks department, will be charged with an offense, and upon conviction, fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Upon conviction, such person(s) shall also be responsible for the costs of injury to persons or property caused as a result of such violation: 
(1)  Public gathering, permit requirement. An organization, group, or individual requesting permission to hold or present an organized event, assembly, public speech, musical program, festival, or similar activity in any park area shall obtain a permit from the director or his/her designee(s) in accordance with this chapter. 
The permit requirement shall not apply to students attending school in New Haven, who are engaged in educational activities under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities, nor to informal picnics as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Commercial vendors, selling. No individual or commercial entity shall operate any vending enterprise, nor offer for sale or sell any good(s) or service(s) unless such vendor is employed or retained by the parks department, or is licensed by the appropriate authorities and has obtained a permit from the director or his/her designee(s). 
(3)  Domestic animals. Domestic animals shall not be permitted to enter or go at large in any park, except for dogs held on a leash by their keepers. 
(4)  Horses. Horseback riding is not allowed in any park except on designated bridle trails. Horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended. 
(5)  Structures, plants, trees, earth, water. No person shall: 
(i)  Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, destroy, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, pavement or paving material, water line or other public utility or part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or placard, monument, stake, post, boundary marker, or other structure, equipment, facility, park property or appurtenance. 
(ii)  Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stone, tree, shrub, plant, wood or other material, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(iii)  Construct or erect any building or structure for temporary use, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across any park, except on special written permit from the director or his/her designee(s). 
(iv)  Damage, cut, carve, mark, transplant or remove any plant, injure the bark, pick a flower or seed of any tree or plant, dig or otherwise disturb grass in any area, or in any other way injure the natural elements of any park area. 
(v)  Climb any tree or wall; climb, stand or sit upon a monument, vase, planter, fountain, railing, fence, or upon any other property or structure not designated or customarily used for such purpose. 
(vi)  Attach any rope, cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench or other property or structure. 
(vii)  Throw, discharge, place or cause any substance, matter or thing to be placed in any body of water in or adjacent to any park, tributary, sewer or drain flowing into such water, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(6)  Wildlife. No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor remove or have in his/her possession the young of any wild animal, nor the egg, nest or young of any reptile or bird. However, any snake known to be deadly poisonous may be killed on sight. 
(7)  Disturbing conduct. No one shall engage in breach of the peace or disorderly conduct as defined by Conn. General Statutes section 53a-182 as amended from time to time. 
(8)  Litter/dumping. No person shall take in, dump, deposit, leave, place or cause any bottle, broken glass, ash, paper, box, can, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash to be placed on any park land, or in any waters in or contiguous to any park. Refuse and trash produced in any park shall be placed in proper receptacles where provided; where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(9)  Ball playing. Ball playing and other group games may be played in an undesignated open area, and only where such activity does not interfere with the general public's normal use of the park. 
(10)  Bathing. No one shall bathe, swim or wade in any water or waterway in or adjacent to any park, except in such water and at such place and hour as the director or his/her designee(s) shall designate by a notice displayed for that purpose. 
(11)  Fires. No one shall light, kindle, or use any fire except in connection with an approved picnic grill at Lighthouse Point Park, Fort Nathan Hale Park, Margaret Fisher Memorial and East Rock Park. Only self-contained fires in a fireproof vessel for cooking purposes will be permitted. Fires shall be totally extinguished, and ashes or coals disposed of in a proper receptacle upon termination of use. 
(12)  Firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or have in his/her possession in any park or recreation area: 
(i)  Any pistol, revolver or object(s) in which loaded or blank cartridges may be used, except for official starters at authorized track and field events. 
(ii)  Any burglar tool(s), implement(s) or similar equipment. 
(iii)  Any rifle, shotgun, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow or other weapon in which the propelling force is gunpowder, a spring or compressed air. 
(13)  Fireworks, explosives, missiles. No one shall ignite, explode or throw any firework, firecracker, rocket, explosive or other missile without a license from the appropriate authorities and a permit from the director. 
(14)  Motor vehicles. No one shall park any vehicle (except baby carriages) on any park drive or road, or drive at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour on any park drive or road. No one shall operate or park any such vehicle upon the turf, lawn, sidewalk and footpath, or any other park land, except in such place and at such time as may be designated by the director. No one shall wash, clean or repair any motor vehicle in any park. 
(15)  Boat launching. No one shall launch, set forth in or place any boat or water borne conveyance in the water, in or adjacent to any park, except at the designated boat launch location at Lighthouse Point, unless a permit is first obtained from the director or his/her designee(s). This prohibition shall not apply to canoe launch sites. 
(16)  Opening and closing hours. Except as hereinafter expressly permitted, no one shall enter or remain in any park, playground or other facility during the following times and under the following conditions: 
(i)  In any park, playground or other facility before 6:00 a.m. or after sunset. 
(ii)  Access roads to East Rock Park including Summit Drive (i.e. Hillhouse Drive), Trowbridge Drive and English Drive are open all the time except when the director or his/her designee determines that public safety is threatened. 
(iii)  After 10:00 p.m. in lighted areas. 
(iv)  By permit, exceptions to the above hours may be allowed in accordance with procedures established by the parks department. 
(v)  The director may declare any section or part of any park to be closed to the public at any time and for any interval of time for maintenance of the facility, or if the park has been properly reserved by a group. 
(17)  Public fountains. The following activities shall not be allowed in a public fountain: 
(i)  Wading, swimming, running in or otherwise entering a public fountain; 
(ii)  Throwing any foreign objects or materials into a public fountain; 
(iii)  Committing any activity which causes damage to a public fountain or contaminating the water in a public fountain. 
(18)  A public fountain shall not be used in a special event unless a permit from the director is obtained. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-2; Ord. of 5-2-88; Ord. No. 1333, 10-20-03; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-6. - Picnics. 
(a)  The parks department does not require a permit for informal picnics in any of its parks. There is a permit fee as authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen, and listed in this Code for organized group picnics. An organized group picnic is any gathering of a group of individuals with a unified purpose or membership, which will exclude the public at large from the area to be covered by a permit. 
(b)  Picnic permits are issued on the condition that the applicant will not sell, distribute or otherwise make available intoxicating liquors in connection with the use of such permit. This stipulation does not apply to beer and wine at Lighthouse Point Park. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-11; Ord. of 5-5-86, § 1; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-7. - Permit application; procedure and contents. 
(a)  Applications for a park/recreational facility permit shall be filed with the director at the parks department office at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the date applied for. 
(b)  The application shall state: 
(1)  The type of activity and name of the person or organization proposing such activity; 
(2)  Whether the activity is proposed on behalf of or by an organization, and if so, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized agent of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the chairperson or director of the proposed activity who agrees to be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization to whom the permit is to be issued; 
(5)  The date when such activity is to be conducted; 
(6)  The park, recreational facility or portion thereof for which the permit is desired; 
(7)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance; 
(8)  The hours when the activity will start and terminate; 
(9)  Whether the activity is to be held by, on behalf of, or for any person other than the applicant. If so, the applicant for such permit shall file a written communication from the organizer authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his/her behalf. Such authorization is to be filed with the director; and 
(10)  In the event the permit involves Lighthouse Point Park, Fort Nathan Hale Park, East Rock Park or Margaret Fisher Memorial, whether permission to build a fire is requested. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-13; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-8. - Permit issuance. 
In order to ensure the public's fair and full use of the city parks, to promote general public enjoyment of the parks through coordinated scheduling of activities, and to promote health, safety, welfare and recreation: The director, with the concurrence of the city's chief of police, and in appropriate cases, the director of the department of public works, director of traffic and parking, fire marshal, and building and electrical inspectors of the city, may issue permits upon the payment of a fee as authorized, established and amended by the board of aldermen from time to time, and as listed in this Code, for the use of any city park or recreational facility by any person or entity unless the director finds: 
(1)  The facilities desired have been reserved for other use at the day and hour requested in the application. In such case, an alternative site will be offered if available; 
(2)  The activity is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising products or goods, and/or is designed to be held purely for commercial profit; or 
(3)  The proposed attendance, duration and usage of sound amplification equipment, either alone or in combination, would constitute a disturbance of the surrounding neighborhood. If the applicant's request is denied, the director shall use his/her best efforts to offer an alternative location acceptable to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-86, § 2; Code of 1985, § 19-14; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 8; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-9. - Insurance, bond or surety. 
(a)  Before any permit is issued, the director shall determine if the event is liable to result in liability of any kind to the city. This includes, but is not limited to, damage to city property, or extraordinary costs to return the facilities to their condition prior to the event for which the permit is requested. 
(b)  The director may require an indemnity bond or other form of security to protect the city from such liability, damage or costs, which the city may incur in connection with such event. 
(c)  If the director determines that financial considerations render the applicant unable to provide the above-mentioned indemnity bond or other security, the director may waive the requirement. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-15; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-10. - Appeal procedure with respect to refusal of permits. 
The director shall grant the permit, or inform an applicant in writing of his/her reasons for denying it within seven (7) days after the application's receipt. Any aggrieved applicant shall have the right to appeal such denial in writing to the board of park commissioners within ten (10) days. The board shall consider the application at its next regular or special meeting, and either sustain, overrule or modify the director's decision, and any special conditions imposed by him/her. The board president shall provide advance written notice to the city clerk within twenty-four (24) hours of any special board meeting. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-16; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-11. - Posting and notice. 
(a)  The director shall post sections of these rules and regulations in each park, playground and other facility under the jurisdiction of the parks department. 
(b)  The director shall furnish the chief of police with a complete list of parks, playgrounds and other facilities under his/her jurisdiction including their rules and hours of operation, and shall update such list as needed. The director shall file such list with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-17; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-12. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The police are authorized to arrest any person for any violation of these rules and regulations. 
(b)  Park security officers have the authority to issue a citation for the violation of any rule or regulation as set by the director. Such officers have the authority to ask any person in violation of such rule or regulation to leave the park, playground or other facility under the jurisdiction of the parks department. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-18; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-13. - Lighthouse Point Park. 
(a)  Hours of Operation: 
Park hours: 
In season: (the Friday preceding Memorial Day through Labor Day and any other times to be opened at the discretion of the director of parks, recreation and trees), 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
Off-season: (all other times), 6:00 a.m. to sunset. 
Boat launch hours: 
Boat launching is restricted to the hours posted by the director, and filed in the city clerk's office. If such hours are inconsistent with state rules and regulations, the state rules and regulations shall prevail. 
(b)  Fees: During the season, fees shall be paid in accordance with those which are authorized, established and amended from time to time by the city's board of aldermen, and listed in this Code. These include fees for parking, picnic shelter reservations, use of facilities, and use of the carousel and building. 
(1)  New Haven residents may obtain a free seasonal parking sticker issued by the director. The sticker shall be affixed to the driver's side of the front windshield of the vehicle. A sticker so affixed shall be valid at, and during the hours of operation of, Lighthouse Point Park from the issuance date through the last day of the season for which the sticker has been issued. 
(2)  Buses shall not be allowed in Lighthouse Point Park on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, except for regularly scheduled Lighthouse line buses operated by the Connecticut Department of Transportation which enter the park as part of the normal operation. 
(c)  Free facilities: The following facilities at Lighthouse Point Park will be available free of charge: 
(1)  Bathing beach with lifeguards on duty, as noted in this section; 
(2)  Picnic tables, as available; 
(3)  Picnic grills, as available; 
(4)  Playground equipment and designated play areas; and 
(5)  Boat launching ramp. 
(d)  Free admissions: Groups of children participating in organized playground and day camp programs operated by the City of New Haven, who are accompanied by adequate adult supervision to the satisfaction of the director or his/her designee(s), shall be admitted free to use the park area and its facilities upon display of a permit issued by director or his/her designee(s) under this chapter. 
(e)  Additional rules of conduct: Besides the rules set forth in this chapter pertaining to general rules of conduct and prohibited acts, the following rules of conduct are applicable to Lighthouse Point Park, and are subject to the same penalties for violation: 
(1)  Bathing and swimming shall be confined to the beach on the south side of the park, or to such other specific areas as designated by the director. 
(2)  Bathing and swimming in the waters off the west side, or harbor side, are expressly prohibited. 
(3)  Sleeping or loitering in the bathhouse is expressly prohibited. 
(4)  Ball playing and other activity that interferes with the comfort of the persons using the bathing beach are expressly prohibited. 
(5)  Bringing controlled or dangerous substances and alcoholic beverages to the park; and/or drinking or using the same in the park at any time. This provision shall not apply to permitted events within the Carousel building with a New Haven police officer on duty. Being under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled or dangerous substance in the park is expressly prohibited. 
(6)  Soliciting contributions in the park for any purpose is expressly prohibited. 
(7)  Playing any game of chance, or being in possession of any gambling instrument or device in the park is expressly prohibited. 
(8)  Camping or staying overnight anywhere in the park without the director's consent is expressly prohibited. 
(9)  Failing to produce and exhibit a permit upon request of any authorized person desiring to inspect the same is expressly prohibited. 
(10)  Disturbing or interfering unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area of the park is expressly prohibited. 
(11)  Commercial vendors, other than those operating concessions owned by the city, are expressly prohibited in the park. 
(f)  Carousel hours and rental fees: 
(1)  The carousel shall be in regular operation from Memorial Day through Labor Day. The director will determine the hours of operation at the start of the season. 
(2)  The director shall have the authority to open or close the carousel to the public at any time, and/or for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals (in and out of season), for the maintenance of the facility, or if the carousel has been properly reserved by a group, or if weather conditions prohibit or do not allow the safe and comfortable operation of the carousel. 
(3)  A membership card obtained from the Friends of the Lighthouse Park Carousel, Inc. shall be recognized as an in-season pass to the carousel, and shall be honored upon presentation to the ride operator for a ride by the individual member only bearing said card. Said membership card shall not be transferable. 
(4)  The parks department will assume all costs associated with operation of the carousel for special parks department sponsored events. All other city agencies or departments requesting use of the carousel and carousel building for special events must agree to assume all costs, including overtime costs, incurred in the use and operation of the carousel. 
(5)  All children forty-two (42) inches in height or less must be accompanied by an adult who shall ride free of charge. 
(6)  The carousel and carousel building may be rented by individuals, groups or organizations in accordance with the fee as authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen, and listed in this Code. 
(7)  The rental charge for the use of the carousel building by persons or groups other than city agencies or departments shall include the following: 
(i)  Adequate accident and liability insurance as determined by the director, which must be secured and supplied as proof of such insurance before the use of the carousel and carousel building. 
(ii)  Adequate measures for security of the facility and participants in the event as required by the director. 
(8)  The Friends of the Lighthouse Park Carousel, Inc., a 501-(C)(3) nonprofit organization formed for the sole purpose of restoring and supporting the continued operation of the Lighthouse Point Park Carousel, shall be granted special privileges with regard to the rental charges for the carousel and carousel building as follows: 
(i)  The Friends of the Lighthouse Park Carousel, Inc., shall be allowed up to three (3) days for special fund raising events. The days are to be determined mutually between the Friends of the Lighthouse Park Carousel, Inc., and the director. All proceeds from these events shall be deposited in the carousel endowment and restoration fund. The parks department shall assume all costs of operating the carousel for such events. 
(ii)  The Friends of the Lighthouse Park Carousel, Inc. are prohibited from assigning the rights and privileges described in subsection (8)(i), above, to any other individual, group or organization. 
(9)  Lighthouse Park Carousel Event Fund established. 
(i)  A fund entitled the Lighthouse Park Carousel Event Fund ("the fund") is established to account for revenues and expenses associated with usage of the Lighthouse Point Park Carousel Pavilion ("the facility") for special events. 
(ii)  The mayor shall submit the annual fund budget as a component of the annual city budget submission required by this Code. The fund's budget shall become effective upon approval by order of the board of aldermen. This budget shall include estimates of the accrued unexpended balance, which may be available from prior years' operations, revenues which may be earned from fees imposed on rentals of the carousel and the facility, and expenditures which may be incurred during the fiscal year for which said budget is proposed. The director of the parks department may adjust expenses to meet actual conditions at the facility, provided that expenditures incurred may not exceed the sum of revenues earned during the fiscal year plus unexpended balances available from prior years' operations. Overtime expenses incurred in the general fund, which are associated with the use of the facility for special events, shall be allocated at least quarterly to the fund. Any unexpended balance in the fund at the end of the fiscal year shall remain in it, and be carried forward as allowed by Conn. General Statutes section 7-148(2)(K). 
(iii)  An annual report on the fund shall be provided pursuant to this Code. 
(iv)  Sums appropriated by the board of aldermen for operation, maintenance or capital repairs of the facility may be used to supplement expenditures from the fund. The board must appropriate the sums before they are added to it. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 6; Code of 1985, § 19-3; Ord. of 5-16-85; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 4a; Ord. of 5-17-93; Ord. of 8-7-95; Ord. of 5-19-97; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1263, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 1289, 8-5-01; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 1577, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1639, 9-7-10 )  
Sec. 19-14. - Athletic fields. 
(a)  Areas under the jurisdiction of the parks department are available for athletic events including, but not limited to, softball, baseball, soccer and football. Playgrounds/athletic fields are to be governed by rules including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Collection of money for attendance at athletic events on park property is expressly prohibited unless a permit is obtained from the director. 
(2)  Betting, playing for stakes, or other gambling on any sporting event are expressly prohibited. 
(3)  Care must be taken that property is not injured or destroyed. 
(b)  The parks department has the authority to issue permits for the scheduled use of playground areas/athletic fields. Those areas not reserved by permits may be used without charge by any resident who follows the regulations governing their use. 
(c)  Violation of rules issued by the director or his/her designee may result in penalties. 
(d)  Fees for entry, use of a practice field, use of lights and tournament fees shall be those authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen, and are listed in this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-4; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1354, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-15. - Tennis courts. 
Tennis courts under the jurisdiction of the parks department shall be governed by the following rules: 
(1)  Hours of play. Unless otherwise posted, the hours of play at all tennis courts shall be as follows: 
Unlighted hard surface courts—6:00 a.m. to sunset. 
Other unlighted courts—9:00 a.m. to sunset. 
Lighted courts—9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Rules of conduct. In addition to the rules of conduct set forth in this chapter, the following rules shall apply to tennis courts. The penalty for violation of these additional rules shall be forfeiture of the use of the tennis courts at the time of the violation: 
(i)  All players must wear rubber-soled tennis shoes or other footwear nondestructive to the tennis court surface. 
(ii)  Care must be taken that the tennis court surface is not injured beyond ordinary wear and tear. 
(iii)  Court time is one (1) hour. At the end of the hour, if players are waiting for the courts, those who have just played must give way to them. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-5; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-16. - Golf course. 
The operation of the Alling Memorial Golf Course shall be governed by the following rules: 
(1)  Season and hours of play: Opening date shall be on or before April 1 of each year, weather permitting; closing date shall be on or after November 30 of each year, weather permitting; the course shall be open at dawn or 6:00 a.m., whichever is earlier, and close at dusk or 7:00 p.m., whichever is later. Both closing time and opening time are weather permitting. 
(2)  Fees: The following fee schedule shall be in full force and effect, and fees shall be automatically adjusted to the new fee schedule on January 1 of each year: 
_____ 
Class 	2008 	2009 	2010 	2011 	2012 	2013 	2014 	2015 
Resident 									
  Weekday 	9 Holes Senior 	$9 	$11 	$11 	$11 	$11 	$13 	$13 	$13 
  Weekday 	9 Holes 	12 	14 	14 	14 	14 	16 	16 	17 
  Weekday 	18 Hole Senior 	12 	15 	15 	15 	15 	17 	17 	17 
  Weekday 	18 Holes 	18 	21 	21 	21 	21 	24 	24 	25 
  Weekday 	Season Pass 	 2 	 4 	 4 	 4 	 4 	 6 	 6 	 6 
  Weekend 	9 Holes 	16 	18 	18 	18 	18 	20 	20 	20 
  Weekend 	18 Holes Senior 	16 	19 	19 	19 	19 	21 	21 	21 
  Weekend 	18 Holes 	20 	23 	23 	23 	23 	26 	26 	28 
  Weekend 	Season Pass 	 4 	 6 	 6 	 6 	 6 	 8 	 8 	 8 
Nonresident 									
  Weekday 	9 Holes Senior 	14 	15 	15 	15 	15 	17 	17 	17 
  Weekday 	9 Holes 	17 	18 	18 	18 	18 	21 	21 	20 
  Weekday 	18 Holes Senior 	20 	22 	22 	22 	22 	24 	24 	24 
  Weekday 	18 Holes 	25 	27 	27 	27 	27 	30 	30 	30 
  Weekday 	Season Pass 	 4 	 5 	 5 	 5 	 5 	 8 	 8 	 8 
  Weekend 	9 Holes 	18 	19 	19 	19 	19 	20 	20 	22 
  Weekend 	18 Holes Senior 	25 	27 	27 	27 	27 	28 	28 	28 
  Weekend 	18 Holes 	30 	32 	32 	32 	32 	34 	34 	35 
  Weekend 	Season Pass 	 8 	 8 	 8 	 8 	 8 	10 	10 	10 
Season Passes 									
	Resident 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 	600 
	Resident Family 	900 	900 	900 	900 	900 	900 	900 	900 
	Resident Senior 	375 	400 	400 	400 	400 	400 	400 	400 
	Resident Junior 	175 	200 	200 	200 	200 	200 	200 	200 
	Resident 1-Parent Family 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 
	Nonresident 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 	800 
	Nonresident Family 	1,200 	1,200 	1,200 	1,200 	1,200 	1,200 	1,200 	1,200 
	Nonresident Senior 	650 	650 	650 	650 	650 	650 	650 	650 
	Nonresident Junior 	400 	400 	400 	400 	400 	400 	400 	400 
Cart Rental 									
	Senior 9 Holes 	13 	16 	16 	16 	16 	17 	17 	
	9 Holes 	15 	16 	16 	16 	16 	17 	17 	20 
	Senior 18 Holes 	22 	28 	28 	28 	28 	30 	30 	
	18 Holes 	26 	28 	28 	28 	28 	30 	30 	30 
	Half cart, 18 holes 				14 	14 	15 	15 	
	Half cart, 9 holes 				8 	8 	9 	9 	
	Single rider, 9 holes 								10 
	Single rider, 18 holes 								15 
Other 									
  Twilight rate (after 5:30 p.m.) 	12 	12 	12 	12 	12 	13 	13 	13 
  Tournament (Weekday, 18 Hole Resident/Nonresident) 	40 	43 	43 	43 	43 	47 	47 	
  9 hole green fee & golf cart after 12 p.m. weekend/holiday 				21 	21 	21 	21 	
  Tournament (Weekend, 9 holes including cart, after 2:00 p.m.) 						23 	25 	
  Tournament (Weekday, 18 holes including cart, after 2:00 p.m.) 						34 	36 	
  18 hole green fee & golf cart after 12 p.m. weekend/holiday 				32 	32 	32 	32 	
  League (9-Hole Resident/Nonresident) 	15 	17 	17 	17 	17 	19 	19 	20 
  League (golf and cart) 						28 	30 	
Golf and Cart 								
	Peak Weekday 9 holes (Resident) 							25 	27 
	Peak Weekday 9 holes (Nonresident) 							30 	30 
	Peak Weekday 18 Holes (Resident) 							39 	41 
	Peak Weekday 18 Holes (Nonresident) 							45 	47 
	Peak Weekend 18 Holes (Resident) 							41 	44 
	Peak Weekend 18 Holes (Nonresident) 							49 	50 
 
_____ 
Nine (9) hole rates for weekend/holiday use of the golf course shall only apply for start times before 7:30 a.m. and after 1:00 p.m. 
Nonresident season passes of any type may be sold only to those persons for whom a 1998 nonresident season pass was sold, and who have continued to renew the pass on a year to year basis. 
At the discretion of the director of parks, recreation and trees promotional discounts may be offered to increase play and/or revenue throughout the season. Such promotions shall be for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(3)  Golf cart fees in touraments: Tournament fees include half the cost of a golf cart with two (2) golfers sharing a cart. 
(4)  Holidays: Weekend rates shall apply on all legal holidays during the golf season. 
(5)  Locker fees (seasonal rental only): 
Resident ..... $50.00 
Resident senior ..... 25.00 
Nonresident ..... 60.00 
Locker key deposit ..... 10.00 
(6)  Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in determining golf course fees: 
(i)  Junior is defined as any individual who is seventeen (17) years of age or younger. 
(ii)  Resident is defined as any individual who lives in either the City of New Haven or the Town of East Haven. Any member of the U.S. Armed Forces on active duty and stationed in either the City of New Haven or the Town of East Haven, as certified by his/her commanding officer, and dependents of and residing with such member, shall be eligible for resident green fees and resident season membership fees. 
(iii)  Senior is defined as any individual who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older. 
(7)  Rules of conduct. In addition to the rules of conduct set forth in section 19-5, the following rules shall apply to the golf course. The penalty for violation of these additional rules shall be forfeiture of the use of the course at the time of the violation: 
(i)  The rules of the United States Golf Association will govern the use of the golf course. 
(ii)  Children under fourteen (14) years of age are not permitted to play unless accompanied by an adult who is also playing. 
(8)  Club tournaments: The New Haven Golf Club and the Knickerbockers Golf Club will be allowed two (2) tournaments each per year, which may be held on a weekend. The fees for such tournaments will be as follows: 
18 holes ..... $26.00 
The director may waive all fees for participation in the Annual United States Gold Association Amateur Qualifying Tournament. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-83; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 6;Code of 1985, § 19-7; Ord. of 8-4-86; Ord. of 9-19-88, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-89; Ord. of 3-18-91; Ord. of 10-21-96; Ord. of 5-5-97; Ord. of 8-3-98, §§ A—C; Ord. of 2-17-99; Ord. of 6-7-99; Ord. of 1-3-00; Ord. No. 1265, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 1323, 3-19-03; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 1556, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 1576, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 1643, 1-3-11 ; Ord. No. 1769 , 4-20-15)  
Sec. 19-17. - Golf course improvement revolving fund. 
(a)  A golf course improvement revolving fund is established to support capital expenditures for playing surface maintenance, repair, and reconstruction at the Alling Memorial Golf Course. Said fund shall derive its income from receipts of the surcharge on fees provided for in this chapter, and interest which may be earned on the balance in said fund. Relevant charter provisions and ordinances pertaining to capital projects shall govern appropriation of monies that accrue in said fund. 
(b)  Any new agreement, renewal or extension of the management agreement in effect on March 1, 1999, for operation of the Alling Memorial Golf Course shall specify that all sums collected in connection with the surcharge on fees provided for in the above section shall be deposited into the golf course improvement revolving fund. No sums collected in connection with said surcharge shall be included in calculations of fees or other compensation payable to the golf course operator. 
(Code of 1985, § 19-7.1; Ord. of 3-18-91; Ord. of 2-17-98; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-18. - Golf course enterprise fund. 
(a)  A fund entitled the Alling Memorial Golf Course Enterprise Fund ("the fund") is established, commencing with the 1997-98 fiscal year. This fund shall account for all revenues and expenses associated with the operations and management of the Alling Memorial Golf Course. 
(b)  All assets, liabilities and reserves (including depreciation reserves) applicable to the Alling Memorial Golf Course shall be transferred to the fund effective July 1, 1997. 
(c)  The accounts and records of the fund shall be maintained under the enterprise fund accounting, in which the golf course is operated and managed under a private self-sustaining fund, governmental accounting, auditing, financial reporting and generally accepted accounting principles. The controller or his/her designee shall prescribe the account and record forms, render reports and maintain such accounts and records pursuant to article VII, section 22(b) of the city charter as amended from time to time. 
(d)  The mayor shall submit the annual budget of the fund as a component of the annual city budget submission required by this Code, and such budget shall become effective upon approval by order of the board of aldermen. 
(Code of 1985, § 19-7.2; Ord. of 5-5-97; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-19. - Edgerton Park. 
(a)  Character of the park. Edgerton Park is to be maintained as an arboretum and botanical garden. The public's use of it is restricted to passive activities, which will not harm or change its essential character. 
(b)  Hours. Edgerton Park shall be open daily from 6:00 a.m. to sunset, or to the time specified by the director. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-8; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-20. - Ralph Walker Skating Rink at Blake Field. 
(a)  Hours of operation. Weather permitting, the rink shall be in operation from November 15th through March 15th. The director shall determine public skating hours, which shall be a minimum of seven hours per week with times on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Hours of public skating shall be clearly posted in the rink. Peak hours shall be considered to be all hours from Monday through Friday, 2:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and New Haven Public School vacation days. Contract ice rental rates shall be for fifty (50) minutes of ice time. 
(b)  Fee schedule. Rates for Ralph Walker Ice Rink ice rentals and skating shall be those authorized, approved and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen, and are listed in this Code. 
(c)  Rules of conduct. In addition to the rules of conduct found in this chapter, the following rules are applicable to the rink. The penalty for violation of these additional rules shall be forfeiture of use of the rink. 
(1)  No one shall be allowed on the ice without skates. 
(2)  Skaters must leave the ice when asked to do so by the rink operators. 
(d)  Skating Rinks Fund. 
(1)  A fund entitled the Skating Rinks Fund ("the fund") is established commencing with the 2000-01 fiscal year, to account for revenues and expenses associated with the operation, maintenance and improvement of any skating rinks owned by the city ("the facilities"). 
(3)  An annual report on the fund shall be provided pursuant to this Code. 
(4)  Sums appropriated by the board of aldermen for operation, maintenance or capital repairs of the facilities may be used to supplement expenditures from the fund, but such sums shall not be added to the fund unless the board has appropriated them. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 6; Code of 1985, § 19-9; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 4b; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 11-18-91; Ord. of 3-7-94; Ord. of 11-10-94; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. of 11-20-00; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-21. - Athletic leagues. 
This section shall apply to all leagues operated by the recreation division of the parks department: 
Fees. Entry fees payable by each team each season in softball and basketball leagues shall be those authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen, and are listed in this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Code of 1985, § 19-10; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 4c; Ord. of 12-4-89; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 3-18-91; Ord. of 5-24-99)  
Sec. 19-22. - Swimming pools. 
Hours. The parks director or his/her designee(s) shall annually post hours of operation of all swimming pools operated by the recreation division of the parks department based upon their availability. 
(Code of 1985, § 19-10.1; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-23. - Use of stages and auxiliary equipment. 
(a)  Responsibility for costs. The parks department will assume all costs for use of the stages, bleachers, the public address system, generator and light tower when used for events sponsored by the city. All other entities requesting use of said stages or equipment must agree to assume all costs, including regular, overtime and other labor costs incurred by that use. 
(b)  Fees and costs. Rental or user fees for stages, bleachers, the public address system, generator and light tower shall be as authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen, and are listed in this Code. 
(c)  Insurance. In addition to applicable fees and costs as referenced above, adequate accident and liability insurance as required by the parks director must be secured and supplied in advance of said rental or use. 
(d)  Permit. Persons or groups must obtain a permit in order to rent stages and equipment referenced in subsection (a). This applies to all city agencies and departments except the parks department. A permit fee as authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen shall be imposed as listed in this Code. However, a city department is not required to pay the fee to use them. 
(e)  Restriction of use. Stages and equipment described in subsection (a) of this section shall be rented only for use on property within the limits of New Haven, or on property outside the city limits that the city loans or leases. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 1; Ord. of 12-13-84; Code of 1985, § 19-19; Ord. of 5-5-86, § 3; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 4d; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-24. - Fees for building use. 
Fees for the rental use of the Coogan and Salperto building shall be those as are authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen, and listed in this Code. 
(Code of 1985, sec. 19-19.5; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 19-25. - Contractual relationships. 
The board of park commissioners may enter into contractual relationships with profit and nonprofit organizations for programmatic use of parks and park structures, provided that the programs are in accordance with the intended use of the parks, and that the organization's activities are open to the public. Such contractual relationships must be within the limits of charter section 117 as amended from time to time, and are to be distinguished from permits for activities elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-3-82, § 2; Code of 1985, § 19-20; Ord. No. 1406, 3-6-06)  
Chapter 21 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 21 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Charter reference— Planning and zoning, § 177 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Regional planning authority; New Haven membership authorized. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by chapter 127, sections 8-31 through 8-37 of the General Statutes, Revision of 1958, the city is hereby empowered to join in the formation of the Regional Planning Authority of South Central Connecticut. 
(Ord. of 9-25-48, § 1) 
Editor's note— The ordinance of Sept. 25, 1948, from which § 21-1 above is derived, also set out the contract which the mayor was authorized to execute pursuant to said section. That contract has been omitted from this compilation.  
Sec. 21-1.1. - Mortgage disclosure; annual and supplemental reports. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as the "Mortgage Disclosure Ordinance of 1977." 
(b)  Definitions. When used in this section, the term: 
(1)  Financial institution shall mean any corporation, partnership, cooperative, proprietorship, or business entity subject to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975, by virtue of sections 303(2) and 309 of that Act, 12 U.S.C. sections 2802(2) and 28058; 
(2)  Local financial institution shall mean any financial institution, as defined herein, with a branch or main office within the City of New Haven or within any of the following towns: Bethany, Branford, Clinton, East Haven, Guilford, Hamden, Killingworth, Madison, North Branford, North Haven, Orange, Wallingford, West Haven or Woodbridge; 
(3)  Local financial institution transacting business with the city shall mean any local financial institution, as defined herein, which; within the relevant calendar year, has: 
a.  Purchased, sold, underwritten or brokered, by itself or in cooperation with other financial institutions, a bond, note or other security issued by the City of New Haven, as defined herein; or 
b.  Received, for a period greater than twenty-four (24) hours, any time or savings deposit of the City of New Haven, as defined herein; 
(4)  City of New Haven shall mean all departments, bureaus, agencies, authorities, boards, commissions or offices: 
a.  Created by and existing under the Charter of the City of New Haven; or 
b.  Created by and existing under any ordinances or resolution of the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven (whether or not such ordinance or resolution was adopted pursuant to a state statute authorizing the same); 
(5)  Controller shall mean the controller appointed by the mayor pursuant to section 11(i) of the city Charter, or, if no such appointment is made under said section 11(i), the city official designated by the mayor to perform the duties of the controller under this section; 
(6)  Chief fiscal officer with respect to any department, bureau, agency, authority, board, commission of office not within the jurisdiction of the controller of the City of New Haven, shall mean the employee or official thereof who performs the equivalent duties therefor. 
(c)  The Annual Mortgage Report. On the first day of June, or on the first business day thereafter, the controller shall file with the city clerk the "annual mortgage report." Said annual mortgage report shall include: 
(1)  A listing of all local financial institutions and of all local financial institutions transacting business with the City of New Haven during the most recently-completed calendar year; 
(2)  A presentation of the date disclosed by those financial institutions during the most recently-completed calendar year pursuant to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 
(3)  A listing of the transactions which took place during the most recently-completed calendar year between those financial institutions described in subsection (c)(1) of this section, and the City of New Haven, as defined herein; 
(4)  Additional data or analysis, if any, which will enable the board of aldermen to assess the availability of mortgage money within the City of New Haven; and 
(5)  Recommendations if any, for increasing the availability of such money. 
(d)  The Supplemental Mortgage Report. On the first day of December, or on the first business day thereafter the controller shall file with the city clerk the "supplemental mortgage report." Said supplemental mortgage report shall include all listings, data, analysis and recommendations which have been disclosed or become available during the preceding eleven (11) months of the types enumerated in subsection (c) for the annual mortgage report. 
(e)  Distribution of Copies by Clerk. Within forty-eight (48) hours after the annual mortgage report of the supplemental mortgage report, as the case may be, has been filed, the city clerk shall distribute a copy thereof to each member of the board of aldermen. 
(f)  Furnishing of Information by Chief Fiscal Officer. Any information required for the annual mortgage report or the supplemental mortgage report which is in the possession of any chief fiscal officer, as defined herein, including but not limited to the types of information referred to in section (c)(1) of this section, shall be furnished by such chief fiscal officer to the controller no later than one month before said controller is required to submit the annual mortgage report or the supplemental mortgage report, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 8-1-77; Ord. of 8-2-93) 
Editor's note— An ordinance enacted Aug. 1, 1977, and formerly codified as § 21-15, has been redesignated by the editor as § 21-1.1 for purposes of classification.  
Sec. 21-1.2. - Disclosures required of financial institutions. 
(a)  Declaration of Policy. It is the policy of the City of New Haven to prevent the instability and decay of communities located throughout the city. Such prevention depends on actions by financial institutions to meet the credit needs of all communities within the city, and particularly low-income communities, and to promote lending practices based on fair and equitable considerations. To encourage financial institutions to meet their obligations, the performance record of a financial institution in servicing its local community will be considered by the city when depositories of city funds are designated. 
The City of New Haven hereby adopts a program requiring financial institutions holding funds for the city or its instrumentalities, or for organizations receiving city grants or city loans in an amount equal to or greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), to disclose certain information as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  APR means the annual percentage rate as defined in the federal "truth in lending" laws. 
(2)  Applicant means any person who applies for a mortgage loan, commercial loan, or home improvement loan as defined in this section whether or not the loan is granted. 
(3)  Census means a standard statistical area as established most recently by the United States Bureau of the Census. 
(4)  City means the City of New Haven, Connecticut, and includes any agency, department, board, or commission of the City of New Haven. 
(5)  Commercial loan means a loan of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) or less which is secured by commercial property. 
(6)  Commercial property means all real property and buildings, structures, appurtenances, and improvements thereon, including residential property, owned by a business entity or individual with total assets of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) or less. 
(7)  Development administrator means the city official holding the office or acting in the capacity of development administrator of the city, or the designee of that official. 
(8)  Financial institution means any commercial bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or other entity which makes mortgage, commercial, or home improvement loans and has total assets in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). 
(9)  Home improvement loan means a loan, secured or unsecured, the proceeds of which are to be used for the purpose of repairing, rehabilitating, or remodeling an existing residential dwelling. 
(10)  Instrumentalities means any agency, authority, board, or commission of the City of New Haven, Connecticut, including but not limited to the New Haven Coliseum Authority, the New Haven Municipal Golf Course, the New Haven Parking Authority, etc. 
(11)  Mortgage loan means a loan which is secured by residential property. 
(12)  Residential property means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by, one (1), two (2), three (3) or four (4) families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
(13)  New Haven SMSA means the Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area of the New Haven Region as defined by the United States Bureau of the Census. 
(c)  Disclosure of Community Reinvestment Performance Evaluations. 
(1)  Before the city deposits its funds in any financial institution, such institution shall disclose copies of the public section of its most recent community reinvestment performance evaluations, prepared by the appropriate federal regulatory agency and/or by the State of Connecticut Commissioner of Banking pursuant to the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, 12 USC 2901 et seq. (as amended), and the Connecticut General Statutes section 36-52a et seq. (as amended). 
(2)  The disclosures required herein shall be made to the development administrator annually within thirty (30) business days of receipt by the financial institution of the performance evaluations specified in paragraph (c)(1). 
(d)  Disclosure of Lending Information and Data. 
(1)  Before the city deposits its funds in any financial institution, such institution shall disclose the following information and data on forms approved by the development administrator: 
a.  The number and dollar amount by census tract for all mortgage loans made on or for residential property located within the New Haven SMSA and: 
(i)  Within the city. 
(ii)  Outside the city. 
b.  The APR by census tract for all mortgage loans made in or for residential property located within the New Haven SMSA and: 
(i)  Within the city. 
(ii)  Outside the city. 
c.  The average loan payment by census tract for all mortgage loans made on or for residential property located within the New Haven SMSA and: 
(i)  Within the city. 
(ii)  Outside the city. 
d.  The information and data referred to in paragraphs a. through c. of this subsection shall be itemized further by census tract to disclose the number, total dollar amount, average effective interest rate, and average down payments of: 
(i)  Mortgage loans made to applicants who did not at the time of execution of the loans intend to reside in the property securing the loan. 
(ii)  Home improvement loans. 
e.  The information and data specified in paragraphs a. through c. of this subsection shall also be obtained for commercial loans or mortgages on or for commercial properties. 
f.  The number of commercial, home improvement, and mortgage loan applicants for each census tract located within the New Haven SMSA, and the percentage of such applicants whose applications were denied, for each category: 
(i)  Within the city. 
(ii)  Outside the city. 
g.  The number and total dollar amount by census tract of all deposits held within the city by each branch of the financial institution, and the location of each such branch by census tract. 
(2)  The disclosure required herein shall be made to the development administrator annually on the first business day of June. 
(e)  Disclosure of 10-K Report or Annual Report. 
(1)  Before the city deposits its funds in any financial institution, such institution shall disclose a copy of its most recent 10-K report prepared and filed in accord with the federal securities laws. Where such report is not required, the institution shall disclose a copy of its annual report and its most recent "call report." 
(2)  The disclosures required herein shall be made to the development administrator annually within ninety (90) days after the close of the financial institution's fiscal year or on the first day of April, whichever is earlier. 
(f)  Disclosure of Additional Information. 
(1)  A financial institution shall disclose a copy of its written policy regarding branch closings. 
(2)  A financial institution is encouraged to disclose the total percentage, as well as the percentage by each job classification (e.g., teller, manager, etc.) of those employees who reside within the borders of the city. 
(3)  A financial institution is encouraged to disclose a list of names of board members residing within the borders of the city. 
(4)  A financial institution may include in its disclosure information regarding contributions it has made to city programs. Such information shall include the date, dollar amount, and recipient of the contribution. 
(5)  A financial institution may include in its disclosure information which in its opinion reflects upon the institution's community reinvestment record. 
(6)  The disclosure enumerated herein shall be made to the development administrator annually on the first business day of June. 
(g)  Compliance by Other Entities. Financial institutions currently holding funds for the city, its instrumentalities, or organizations receiving city grants or city loans in an amount equal to or greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall comply with all of the disclosure provisions as set forth in subsections (c), (d), (e) and (f). 
(h)  Failure To Provide Information. If any financial institution refuses to comply with the disclosure provisions as set forth in subsection (c), (d), (e) and (f), the development administrator shall report such refusal to the controller of the city. If such institution has previously been designated as a city depository, the controller shall consider withdrawing such designation. The development administrator shall maintain a list of those financial institutions refusing to comply, which list shall be a public record. 
(i)  Compilation and Usage of Financial Data. 
(1)  The development administrator shall compile the disclosures made by financial institutions pursuant to the provisions set forth in subsections (c), (d), (e) and (f). 
(2)  The development administrator shall file the compilation of disclosure information with the city clerk annually on January 15th or the next business day thereafter. 
(3)  The city clerk shall provide the public with access to the information and shall notify the board of finance and the board of aldermen of its availability. 
(4)  The board of finance shall consider the information in its determination of depositories for city funds. 
(5)  The instrumentalities of the city, as well as organizations receiving city grants or city loans in an amount equal to or greater than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall consider the information in their determination of depositories for funds which they control or with which they are entrusted. 
(j)  Severability. If any provision of this section or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this section, or the application of such terms or provisions to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby; and each remaining term and provision hereof shall be deemed valid and be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 12-16-91; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 8-2-93)  
ARTICLE II. - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
Sec. 21-2. - Redevelopment agency established; membership, term, compensation. 
Pursuant to chapter 130 of the General Statutes, Revision of 1958, the city hereby establishes the New Haven Redevelopment Agency to be composed of five (5) residents appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen of the city. Members of the agency first appointed shall be designated to serve for one, two, three, four and five years respectively and thereafter shall be appointed annually to serve for five years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner of original appointment. Members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed by the city for necessary expenses, within the limits of the appropriation approved therefor. 
(Ord. 8-7-50, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 21-3. - Selection of redevelopment agency officers, employees. 
The redevelopment agency shall select from among it members a chairman and a vice-chairman and may employ a secretary and such other officers, agents, technical consultants, legal counsel and employees as it may require, within the limits of its appropriations. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 3)  
Sec. 21-4. - Majority of redevelopment agency necessary to act. 
Action by the redevelopment agency shall be taken only on a majority vote of all of the members of the agency. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 4)  
Sec. 21-5. - Procedure by agency in passing on redevelopment. 
The redevelopment agency shall exercise its powers in the name of the city and is empowered, authorized and directed as follows: 
(a)  Refer plans to city plan commission. Upon submission to the redevelopment agency by a redeveloper of a proposed redevelopment plan, the redevelopment agency shall immediately transmit such plan to the city plan commission for its study and shall request and receive the written approval of the city plan commission thereon prior to taking action on the redevelopment plan. 
(b)  Public hearings. Before approving any redevelopment plan, the redevelopment agency shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication of such notice to be not less than two weeks before the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  Conditions for approval of plan. The redevelopment agency may approve the redevelopment plan if, following such hearing, the agency finds that: 
(1)  The area in which the proposed redevelopment is to be located is a redevelopment area; 
(2)  The carrying out of the redevelopment plan will result in materially improving conditions in such area; 
(3)  Sufficient living accommodations are available within a reasonable distance of such area or are provided for in the redevelopment plan for families displaced by the proposed improvement, at prices or rentals within the financial reach of such families; and 
(4)  The redevelopment plan is satisfactory as to site planning, relation to the comprehensive or general plan of the city, construction and financial ability of the redeveloper to carry it out. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 5)  
Sec. 21-6. - Approval of redevelopment plans by housing authority, aldermen. 
(a)  No redevelopment plan for a project which consists predominantly of residential facilities shall be approved by the redevelopment agency except with the approval of the housing authority of the city. 
(b)  The approval of the redevelopment plan shall be given by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, §§ 6, 7)  
Sec. 21-7. - Modification of redevelopment plans. 
A redevelopment plan may be modified at any time after the sale or lease of the area, provided the modification shall be consented to by the purchaser or lessee and approved by the city plan commission, the housing authority (as required by section 21-6(a)), the redevelopment agency, and the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 8)  
Sec. 21-8. - Authority of redevelopment agency to acquire and use real property. 
The redevelopment agency is authorized to acquire real property required for redevelopment purposes, by purchase, exchange, or gift. The redevelopment agency is also authorized to acquire real property by eminent domain in accordance with the provisions of section 8-129 through and including section 8-133 of the 1958 revision of the general statutes and subject to the prior approval of the board of aldermen. Real property may be acquired previous to the adoption or approval of the redevelopment plan for a project area, provided the property acquired shall be located within an area designated by the city plan commission as an appropriate redevelopment area and provided such acquisition is authorized by the board of aldermen. Title to all land acquired by the redevelopment agency for redevelopment purposes shall be solely in the name of the city. While such real property is in the possession of the redevelopment agency, the agency may clear, repair, operate or insure it, or may make site improvements essential to preparation for its use in accordance with the redevelopment plan. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 9) 
State Law reference— Sections 8-128—8-133 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958) authorize the acquisition of real property by redevelopment agencies and regulate certain aspects of condemnation for that purpose.  
Sec. 21-9. - Sales, leases of land by agency to redevelopers or public agencies. 
The redevelopment agency may sell or lease, for such sums as may be agreed upon, the whole or any part of a redevelopment area to the redeveloper, or, if the property is to be used for public purposes, to an appropriate public agency. The consideration paid for the sale or lease of the property shall be determined by the redevelopment agency, provided, if the cost or carrying charges of such land to the redevelopment agency are greater than such consideration, the redevelopment agency shall first have specific authorization from the board of aldermen for the sale or lease at any lesser consideration, and the city may appropriate and authorize the expenditure of money to compensate for any portion of the difference between the acquisition cost of such property and such sale or lease price of such property at a lesser consideration to a redeveloper, but in no case shall sale or lease price be lower than the use value of such property. Each contract for sale or lease to a redeveloper shall provide, among other things that the property transferred shall be developed and used in accordance with the redevelopment plan or such plan as modified with the approval of the redevelopment agency, that the building of the improvements shall be begun within a period of time which the redevelopment agency fixes as reasonable and that all transfers of properties by the redeveloper shall be subject to the consent of the redevelopment agency. Any contract for sale or lease shall be approved by the board of aldermen before its final approval by the redevelopment agency. 
Any contract for sale or lease to a redeveloper may provide, among other things: 
(a)  That the properties in the redevelopment area shall be maintained in accordance with the redevelopment plan; 
(b)  That the redevelopment agency shall have the right of inspection; 
(c)  That the redeveloper, as security for its fulfillment of the contract, shall make a cash deposit or give a bond with such surety as the contract may provide or make such other guarantee as the redevelopment agency may deem necessary in the public interest; 
(d)  That, if the redevelopment agency finds that the redevelopment is not being maintained in accordance with the contract terms and conditions, it shall notify the redeveloper or its successor in title in writing of the work which shall be done to meet the standards of maintenance agreed upon; 
(e)  That the city may contract to retain or accept, close, relocate, construct, reconstruct and maintain specified streets, playgrounds, parks or other public facilities within the area of the proposed redevelopment. 
Upon consummation of the contract for sale or lease of a site to a redeveloper, the city may provide for the extension of such streets, sidewalks and public utilities as are necessary to its use for residential purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 10) 
State Law reference— Authority of redevelopment agency to sell or lease property, § 8-137 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 21-10. - Authority of redevelopment agency to accept aid from state, federal agencies. 
In order to carry out a redevelopment program the redevelopment agency may accept grants or other financial assistance from the state or federal governments and may do any and all things necessary or desirable to secure such financial aid, including obligating itself in any contract with the federal government to convey to the federal government the project to which such contract relates upon the occurrence of a substantial default. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 11) 
State Law reference— Acceptance of state, federal grants by redevelopment agencies, § 8-135 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 21-11. - Financing of redevelopment agency by city. 
The redevelopment agency may have funds appropriated to it by the city for administrative expenses and for the acquisition of real property in any redevelopment area. The city may issue bonds for redevelopment purposes, in accordance with state and federal laws for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 12)  
Sec. 21-12. - Additional redevelopment powers provided by statute. 
In addition to the foregoing powers and authorizations, the redevelopment agency shall exercise all powers and authorities vested in redevelopment agencies by the general statutes or by any amendments or additions thereto which may hereafter be enacted by the general assembly. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 13) 
State Law reference— For provisions concerning redevelopment agencies generally, see §§ 8-124—8-145 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 21-13. - Redevelopment advisory board. 
There shall be an advisory group composed of five (5) persons, namely, a representative of the housing authority of the city, selected by said authority; a representative of the city plan commission, selected by said commission; a representative of the board of education, selected by said board; and two (2) representatives of the board of aldermen, selected by said board on a bipartisan basis. Any vacancy in this group shall be filled in the manner of original selection. The function of this group shall be to advise and assist the redevelopment agency in the preparation and execution of a redevelopment program for New Haven and to assist in coordinating with said program the activities of the agencies represented on said advisory group. The advisory group shall attend all meetings of the redevelopment agency but shall have no voting power. 
(Ord. of 8-7-50, § 14)  
ARTICLE III. - NEW HAVEN DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 21-14. - Development commission. 
(a)  There shall be a New Haven development commission, pursuant to section 7-136, General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958 for the promotion and development of the economic resources of the city. It is hereby designated as a municipal development agency under Connecticut General Statute, Section 8-186, et seq., as they may from time to time be amended, the city's urban rehabilitation agency, under Connecticut General Statute, Section 8-290, et seq., as they may from time to time be amended; and the city's harbor improvement agency under Connecticut General Statutes 13b-56 and 13b-57, as they may from time to time be amended. It shall exercise all the powers and duties conferred by state law on such agencies including the power to acquire by eminent domain as may be provided for any of those agencies in the same manner as under Connecticut General Studies, Section 8-129 through 8-133, as they may from time to time be amended. 
(b)  Said commission shall consist of fifteen (15) members; a member of the board of aldermen elected by the board of aldermen in January of each year and fourteen (14) other members, which may represent the nonprofit community development organizations and any of the following sections of the New Haven community: Banking, public utilities, general business, education, private charitable, cultural or scientific organizations, real estate and city agencies, all of whom shall be residents of the city and all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. The mayor shall fill the vacancies in membership, arising from expired terms, by appointments for a term of three (3) years. Any vacancy in the membership of the commission shall be filled for the unexpired portions of any member's term by the mayor. The mayor may appoint, if in said mayor's opinion the interests of the city require it, advisory representatives to the commission for specified terms from any of the above sections of the community. Such advisory representatives may not vote but may advise and participate in the business of the commission. 
(c)  The members shall elect annually one (1) member of said commission to be chairman, another to be vice chairman, and a third to be secretary. 
(d)  The members of said commission shall receive no compensation for their services as such, but shall be reimbursed, within the limits of any sum appropriated for such purpose, for their necessary, expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
(e)  Said commission may appoint employees, hire consultants, and purchase material and supplies necessary for the discharge of its duties, within the limits of any sum appropriated for such purpose. 
(f)  In the implementation of its powers and duties conferred by state law, said commission shall engage in the following services related to municipal development, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  To have prepared, to review, to modify, and to approve all plans, including any amendments thereto required to be prepared and approved, by state law, by a municipal development agency, an urban rehabilitation agency, or a harbor improvement agency. 
(2)  To study, investigate and appraise economic conditions and trends affecting New Haven industry, business and commerce and its residential, recreational and municipal facilities. 
(3)  To promote, assist and encourage the preservation of a healthy business climate and aesthetically attractive physical environment in the city. 
(4)  To promote, assist and encourage the preservation, expansion and development of existing New Haven industry, business and commerce and its residential, recreational and municipal facilities. 
(5)  To promote, assist and encourage the location, expansion and development of new industry, business and commerce in the city, with due regard for the conservation and preservation of the ecology of the area. 
(6)  To prepare, collect, compile, advertise and distribute books, maps, charts, pamphlets and graphic material of every kind and description relative to the human and physical resources of the city. 
(7)  To cooperate with, and seek to coordinate the activities of, all official and unofficial civic, research and promotional agencies, commissions, groups, associations and organizations having like or kindred economic development, functions and concerns. 
(8)  To confer and cooperate with agencies of the state and federal governments in the exercise of the aforesaid powers and duties. 
(9)  To confer and cooperate with similar municipal economic development commissions in the greater New Haven Area in order to foster and maintain a proper balance among industrial, business, commercial, residential, recreational and municipal growth elements, with attention to protection and aesthetic improvement of the physical environment. 
(10)  To advise and make recommendations to appropriate officials, agencies, boards, departments and commissions of New Haven, including the mayor, the board of aldermen and the city planning commission, regarding actions which, in said commission's judgment, would affect or improve the economic condition and development, or physical environment, of the city. 
(g)  Each official, agency, board, department and commission shall cooperate with and assist said commission in the exercise of its powers and duties. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 5; Ord. of 9-26-83; Ord. of 10-19-87; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 12)  
Secs. 21-15—21-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An Ord. of Aug. 5, 1996, repealed former section 21-15 in its entirety which pertained to the New Haven Housing Partnership which derived from an Ord. of July 2, 1990, and an Ord. of July 6, 1993.  
ARTICLE IV. - LIVABLE CITY INITIATIVE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An Ordinance of May 20, 1996 repealed former Art. IV, §§ 21-21—21-27, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. IV pertained to the office of housing and neighborhood development and derived from an Ord. of July 6, 1981, § 1; an Ord. of May 29, 1990, § 2; and an Ord. of July 6, 1993. 
 
Sec. 21-21. - Establishment of bureau. 
The office of housing and neighborhood development is abolished and there is hereby established the livable city initiative bureau, hereinafter referred to in this chapter as the "bureau." 
(Ord. of 6-7-99)  
Sec. 21-22. - Powers and duties of the bureau 
The bureau is authorized to engage in any and all activities authorized by law which are related to the elimination and prevention of blight, as well as the rehabilitation of viable buildings and structures, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Demolition of unsafe and/or blighted buildings and structures and the ability to contract for the same; 
(2)  Acquisition and disposition of real estate, on behalf of the City of New Haven, by all methods permitted by law including, but not limited to, methods outlined in section 7-148(L)(3)(A) and (B) of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time, which authorizes a municipality to "take or acquire by gift, purchase, grant, including any grant from the United States or the state, bequest or devise and hold, condemn, lease, sell, manage, transfer, release and convey such real and personal property or interest therein absolutely or in trust as the purposes of the municipality or any public use or purpose…" as well as acquisition via tax foreclosure, deed in lieu of tax foreclosure, summary foreclosure, receivership and eminent domain. Property so acquired shall be disposed of in accordance with the land disposition guidelines approved by the board of aldermen on December 1, 1997, as amended from time to time, and in a manner consistent with applicable law. 
(3)  Relocation of displaced individuals in accordance with the state and federal relocation laws and regulations, as applicable; 
(4)  State building code enforcement, zoning ordinance enforcement and housing code enforcement in accordance with applicable law; 
(5)  Planning, technical assistance and other assistance in site assembly to promote a livable city in conjunction with the city plan department; 
(6)  Financial assistance to qualified individuals and entities to promote conservation of the city's neighborhoods, housing stock, and to encourage homeownership and maintenance; 
(7)  Planning, technical and financial assistance, training and information services to the extent provided by law, to build the capacity of neighborhood organizations to participate in neighborhood revitalization activities, and to increase the effectiveness of housing management; and 
(8)  To affirmatively pursue compliance with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended from time to time, with respect to empowerment of the target population including, but not limited to, employment and economic opportunities. 
(9)  To the extent allowed by law, inspecting, repairing, demolishing, removing or, to the extent applicable, otherwise disposing of any real estate in order to secure such real estate or to make it safe pursuant to section 49-73b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 5-20-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-7-99)  
Sec. 21-23. - Appointment of director; powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint a director of the bureau who shall serve at the mayor's pleasure. 
(b)  The director is responsible for administration of the bureau, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Personnel selection, supervision, management, training and development; 
(2)  Budget development and administration; 
(3)  Program planning, policy and execution; 
(4)  Oversight of office operations and procedures; 
(5)  Other related administrative and managerial functions; 
(6)  Staff support to the livable city initiative board established under section 21-24 of this chapter; and 
(7)  All other powers and duties of the bureau not expressly required by state law or ordinance to be exercised by the livable city initiative board established under section 21-24 of this chapter. 
(c)  The director shall manage and control the office of building inspection and enforcement in accordance with section 121 et seq. of the Charter of the City of New Haven, as amended from time to time. Such office shall hereinafter be referred to as the "building division" of the bureau for the purposes of this chapter. 
(d)  The director may hire, with the approval of the appropriate boards, commissions or authorities, employees, consultants and contractors, and purchase goods, supplies, services necessary for the discharge of the bureau duties, within the limits of any sums appropriated for those purposes. The director shall make every reasonable effort to employ city residents and engage the services of consultants and contractors whose principal place of business is located in the City of New Haven and to ensure a balance of such residents, staff consultants, including those providing professional services, that shall reflect the racial demographics of the city. 
(e)  No later than January 1, 2000, the director shall formulate and promulgate, in consultation with the livable city initiative board, written policies and procedures regarding the responsibility of contracts engaged by the bureau, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Davis-Bacon Act, 40 USC 276a et seq., as amended from time to time; 
(2)  Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, 12 USC 1701u and implementing regulations at 24 CFR Part 135, as amended from time to time; 
(3)  Fair Housing Act, 42 USC 3601-3620, including implementing regulations at 24 CFR Part 100 and Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (PL 90-284), as amended from time to time; 
(4)  Section 2-222(d) and 2-226 of this Code ("living wage ordinance"), as amended from time to time; 
(5)  Chapter 12½ of the this Code, as amended from time to time. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all contracts used to engage consultants and contractors must contain the following provision: 
"The contractor agrees, warrants and represents that it shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws, rules, regulations, codes, ordinances and statutes." 
(f)  The director and members of the director's staff shall receive ongoing training appropriate to their job descriptions and to all programs they administer in accordance with applicable local, state and federal laws, rules, regulations, codes, ordinances and statutes, including ethical, conflict-of-interest, freedom of information and public records and meetings provisions. 
(g)  The director shall take actions necessary, including a market study, and the promulgation of policies and procedures as appropriate, to ensure that expenditures of City funds are not made when doing so for the purposes of housing acquisition and/or rehabilitation would make it unlikely or impossible for an end buyer to sustain affordable homeownership. 
(h)  As of July 1, 1999, the director shall require the execution of a conflict-of-interest/non-collusion affidavit, in a form and manner provided by the city, of all borrowers/grantees, consultants and contractors. Said affidavit shall indicate, at a minimum, conflicts resulting from a relationship, whether professional or familial, with city employees, board, commission, and/or authority members, and appointed and/or elected officials. 
(i)  As of July 1, 1999, the director shall provide, through the bureau or a consultant/contractor engaged by the bureau, a homebuyer/maintenance workshop, as the case may be, to all borrowers/grantees who apply for and/or obtain assistance from the bureau's program. Said workshop, should include preand post-purchase/rehabilitation topics, including, but not limited to, debt ratios, retention of independent legal counsel, property maintenance, truth-in-lending, financing agreements, mortgages, contractors, property insurance and landlord/tenant issues. 
(j)  As of July 1, 1999, The director shall ensure that prospective buyers/donees of city owned property are encouraged to retain independent legal representation, order a title search, perform their own due diligence (which means their own inspection of said property), and secure, at their sole expense, a phase I, II and/or III environmental study, if necessary. Additionally, such advice shall state that city-owned property is sold on an as-is basis and that the city makes no warranties, covenants, agreements, promises, conditions, acknowledgments, or representations relative to the marketability, mercantability, habitability, integrity or condition of the property. 
(k)  The director shall, in consultation with the livable city initiative board, administer the bureau's loan and grant programs and do all things necessary to implement such programs including but not limited to establishing the terms and conditions of said programs, within the limitations of sums appropriated for such purpose. 
(l)  The director shall file monthly reports with the board of aldermen of all activities of the bureau including loan, demolition and blighted buildings' or structures' reports, and conflict-of-interest/non-collusion affidavits for all borrowers/grantees, consultants and contractors. 
(m)  The director shall take the necessary action to establish a loan underwriting committee ("LUC") to ensure compliance with the City of New Haven's Residential Loan Assistance Program Policies and Procedure which shall include (without limitation) appointing committee members, establishing guidelines for the LUC and/or amending the guidelines and/or loan program policies and procedures 
(Ord. of 5-20-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-7-99; Ord. No. 1636, § 1, 9-7-10 )  
Sec. 21-24. - Establishment of board. 
(a)  The office of housing and neighborhood development board is abolished and there is hereby established the livable city initiative board within the bureau, hereinafter referred to as the "board." It shall consist of nine (9) regular members and two (2) alternate members. Seven (7) of the regular members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen. The other two (2) regular members shall be members of the board of aldermen appointed by the president of the board of aldermen. The two (2) alternate members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen. The board members shall serve without compensation and shall be elector residents in the City of New Haven. Board members may be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, within the limitations of appropriations. 
(b)  Board members appointed by the mayor shall serve for three (3) years. Each of those members shall serve until his successor is appointed and has qualified. 
Board members appointed by the president of the board of aldermen shall serve for two (2) years or a portion thereof, coterminous with their aldermanic term. 
In the event of a vacancy in the board's membership, the successor shall be appointed to serve during the balance of the term remaining from the vacating member's term. 
(c)  All members of the board will undergo training and development relative to the activities of the bureau and all programs it administers, as well as the city ethics ordinance, and the state freedom of information and public records and meetings statutes. 
(Ord of 5-20-99, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-7-99)  
Sec. 21-25. - Designation of livable city initiative board as urban homesteading agency, housing site development agency, and community development agency. 
(a)  The board is hereby designated as the city's urban homesteading agency under the Connecticut General Statutes sections 8-169, et seq., as amended from time to time; the city's housing site development agency under the Connecticut General Statutes section 8-123 through section 8-214, as they may from time to time be amended; and a city community development agency under Connecticut General Statutes section 8-169a et seq., amended from time to time, and may exercise, in accordance with said sections, all the powers and duties conferred by state law on such agencies. 
(Ord. of 5-20-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-7-99)  
Sec. 21-26. - Livable city initiative board organization and voting requirements. 
(a)  The board shall elect a chairperson, a co-chairperson and a secretary from its membership who shall serve a one-year term. The board may further organize itself in whatever other manner it deems appropriate and may adopt such rules and regulations for its governance as it considers necessary. These rules shall determine the privileges and voting rights of the alternate members. 
(b)  A majority of all voting members of the board constitutes a quorum for conducting the board's business. All actions shall be taken by an affirmative vote of at least a majority of the members of the quorum. 
(c)  The board shall meet at least monthly and may be called into special session upon due notice by the mayor, the chairperson, or by a petition signed by a majority of the board. 
(Ord. of 5-20-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-7-99)  
Sec. 21-27. - The board's role, powers, and duties. 
In addition to its powers and duties that may be conferred by state law, the board shall provide the following functions and perform the following duties; 
(1)  Long-range planning in policy formulation and program evaluation for the bureau; 
(2)  Review and comment to the director on annual budget recommendations prepared by office staff; 
(3)  Approve the bureau's acquisition and disposition of real property by all methods generally described herein excluding tax foreclosure and deed-in-lieu of tax foreclosure; 
(4)  Approve the disposition of real property in accordance with guidelines passed by the board of aldermen on December 1, 1997, as amended from time to time; 
(5)  Review, modify and approve all plans, including any amendments thereto, required to be prepared and approved by state law by the board when it serves as any of the agencies listed in section 21-25 of this chapter and all other plans as may be referred for approval by the director of the bureau; 
(6)  Submit to the board of aldermen a report as to the disposition of parcels on which properties have been demolished and a maintenance plan where necessary within ninety (90) days of demolition. Failure to submit such a report may result in the termination of this initiative. 
(Ord. of 5-20-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-7-99)  
Sec. 21-28. - Loan underwriting committee. 
(a)  The LUC established by the director as described in subsection 21-23(m) above shall be charged with ensuring that loan recommendations from LCI are consistent with the City of New Haven's Residential Loan Assistance Program's Policies and Procedures. 
(b)  The LUC shall have seven (7) members appointed by the director. The director shall seek to appoint a balanced membership from the private, non-profit and public sectors, with an emphasis on individuals with expertise or experience in related fields such as banking/finance, architecture, real estate law loan programs, and/or community development. No member of the LUC shall be an officer or employee of the City of New Haven. 
(c)  Members of the LUC shall be appointed to a term of two (2) years, except that three (3) of the initial appointees shall have an initial term of one (1) year. Each member of the LUC shall be eligible for reappointment at the expiration of his or her term, provided that no member shall be permitted to serve for a period in excess of nine (9) consecutive years. 
(d)  The City of New Haven will indemnify and hold harmless the LUC members against and from any personal liability arising from their service on the LUC provided that such liability arises from actions taken by such LUC member within the scope of the authority of the LUC, as described in the loan underwriting advisory guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 1636, § 2, 9-7-10 )  
Sec. 21-29. - Mayoral declaration that land acquisition(s), land disposition(s) and demolition(s) are of an emergency nature and that immediate action is necessary. 
(a)  The mayor may invoke section 41 of the Charter to certify as an emergency all land acquisition(s), land disposition(s) and demolition(s) undertaken by bureau and a list of all such activities shall be submitted to the board of aldermen no later than one week before each regular board of aldermen meeting for inclusion on the regular agenda of said meeting; and said list shall be accompanied by the requisite city plan commission report, to the extent required by law, as well as all pertinent information about each land acquisition, disposition and demolition matter including but not limited to, as applicable, the square footage, purchase and/or sales price, name of purchaser and the purchaser's conflict of interest/non-collusion affidavit and proposed use for each parcel. 
(b)  All items on such list shall be deemed first readings proper for vote pursuant to the invocation of section 41 of the Charter unless the alderperson of the ward affected by the land acquisition or disposition contacts the president of the board prior to the start of the board meeting to request that an item be separated out for referral to the appropriate committee. 
(Ord. of 6-7-99)  
Sec. 21-30. - Emergency purchasing and bidding procedures for demolition of building(s) and/or structures by the bureau. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 74(d)(iii) of the Charter, the purchasing agent is hereby authorized to secure the services of contractors engaged to undertake the demolition of building(s) and structure(s) identified by the local building official to the bureau as said demolition is herein deemed by the board of aldermen to be an emergency involving a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The purchasing agent shall award the demolition contract(s) to the lowest responsible bidder using the agent's informal bid process in manner consistent with purchasing policies and procedures which may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  The director of the bureau shall file a monthly report with the board of aldermen containing a list of all bids awarded in the preceding month for demolitions undertaken by the bureau, along with the names and addresses of the contractors, amount of the contract, funding source, and the completion dates of all demolitions, and all other pertinent information including a list of the racial and residential status of contractors' personnel working on said demolitions. 
(Ord. of 6-7-99)  
ARTICLE V. - OFFICE OF BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 6, 1981, § 3, added provisions designated Ch. 21C, §§ 21C-1—21C-3, which the editor has included herein as Art. V, §§ 21-31—21-33 for classification purposes. 
 
Sec. 21-31. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established the office of business development. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 3; Ord. of 4-17-89, § 1)  
Sec. 21-32. - Powers and duties of the office. 
The office of business development is authorized to engage in services related to the economic development of the city, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Retention and expansion of the city's tax base and employment; 
(b)  Programs necessary to encourage, assist and provide for economic development, including, but not limited to a land and building bank, small business assistance program, minority business assistance, a lending program through the New Haven development corporation, the neighborhood commercial revitalization program, and employment training program; 
(c)  Securing federal and state grants for economic development projects; 
(d)  Providing comprehensive and coordinated development planning services in partnership with appropriate public, private and nonprofit agencies; 
(e)  Assisting developers, owners, merchants and residents in identifying funding sources, making applications to public and private lenders, and complying with regulatory, statutory, or other permitting requirements; 
(f)  Gathering and disseminating information and data critical to investment decisions; 
(g)  Assisting in planning the coordinated delivery of public services; 
(h)  Developing marketing programs for publicly owned land; 
(i)  Reviewing the duly adopted and proposed physical development plans of the city and recommending amendments thereto; 
(j)  Assisting communication regarding the provision of services between public, private and nonprofit agencies concerned with the development of the city; 
(k)  Directing local implementation of the State "Coastal Management Act", Connecticut General Statutes Sections 22a-90 through 22a-112, as they may from time to time be amended. 
(l)  Developing marketing, promotional, and cultural programs, and providing staff support to the commission on cultural affairs. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 3; Ord. of 4-17-89, § 2; Ord. of 5-29-90, § 2)  
Sec. 21-33. - Appointment of director; powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint a director of the office of business development, who shall serve at the mayor's pleasure. 
(b)  The director is responsible for the administration of the office of business development, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Personnel selection, supervision, management, and development; 
(2)  Budget development and administration; 
(3)  Program planning, policy and execution; 
(4)  Oversight of office operations and procedures; 
(5)  Other related administrative and managerial functions; 
(6)  Staff support to the New Haven development commission and any other city entities regarding economic development projects and programs; and 
(7)  All other powers and duties necessary to carry out the services of the office. 
(c)  The director may appoint, with the approval of the appropriate entities, employees and staff, hire consultants, and purchase supplies, services, and construction, necessary for the discharge of the office's duties, within the limits of any sums appropriated for those purposes. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 3; Ord. of 4-17-89, § 3)  
Sec. 21-34. - Acquisition of real estate to protect security for city loans or to realize value of city liens. 
If advised in writing by the corporation counsel of the city to do so, the mayor is hereby directed to take such action or actions as may be reasonably necessary in order to adequately protect the city's position with respect to any real estate which serves as security for any loan made by the city or for any liens, and that any such action may include the commencement of foreclosure proceedings and/or bidding for such real estate at any foreclosure sale, and (where any such bid is the highest bid) taking title to the same without further reference to the board of aldermen, provided that: 
(1)  In no circumstances shall any such bid be greater than the aggregate of the amount owed to the city and the sum of any other indebtedness secured by the real estate in question (the "property") where the lien securing such other indebtedness is superior to that held by the city; 
(2)  In no event shall the city bid any sum which is greater than ninety (90) percent of the appraised value of the property, as calculated pursuant to the appraised value set forth in an appraisal carried out not more than six (6) months prior to the foreclosure sale in question; 
(3)  The city shall have sufficient funds to complete the purchase of the property from an appropriate funding source in the event that the city is the successful bidder; 
(4)  In the event that the funds which may be used to purchase the property are derived from the federal or state government, all requisite governmental approvals of such action (if any) shall have been obtained prior to the foreclosure sale in question; and 
(5)  Reports of all activities by the city under this section 21-34 shall be filed quarterly with the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 12-6-99)  
Sec. 21-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DOWNTOWN AND HARBOR DEVELOPMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of May 29, 1990, § 2, repealed former sections 21-36—21-37 in their entirety which pertained to the office of downtown and harbor development and derived from an Ord. of July 6, 1981, § 4. 
 
Secs. 21-36—21-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BENEFIT RECAPTURE 
 
Sec. 21-39. - Tax benefits. 
If the city directly grants a tax abatement, tax assessment deferral or other tax benefit to an industrial or commercial entity for the purpose of locating, maintaining, rehabilitating or expanding its manufacturing facilities in New Haven, and the entity relocates its manufacturing facilities from New Haven in whole or in part during the term of any such benefit, the tax benefits for the remainder of the term shall automatically be cancelled, and the tax benefits effected shall be repaid within thirty (30) days to the City of New Haven together with interest from the date the benefits accrued, such interest to be at the prime rate on the date of cancellation, and such industrial or commercial entity must notify the city six (6) months prior to its relocation. 
(Ord. of 12-16-85)  
Sec. 21-40. - Community development block grant float loan. 
If an industrial or commercial entity relocates its facilities in whole or in part from New Haven during the term of any community development block grant float loan directly granted to it by the city, the outstanding principal balance of the loan shall be immediately due and payable at the then prevailing prime rate, and such industrial or commercial entity must notify the City of New Haven six (6) months prior to its relocation. 
(Ord. of 12-16-85)  
Sec. 21-41. - Implementation. 
The requirements of section 21-39 and section 21-40 shall be implemented by appropriated provisions in tax benefit agreements and community development block grant float loan agreements, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 12-16-85)  
Sec. 21-42. - Effective date. 
This Article VII shall apply to all affected agreements entered into by the City of New Haven following the effective date of this article [January 6, 1986]. 
(Ord. of 12-16-85)  
Secs. 21-43—21-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions codified as Art. VIII, § 21-46, derive from an ordinance enacted April 7, 1986, approved April 14, 1986, and effective April 26, 1986. Said ordinance designated said provisions as Art. VII, § 21-39, and has been redesignated by the editor to avoid duplication of section numbers. 
 
Sec. 21-46. - Alternate members. 
(1)  Appointment of alternates; terms of service. In accordance with the provisions of Section 8-19a of the Connecticut General Statutes (P.A. 84-154), the mayor shall appoint three (3) alternate members to the New Haven city plan commission. Such members shall be electors of the City of New Haven, and shall not be employees of the City of New Haven or members of the zoning commission or the board of zoning appeals. They shall serve without compensation. 
The mayor shall designate one (1) member to serve until January 1, 1987; one (1) member to serve until January 1, 1988; one (1) member to serve until January 1, 1989. Thereafter, each alternate member shall be appointed by the mayor in a like manner for terms of three (3) years. Any vacancy created by any reason other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired portion of that term in the same manner as the original appointment. Each member shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. 
(2)  Powers and duties. The three (3) alternate members shall, when seated, have all the powers and duties assigned to the city plan commission and its members by the General Statutes, Special Act 243 (1913) and the City Charter. They may attend all commission meetings and executive sessions. If a regular member of the commission is absent or is disqualified, the chairman of the commission shall designate an alternate to so act, choosing alternates in rotation so that they shall act as nearly equal a number of times as possible. If any alternate is not available in accordance with such rotation, such fact shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(Ord. of 4-7-86)  
Secs. 21-47—21-50. - Reserved.  
Chapter 22 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 22 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Duty of chief of police when claims arise from defective streets, sidewalks, bridges, § 2-45; door-to-door sales, Ch. 22½; duty of police to assist sealers of weights and measures, § 31-1. 
Charter reference— Department of police services, §§ 109—117; general provisions concerning police services, §§ 122—129. For pensions, see Special Laws Compilation, §§ 180—216. 
State Law reference— Provisions concerning police departments generally, §§ 7-274—7-294 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Reimbursement of police for injuries, expenses. 
The board of police commissioners, may, after due inquiry, approve a bill against the city to reimburse any police officer, in whole or in part, for any unusual injury to his clothing and equipment received in the judicious and faithful discharge of his duty, or for any reasonable expense incurred by him in defending any suit for his acts done in the like discharge of his duty, and such bill, being approved and passed in the same manner as other bills, shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1928, § 613)  
Sec. 22-2. - Auditing and approval of police department expenses. 
The board of police commissioners shall each month audit all bills created in and for the police department, and cause those approved by them to be duly certified and passed over to the city clerk, for the approval of the board of finance. 
(Code 1928, § 614)  
Sec. 22-3. - Accounting, monthly reports by police chief; payment of bills. 
The chief of police shall keep an account of all incidental expenses of the police force, and station houses, including any expenses incurred by any member of said force in pursuing any alleged offender, or in securing and placing him in a station house, and any necessary expense incurred in recovering or restoring stolen property; and at the end of each month he shall make out a bill for the same against the city, certifying thereon that the same is correct, and present it to the board of police commissioners, furnishing vouchers if required; and such bill, being amended and approved by said board, shall be passed, approved and paid in the same manner as other bills against the city. 
(Code 1928, § 616) 
Cross reference— Contents of bills against the city, § 2-36; off-setting amounts due city against obligations, § 2-37; preferences in paying claims, § 2-38; presentation and procedures for claims for damages, § 2-46. 
Charter reference— Procedure for payment of claims, § 19.  
Sec. 22-4. - Special constables—Authorized; appointment, term, compensation. 
The board of police commissioners may authorize the chief of police to appoint and reappoint, for terms not exceeding five (5) years, as many auxiliary policemen to serve without pay or other compensation as may be deemed advisable by said board for service in connection with police duty in the city. These auxiliary policemen shall be known as a special constable unit. 
(Ord. of 7-7-47, §§ 1, 4)  
Sec. 22-5. - Same—Mobilization for active duty; powers, duties. 
Special constables may be mobilized for training at the call of the chief of police or any authorized member of said department that the said chief of police may designate, but they shall be mobilized for active service or called upon to perform active police duty only in the event that the mayor or acting mayor has declared that a serious emergency exists in the city and only upon the authorization of the mayor or the chief of police following such declaration. During such period of active service only, such special constables shall possess all the powers and privileges and shall perform the duties of the regular members of the police force assigned to them by the mayor or the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 7-7-47, § 2)  
Sec. 22-6. - Same—Badge, uniform required. 
Every special constable shall, at his own expense, provide himself with a metal badge, silver plated or nickel plated, in the form of a shield, not less than two inches (2") long at the longest part, nor less than one inch and a half (1½") wide at the narrowest part, and lettered thus, in capital letters. 
SPECIAL 
CONSTABLE 
NEW HAVEN. 
Every special constable shall wear said badge affixed to some conspicuous place upon his outer clothing whenever executing the duties of this office, and he shall also wear such uniform as may be prescribed by the board of police commissioners. It shall be unlawful for any special constable to attempt to carry out any order, rule or regulation promulgated by proper authority when he is not wearing said uniform and badge. 
(Code 1928, §§ 604, 605; Ord. of 7-7-47, § 3)  
Sec. 22-7. - Same—Medical care for members injured on active duty. 
The city, as soon as it shall have knowledge of any accidental personal injury sustained by any member of such special constable unit and arising out of and in the course of the performance of the duties of such member while on active service or active police duty, shall provide a competent physician or surgeon to attend the said injured special constable, and in addition shall furnish such medical and surgical aid and hospital service as such physician shall deem reasonable or necessary. 
(Ord. of 7-7-47, § 5)  
Sec. 22-8. - Same—Compensation of members incapacitated while on duty. 
If any member of the special constable unit shall sustain an accidental personal injury arising out of and in the course of the performance of the duties of such member while on active service or active police duty, and if such accidental injury shall result in the total incapacity of such member to carry on his usual work, there shall be paid to such member a weekly compensation of seven dollars ($7.00); and such compensation shall not continue longer than the period of such total incapacity, or in any event longer than five hundred and twenty (520) weeks. The injuries described in section 5236 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1930, as the same is now amended shall be considered as causing total incapacity and compensable for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-7-47, § 6) 
Editor's note— Section 5236 of the 1930 Revision of the general statutes, as amended, appears as § 31-161 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Chapter 24 - SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1408, adopted March 6, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 24 in its entirety and retitled the chapter from "Septic Tanks, Cesspools and Privies" to "Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems." The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
Cross reference— Connection with either public sewers or conforming private disposal facilities required, Plumbing Code Par. 312.0; Recommendations of state Health Department concerning construction and maintenance of cesspools, septic tanks and privies adopted in absence of provisions of ordinance, Plumbing Code Par. 313.0; for public sewers generally, see Ch. 25 of the old volume (in 6? × 9? format). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definitions, interpretation. 
This article's provisions are cumulative and supplement other city ordinances relating to health, waste disposal, cesspools, septic tanks, subsurface sewage disposal systems and their connections, the State Public Health Code and technical standards for subsurface sewage disposal as published by the Commissioner of Health. 
(Ord. of 11-8-48, §§ 1, 6; Code of 1985, § 24-1; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-2. - Connecting cesspools, privy vaults to public sewers. 
No person shall connect any cesspool or detached privy vault with any public sewer without permission from the city engineer for good cause shown. A cesspool or detached privy vault must be watertight in order to allow for a connection with any public sewer. When a cesspool or privy vault is connected with a public sewer, the discharge pipe from the cesspool or vault shall be trapped, and located as directed and approved by the city engineer and health director. 
(Code of 1928, § 690; Code of 1985, § 24-1.1; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-3. - Permit to construct or use cesspools, septic tanks-required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, lay, use, or cause a cesspool, septic tank or subsurface sewage disposal system to be constructed, laid or used within city limits without a written permit from the health director. Similarly, no pipes may be connected to a cesspool or septic tank without a written permit from him/her. The health director is authorized to grant such permits. The fee for said permit shall be as set out in this Code as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No repairs, alterations or expansions of subsurface sewage disposal systems shall occur without the health director's approval. 
(Ord. of 11-8-48, § 2; Code of 1985, § 24-2; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(7), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-4. - Same—Application, conditions of issuance. 
All permit applications required by the foregoing section shall be in writing, and made in the name of the owner of the premises on which the work will be done. The application shall set forth the street address of said premises, the name and address of the person doing the work, and such other information as required by the health director. The application shall be accompanied by a signed, written statement of the person doing the work, acknowledging that the construction, material used, and workmanship will comply with all rules and regulations made by the State Department of Public Health and this Code of Ordinances, and that he/she assumes full responsibility for any variances in the matter of construction, material used and workmanship. 
(Ord. of 11-8-48, § 3; Code of 1985, § 24-3; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-5. - Approval of sewer plans before commencing building construction. 
No person shall commence the construction of any building which is not to be connected to a sanitary sewer maintained by the city, unless and until the health director approves the plans for the building's sewage disposal system, and a permit is issued for the installation of a septic tank, cesspool or subsurface sewage disposal system in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 11-8-48, § 5; Code of 1985, § 24-4; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-6. - Penalty for violating chapter. 
Any person violating any of the terms or conditions of this chapter, and/or any state law or regulation relating to it, shall be punished up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day of any such violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-8-48, § 8; Code of 1985, § 24-6; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-7. - Requirements for processing contents of privies, septic tanks, cesspools at city treatment plant. 
The contents of any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or subsurface sewage disposal system shall not be delivered to, or processed at, any of the city's municipal treatment plants unless the following requirements and conditions are met: 
(a)  Nature of wastes. Such contents shall consist only of human, organic, domestic and commercial wastes, specifically excluding those industrial wastes prohibited by the sections of this Code that regulate the use and discharge of substances into the public sewerage system, and the city's treatment plants. 
(b)  Transportation of wastes. Such contents are transported in a sanitary, watertight vehicle with a suitable valve outlet as required by state laws and regulations. 
(c)  Permits and fees. The person delivering such materials has obtained an annual permit from the director of the department of public works, or his/her authorized agent, health director, State Commissioner of Health Services and the Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority's general manager, and payment of an annual permit fee has been made as required by this Code. 
(d)  Absence of detrimental substances. The treatment plant operator has certified that the delivered waste to be disposed of contains no substances detrimental to the plant's treatment processes. The plant operator may refuse the admission of any contents considered harmful. 
(Ord. of 10-7-57, §§ 1, 2; Code of 1985, § 24-7; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(8), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-8. - Same—Penalty. 
Any person who violates the previous section shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day that any violation continues, or that any proscribed waste or substance harmful to the city's treatment plant(s) is discharged, shall be deemed a separate offense for the purpose of applying the penalty authorized in this section. 
(Ord. of 10-7-57, § 5; Code of 1985, § 24-8; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-9. - Same—Liability for violations. 
Any person who violates the above-section concerning requirements for processing contents of privies, septic tanks, cesspools at city treatment plants shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused to the city's sewerage system or treatment plant resulting from such violation. 
(Ord. of 10-7-57, § 3; Code of 1985, § 24-9; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-10. - Offensive private cesspools prohibited; abatement by board of health. 
(a)  No person owning any privy, cesspool or subsurface sewage disposal system shall keep and maintain it with an offensive scent to those within range of such scent, except when the system is temporarily being cleaned. Whenever the health director believes that any privy vault or cesspool situated upon a lot on a street in which there is a sewer becomes dangerous to the public health, he/she may order such owner to have it abolished and its contents removed, and to fill the excavation with clean materials. If the owner fails to obey such order within seven (7) days after receiving a written notice from the health director or his/her designee to do so, said city official may cause such order to be executed at the city's expense. The expense shall be charged against such owner, and the city may recover it against him/her through legal action. 
(b)  Under such circumstances as described in subsection (a) above, the house in question shall be connected to the public sewer line located within the street. 
(Code of 1928, § 705; Code of 1985, § 24-10; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-11. - Drains, sinks not to pollute water to be offensive. 
Every drain or sink in the city shall be so constructed and maintained that the same shall not injure the water of any well, or become offensive by its odor to the public. 
(Code of 1928, § 705; Code of 1985, § 24-11; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Secs. 24-12—24-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Whenever in this article a provision is noted as derived from "Health Reg. of" a certain date, it is derived from a regulation of the board of health promulgated on such date. 
Cross reference— Plumbing Code, Par. 313.1 provide that sewage disposal systems that do not connect with public sewers shall consist of septic tanks with their auxiliary units. Plumbing Code, Par. 314.1 provides that septic tanks will only be permitted if it has been demonstrated to the plumbing inspector that their use is absolutely necessary. 
See note at beginning of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 24-41. - Requirements for disposal of human excreta. 
All human excrement must be disposed of in properly managed sewers, septic tank systems, cesspools, privy vaults, subsurface sewage disposal systems, or by other means approved by the health director in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Avoidance of water pollution. No human excrement, or material containing human excrement, shall be disposed of in such a manner that it is likely to gain access to any waters except under conditions approved by the State Department of Health and the health director. No toilet shall be erected or maintained over any stream or on the banks thereof. 
(2)  Private disposal systems if public sewers available. No privy vault, sewage seepage system or sewage overflow shall hereafter be constructed or permitted to remain on any premises from which a public sewer is accessible without the permission of the health director. 
(3)  Sanitary construction, maintenance. Every privy vault, toilet or other sewage disposal system shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times, and must be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the escape of odors, and to exclude animals, poultry and insects. 
(4)  Disposal of material from system. Material removed from any privy vault, toilet or other sewage disposal system shall be disposed of by burial, or by other sanitary methods approved by the health director. 
(5)  Discharge of waste onto public or private property. No kitchen wastes, laundry water, sink water or toilet wastes shall be allowed to discharge, or flow into any gutter, street, roadway or public place. No such material shall discharge on to any private property so as to create a nuisance or detrimental health condition. 
(Health Reg. of 12-8-52; Code of 1985, § 24-15; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-42. - Permitting privy vault, cesspool to fill; using abandoned well as cesspool or privy vault. 
(a)  No person shall permit any privy vault, cesspool or subsurface sewage disposal system to be filled within two (2) feet of the general surface of the surrounding ground. 
(b)  No person shall use an abandoned well for a cesspool, privy vault or subsurface sewage disposal system. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 703, 706; Code of 1985, § 24-16; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-43. - Cesspools, catch basins in streets prohibited. 
No person shall construct or place a private catch basin, cesspool or subsurface sewage disposal system within the city's street limits. 
(Code of 1928, § 691; Code of 1985, § 24-17; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-44. - Installation of subsurface sewage disposal system. 
The State's Public Health Code shall control the installation of subsurface sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-45. - Drainage from disposal system to gutter or surface of ground prohibited. 
No drainage from a sewage disposal system shall be discharged into a street, gutter or onto the ground surface. 
(Health Reg. of 12-8-52; Code of 1985, § 24-33; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-46. - Privy construction. 
Privies shall be constructed with adequate storage space for excreta, with self-closing seat covers, fly-tight vault, and screened vent from the vault to the atmosphere. Privies shall be constructed so as to permit ready cleaning. 
(Health Reg. of 12-8-52; Code of 1985, § 24-35; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 24-47. - Regulations not to permit sewage overflow or nuisance. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the creation or maintenance of any sewage overflow or nuisance. 
(Health Reg. of 12-8-52; Code of 1985, § 24-36; Ord. No. 1408, 3-6-06)  
Chapter 25 - SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Revised Ord. No. 772, adopted Oct. 4, 1982, amended the Code by deleting Ch. 25 in its entirety and substituting therefor a new Ch. 25, relative to the same subject matter, to read as herein set forth. Prior to deletion, former Ch. 25, §§ 25-1—25-47 and 25-51—25-60, had been derived from Ordinances adopted Mar. 7, 1955, § 14; May 22, 1979, §§ 1—10; and June 4, 1979. 
Ch. 25 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Subsurface sewage disposal systems, Ch. 24; excavations in streets, sidewalks, §§ 27-35—27-42. 
Charter reference— Creation, duties of bureau of sewers, § 85(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Creation, purpose and definitions. 
(a)  The construction, extension, maintenance and operation of sanitary sewer system, sewers, sewage works, public sewer system, city sanitary sewer system, sewage system and all facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial waste water shall be under the control of, and subject to, the regulation of the water pollution control authority of the City of New Haven hereinafter referred to as the WPCA, under the authority of Chapter 103, Section 7-246 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, revision 1958, revised 1979, as amended and in accordance with the power granted the said WPCA by the Charter of the City of New Haven. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees centigrade, reported in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as described in the most current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, as such may be amended from time to time. 
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer or sewer connection. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer, storm sewer or other place of disposal. 
Ccf. The volume measure of one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
Chlorine demand. The amount of chlorine which must be added to water or waste water to produce a residual chlorine content in such water or waste water. 
City. City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
City engineer. The city engineer of the City or his or her authorized deputy, agent, representative, or such other person as may be designated by the Mayor of the City. 
City's sanitary sewer system. All sanitary sewer systems and extensions or enlargements thereof, owned by the city or in which the city has an equity of ownership and there is specifically included all the systems constructed by persons as that term is defined herein, and which have heretofore or may hereafter be acquired by the WPCA. Included in such definition but not limited to, are the following: 
Sanitary sewer systems, sewers, sewage works, public sewer, public sewer system, sewage system, sewerage system and all facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial waste water. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidation of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or waste water, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as described in the most current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, as such may be amended from time to time. 
Combined sewers. Any public sewer receiving both sewage and storm and surface waters and drainage. 
Company. The New Haven Water Company, Inc., its successors and assigns. 
Customers. Any and all contributors of waste water to the sewer system, including the City of New Haven, the Town of Hamden, the Town of Woodbridge, the Town of East Haven and the Town of North Branford. 
Domestic waste water. Residential-type waste water which requires no pretreatment under the provisions of this chapter before discharging into the city's sanitary sewer system, excluding all manufacturing and industrial waste water. 
Dry industry. An industry discharging only domestic waste water into the city's sanitary sewer system and having no process or manufacturing operation that discharges liquid industrial waste water of any characteristic into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
Establishment plant. Any establishment or plant producing liquid waste, with or without bearing suspended solids, required to be discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
General manager. The WPCA's engineer and chief of operations and maintenance, according to the duties and powers assigned to him by the WPCA. 
Gross revenues. All revenues of the sewer fund regardless of source, except for federal and state grants. 
Industrial waste water. Any liquid, free-flowing waste water, including contaminated cooling water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development, recovery, or processing of natural resources with or without suspended solids, as distinct from domestic waste water. 
Industrial waste producer. Any plant, establishment or industry which discharges industrial waste water resulting from a process or manufacturing operation, whether or not such waste water is segregated from or combined with domestic waste water from the plant, establishment, or industry. 
Institutional user. That class of users not meeting the definition of residential, commercial, or industrial users, and meeting the criteria for nonprofit, tax-exempt status. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million (ppm), and is a weight-to-volume ratio; when the milligrams-per-liter value is multiplied by the factor .750, an equivalent to units per hundred cubic feet (ccf) of water is obtained. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Permittee, permit holder. Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which owns, operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant being operated under a valid industrial waste permit to discharge waste water into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
Person. Persons, individuals, firms, partnerships, companies and government entities, whether one or more, or a combination of one or more thereof. 
pH value. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per liter of solution, i.e.: 
pH =     1    
 log (H + ) 
pH will be determined according to the most current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. 
Producer. Any person, firm, association, corporation or trust which owns, operates, possesses or controls an establishment or plant, whether or not a permittee. 
Residential, commercial users. 
(1)  Residential user: 
a.  Single-family residence. A residential establishment serving a single family or household. In those instances where there is no meter on the water supply to the principal household, separate living quarters will be considered as a separate residence and a separate user charge will be applied. 
b.  Duplex residence. A single building equipped for occupancy by two (2) families. 
c.  Multiple dwelling units. One or more buildings each equipped for occupancy by three (3) or more families. 
(2)  Commercial user: Any business or establishment which does not meet the definition of industrial producer (see subsection (s) hereof) or the definition of residential user herein. 
Sanitary sewer system, sewers, sewage works, sewer, public sewer system, city sanitary system, city sanitary sewer system. All facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial waste water. For the purpose of this chapter, however, watercourses and storm sewers shall not be included in this definition. 
Sewage. A combination of the water-borne wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. Any substance, liquid or solid, which may contaminate or pollute or affect the cleanliness or purity of any water. 
Sewer fund. The sewer fund of the city. 
Sewer staff. That group of employees engaged by the WPCA to administer, operate and maintain the city's sanitary sewer system under the supervision of the general manager. 
Slug. Any discharge of water or waste water which in concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the waste water treatment works. 
Standard methods. The most current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, as it may be amended, a copy of which is on file in the office of the general manager, WPCA. 
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters, drainage, groundwater or unpolluted water from any source, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Total suspended solids (TSS). Solids measured in milligrams per liter (mg/l) that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, waste water, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device, as defined in the most current edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, as amended, and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
User charge. Charges established under this chapter for discharging waste water into the sanitary sewer system. 
Waste water. See "Sewage". 
Watercourse. A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently. 
WPCA. The Water Pollution Control Authority of the City of New Haven as designated by ordinance by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-2. - Construction—Location; duty to leave easement strip when excavating strips. 
Public sewers shall have precedence over all other underground utilities located within a public right-of-way. All persons are prohibited from laying or relaying any gas, water, telephone, electric or cable facility within a public right-of-way without first obtaining prior written approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-3. - Same—Preparation of plans, maps, by city engineer. 
Before any public sewer and/or storm sewer shall be contracted for or built, the city engineer shall cause to be prepared the necessary plans for the work and profile showing grades of the street and sewer and/or storm sewer, the depth of such sewer and/or storm sewer below the surface of the street, and the height above mean sea level, as established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey and used as the city datum. And when such sewer and/or storm sewer is completed, the city engineer shall cause a map to be prepared, showing the location and size of the sewer and/or storm sewer and the location of the manholes, basins, culverts, branches for house connections, and other appurtenances. The city engineer shall also cause a map to be prepared showing the situation, dimensions, and ownership of all lands adjoining the street in which said sewer or storm sewer is laid, as provided in the portion of this Code dealing with assessments. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-4. - Precautions required in making excavations for sewer connections. 
No person shall open any street or other public way for the purpose of laying a sewer and/or storm sewer connection or drain, without first removing with the least possible injury and loss all materials for paving or hardening the roadway and placing the same, together with the excavating materials from the trenches, where they will cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. Whenever the sides of the trenches do not stand perpendicular, sheeting and braces shall be constructed by the person making the excavation to prevent any unnecessary caving. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-5. - Clogging catch basins, gully-shoots. 
No person shall throw into any catch basin or gully-shoot any dead animal or animals or vegetable substance, dirty water, wash, brine or other substance likely to remain therein or to clog up such catch basin or gully-shoot or to create substances near a catch basin or gully-shoot which can fall or be carried into same. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-6. - Connections to be by licensed person, conform to directions of city engineer. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner or owners of the premises to which any drain connected with any public sewer and/or storm sewer shall be attached, to employ a person, duly licensed by the city engineer in making and, laying such connection with such public sewer and/or storm sewer and to conform to the directions of the city engineer in regard to the manner in which such connection shall be made, and said drain made and laid, and to keep said drain at all times in good repair. 
(b)  The general manager shall have power, and it shall be his and/or her duty, to discontinue, stop up and prevent from discharging into any public sewer, any private sewer, or drain aforesaid which is not laid or kept in repair to his or her satisfaction. The city engineer shall have the power and it shall be his and/or her duty to discontinue, stop up and prevent from discharging into any storm sewer or drain which is not laid or kept in repair to his or her satisfaction. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-7. - Pipe diameter for connections. 
No person shall make any connection of any diameter with the public sewer system and/or storm sewer except by the consent of the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-8. - Grade, line of connections; trap ventilation required. 
No person shall construct or lay any private sewer or drain, except it be to a uniform grade and line, and with a fall toward the public sewer and/or storm sewer at such minimum rate as may be approved by the city engineer. A suitable trap shall be located in every private sewer or drain which connects with a public sewer or storm sewer at some convenient point between the public sewer or storm sewer and the house or building, and that portion of the private sewer or drain thus connected shall be properly ventilated. In all cases, the work shall be as directed or approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-9. - Multiple connections through one drain. 
No person shall connect more than one house or building, or single house in a block, with a public sewer or storm sewer through any one drain, except by a special permit from the city engineer. Whenever such permission is granted, the work shall be done as directed or approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-9.1. - Storm leader separation. 
(a)  In each area of the city in which a project of separation of combined storm water and sanitary sewer lines has been or is to be undertaken, the city engineer shall in writing notify the owner or owners of each building affected by such project that the owner or owners shall separate the building's storm water from the building's sanitary wastewater. Such separation shall be completed within eighteen (18) months of the date of notice. 
(b)  Where roof drains are connected to sanitary sewer pipes within the interior or exterior walls of a building, and the roof area of the building is greater than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet, such separation must be done only at such time as improvements are made to the building subsequent to the date of this section, the value of which improvements exceeds fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the building as of the date of the city engineer's notice to separate. For the purposes of this paragraph, "improvements" shall be defined as follows: "Construction, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension or repair of a permanent structure on real property." Such improvements shall be verified by paid receipts, and building permits and inspections for work performed or other verification satisfactory to the city engineer. 
(c)  Failure to complete the separation within the time required shall be a violation of this section and shall result in a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day that the violation shall continue. 
(d)  The city engineer shall from time to time establish written regulations and guidelines for administration of this section. 
(e)  The board of alderman may from time to time establish by order such financial assistance programs to aid property owners affected by this section as are in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-3-89; Ord. of 2-19-91)  
Sec. 25-10. - Damage to or interference with sewer system, storm sewer or sewage works. 
No person shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the storm sewer system, sewerage system or the sewage works of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-11. - Rates established. 
(a)  Charges for sanitary sewer services furnished by the WPCA for residential, commercial, industrial and institutional users shall be as established and revised from time to time by the WPCA. 
(b)  Such charges shall reflect a proportional distribution of costs among all users pursuant to Chapter 7-255 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and Section 204(b) of 33 USC, Section 1284(b). 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-12. - Rates for property located outside city. 
The charges to be made by the WPCA for sewer service to property located outside the limits of the city shall be established on the basis of a formal contract with the WPCA, the charges shown in said contract to be not less than actual costs to the WPCA, and said contract to be approved by the WPCA. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-13. - No reduced rates or free service permitted. 
All persons owning, renting, leasing or having management or control of property or premises that produce waste that is discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city, including domestic waste, and subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall be charged the rates established by the WPCA, and no reduced rates or free sanitary sewer service shall be furnished to any such person, property or premises. In all cases, the owner of property shall have final responsibility for the payment of sewer charges. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-14. - Determination of charges; generally. 
In those instances where water meters are provided on the sources of water providing water to the facilities discharging into the sanitary sewer system of the city, potable water usage will be determined from the water meter readings for the purpose of determining the sewer service charge, except as may be modified or amended by the WPCA from time to time. As to such water sources that are not metered, estimates of water usage will be made. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-15. - Allowance for metered water not discharged into city's sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  Any person owning or having control of property discharging waste into the sanitary sewers of the city and on whose property there is located one or more facilities requiring water, from the source of supply that also furnishes water to the sanitary sewer system, and such water provided to the city, may at his or her own expense install a water meter of a type and design, and at a location, approved by the general manager, and the WPCA will accept readings from such meter taken and provided to the WPCA by such person or his or her duly authorized agent, such readings to be furnished on forms provided by the general manager and sworn to as correct by the person taking the reading. Meters installed for this purpose shall be sealed by the WPCA, and the owners shall ensure that said seal is not broken. 
(b)  The amount of water measured by the reading of such meter will be used to adjust the water usage upon which the user charge established by this chapter will be computed. In the event such property is not supplied water by the company, such meter reading will be deducted from the total water usage furnished to the property as estimated by the general manager as provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  No facility for which a meter is installed under the provisions of this section shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city without the owner thereof having first notified in writing the general manager of such proposed connection. 
(d)  The sewer staff shall have the right, at any time during regular business hours, to check the meter reading on such meter installed to measure the amount of water provided to the facility not discharging waste into the city's sanitary sewers, and to remove and test such meter at any time. 
(e)  Any person making a false affidavit as to the amount of water usage registered by a meter installed under the provisions of this section, or any person representing to the WPCA that the facility for which a meter is installed under the provisions hereof does not discharge waste into the sanitary sewer when, in fact, it does, or any person having facilities for which such a meter is installed who subsequently connects such facility to the city's sanitary sewer system without notifying the general manager shall be guilty of an offense. Each and every day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable as in accordance with section 25-43. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-16. - Engineering study to determine charge for industrial, commercial and institutional users where portion of water not discharged into sewer. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply only to those industrial, commercial and institutional water users who have facilities connected to the sanitary sewers of the city and who make application to the general manager under the provisions hereof. 
(b)  Any industrial, institutional and commercial water user owning or having control of property discharging waste into the sanitary sewers of the city, and on whose property there is located one or more facilities requiring water, from the source of supply that also furnishes water to the sanitary sewer system, and all or part of such water provided to any such facility is not discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city, may make application to the general manager, on forms furnished by the WPCA, requesting that an engineering study of the applicant's property and facilities be made for the hereinafter stated purpose and paying the fee established by the WPCA. 
(c)  Applications made under the provisions of this section shall be upon forms promulgated and furnished by the general manager, and the applicant shall furnish all the information and other matters requested therein. The fee for making the first application under the provisions hereof shall be as established and revised from time to time by the WPCA. No fee shall be required for studies initiated by the general manager subsequent to the first application. The fee is to reimburse the WPCA for the expense of making the engineering study and report. Each applicant shall agree, as a condition precedent to the general manager conducting the study and tests provided for herein, including those initiated by the general manager, to indemnify and hold harmless the WPCA of and from any and all such liability for any acts or omissions by the WPCA, its agents and employees committed while conducting the engineering studies and tests provided for herein, causing or resulting in damages to the property or person of the applicant, his or her agents, employees and invitees. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application and the fee required herein, the general manager will, as soon as possible, make an engineering study of the applicant's property and facilities. In those instances where, in the opinion of the general manager based upon an engineering study of the property and facilities of the applicant, it is impractical or infeasible for the applicant to install one or more meters to measure the amount of water passing through the water meter serving such property and not being discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city, the general manager is authorized to make an engineering study to determine the percentage of the amount of water passing through such meter that is being discharged into the sanitary sewer of the city. A report of such determination, showing the basis thereof, shall be certified to by the general manager, and one copy shall be filed with the WPCA and one copy shall be retained by the general manager. Such report when so filed, shall constitute the basis upon which the sewer service charge established by this chapter shall be computed. 
(e)  The general manager is authorized, at his discretion or on written request from an applicant, to make such additional engineering studies from time to time of any such property and facilities to check the current accuracy of the filed report on any such property, and if it is then determined that the filed report's annual estimated sewage volume is now estimated to differ by more than five (5) percent, a new report based upon the latest studies shall be filed with the WPCA to replace the prior one. A complete copy of each such report shall be retained by the general manager. No change in the basis of computing the sewer service charge for any property will be made until the first billing date after the filing by the general manager with the WPCA of the first or any subsequent report. Requests by an applicant for a restudy under the provisions hereof will not be accepted or acted on more than once in every twelve-month period (annually) subsequent to the filing of the first report on the applicant's property, except when a substantial or material change in a condition or operation of the applicant's property or facilities renders the then-current filed report and the charges based thereon no longer applicable to the applicant's facilities. 
(f)  In the event the general manager determines it is necessary that certain testing instruments be installed, or the existing equipment or facilities located on the applicant's property be altered, adjusted, disconnected or temporarily moved in order to facilitate the making of an engineering study or test under the provisions of this section, all of the foregoing shall be done by and at the expense of the applicant. 
(g)  When the general manager has, as a result of an engineering study made under the provisions of this section, determined the percentage of metered water passing through the water meters serving a property that is being discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city, or when the amount of metered water passing through the water meter serving such property and which is not being discharged into the city's sanitary sewers is determined from a water meter installed to measure the amount of such water, billings by the WPCA for sanitary sewer service to such property made prior to such determination shall be reviewed for the purpose of making whatever adjustment is necessary in order to charge such customer only for the amount of metered water that is or has been discharged into the city's sanitary sewers. No adjustment shall be made in excess of that determined to be proper from such engineering study or from the metering of water that is not discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city. Once the proper percentage of adjustment has been determined and certified to the WPCA under the provisions of this section, all subsequent adjustment of water usage for sanitary sewer service charge purposes shall be computed only on the certified basis of adjustment currently on file with the WPCA. 
(h)  The general manager, may, in the exercise of his discretion, deny an application to conduct a study authorized by this section, for any reason, including a finding by other methods adopted by the general manager to reflect differences in the amounts of metered potable water and estimated waste water discharges for the purpose of assessing user charges. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-17. - Billing where company does not supply water for all multiple living unit connections. 
Where the company does not supply the source of water for all multiple living unit connections, the owner of the premises will be billed directly for the sewer service charge, where individual water meters are not provided for each living unit. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-18. - Deductions for vacancies in apartments; removal of apartments from services. 
No deductions will be made for vacancies in the application of the minimum sewer service charge to apartments or duplex residences in any classification. An apartment unit or duplex unit removed from such services by remodeling or abandonment will be relieved of payment of a sewer service charge, but correction of the WPCA's record must be requested by the owner in writing or by signing the proper forms provided by the WPCA. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-19. - Billing. 
(a)  Billing for sewer service charges shall be made to the sewer customers of the WPCA generally concurrently with the monthly or quarterly water bills issued by the company to such customers. Those persons without water meters or with a source of water supply other than the company will be billed periodically. 
(b)  All sewer user charges shall be due and payable in full on or before ten (10) days after the date of the mailing of the bill to the person. Any sewer use charge not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the due date shall be delinquent and shall bear interest from the due date at the rate and in the manner provided by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut for delinquent property taxes. There shall be indicated on each bill the late (last) date on which the same may be paid without becoming subject to the interest charge, together with a statement to the effect that if the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days from the due date, it will become subject to interest from the due date at the applicable rate. The WPCA shall exercise due diligence to collect the full amount due. The WPCA may consider accounts, in its discretion, uncollectible or may in its discretion compromise the amount due. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-20. - Collection procedures. 
(a)  In addition to other collection procedures provided herein, the general manager may retain independent legal counsel, and/or an independent collecting agent, as selected by the WPCA, for the collection by all lawful means of any delinquent unpaid sewer use charges as defined and revised from time to time by the WPCA. A list of said unpaid accounts turned over for collection shall be provided semi-annually to the chairman of the WPCA. 
(b)  Any unpaid sewer user charges shall constitute a lien upon the real estate against which such charge was levied from the date it became delinquent. Each such lien may be continued, recorded and released in the manner provided by the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut for continuing, recording and releasing property tax liens and encumbrances except taxes, and may be foreclosed in the same manner as a lien for property taxes. The WPCA shall designate a person as the collector of the sewer use charges, and such collector may collect such charges in accordance with the provisions of the General Statutes, aforesaid, for the collection of property taxes. The general manager will prepare a list of accounts deemed uncollectible in whole or in part, with recommendations as: 
(1)  Write-off as uncollectible; 
(2)  Compromise amount of payment. 
Said list shall be submitted to the WPCA for review and approval. 
(c)  Delinquent unpaid sewer user charges collected by independent counsel and/or collecting agency shall be increased to include all fees and charges of the collection agent applicable to the unpaid sewer use charges. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-21. - Adjustment of bill. 
(a)  In the event any adjustment in a water bill affects the basis on which the city sewer charge is levied for the same period, an appropriate adjustment in the sewer charge shall be made by a credit or additional charge on the next bill. In all cases, the general manager shall certify to the WPCA the validity of each adjustment. 
(b)  The general manager may permit adjustments to a user's sewer bill for various reasons under provisions of rules, regulations and guidelines that may be adopted from time to time by the WPCA. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-22. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay. 
The WPCA shall have the right to discontinue sanitary sewer service to any person discharging into the sanitary sewers of the city who fails or refuses to make timely payment of the sewer charges for which he is billed; provided, however, in the event of a dispute as to the amount of charges made, service shall not be terminated if the person charged deposits with the WPCA the amount of such charges on the condition that, upon the review of the dispute and decisions thereof by a body designated by WPCA, which decision shall be final, any amount such body finds the customer is entitled to have refunded shall be returned to him or her, and the balance thereof shall be applied to satisfy the disputed charges. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-23. - Continued use of sewer after refusal to pay. 
Any person failing or refusing to pay the charges provided for in this chapter, or to deposit the proper sum in the event of a dispute as to the amount of such charges in the time and manner provided, and who continues to discharge waste water from his property into the sanitary sewer systems of the city, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished in the manner provided for in section 25-43. Each and every day that such violation continues shall constitute separate offense and shall be punishable as such. The conviction of a person for such an offense shall not be a bar to the institution by the WPCA of a suit for the collection of the delinquent charges and for an injunction to enjoin such person from discharging waste into the sanitary sewer system of the city without complying with the provisions of this article and paying the charges established hereby. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-24. - Implementation of chapter. 
(a)  All provisions of this chapter shall become effective upon their passage in accordance with Section 8(b) and Section 38 of the City Charter. 
(b)  The general manager may establish estimated volumes and characteristics of sewage flow based on best available data prior to the completion of engineering studies to serve as the temporary basis for determining sewer use charges until such engineering studies are completed. Charges so determined shall be adjusted for the entire period of application, up or down, at the time of the first billing after completion of the required engineering study. In any event, all users shall be liable for full payment of all sewer user charges for sewer service rendered after July 1, 1979. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-25. - Violations; furnishing WPCA false information; severability. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly furnishing the WPCA with false or fraudulent information, or failing to comply with the provisions hereof, shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in Section 25-43. Each and every day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. This penalty shall be in addition to any other remedy, penalty or sanction provided for herein. 
(b)  If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or the application of same to any person or set of circumstances is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, void or invalid (or for any reason unenforceable), the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or their application to other persons or sets of circumstances shall not be affected thereby, it being the intention of the board of aldermen of the city in adopting and of the mayor in approving this chapter that no portion hereof or provisions or regulation contained herein shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any unconstitutionality or invalidity of any other portion, provision or regulation, and to this end all provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-26. - Permits. 
(a)  All industrial waste producers of waste water of any quantity, strength or quality, and all industrial waste producers who hereafter desire to connect and discharge to the city sanitary sewer system, shall make application to the general manager on forms supplied by the WPCA for a permit authorizing such connection. 
(b)  Any producer of industrial waste water discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste water into a city sanitary sewer in any quantity must comply with the following, if required by the general manager: 
(1)  File a discharge report which must include, but not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, production quantities or any other information that is deemed relevant by the general manager to the generation of waste, including substances and concentrations in the waste water discharge; 
(2)  Submit a plan showing location and size of on-site sewers, sampling point, pretreatment facilities, city sewers and any other information required by the general manager; 
(3)  Describe activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste water including all materials, processes and types of materials which are or proposed to be discharged; it being understood that the general manager will not disclose this information to others until prior notification is provided to the producer; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production; 
(5)  The chemical components and quantity of liquid or gaseous material bulk stored on-site, even though they may not normally be discharged into the city's sewer system. 
(c)  The permit provisions do not apply to restaurants, automobile dealers and/or gasoline service stations without automotive repair shop or car wash facilities, and food dispensing services, or building drains of industrial waste producers where the discharge is solely domestic or sanitary waste water; provided, however, that these exempted operations may be required to install a sampling well as required in section 25-35 of this chapter and, further, that any producer exceeding the limits established in section 25-32 and/or two hundred and fifty (250) mg/l of TSS and/or BOD will not be excluded from meeting all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-27. - Permit issuance and renewal. 
(a)  Applicant shall pay fees as established and revised from time to time by the WPCA for the issuance of an initial one-year permit and an annual renewal fee thereafter. 
(b)  An annual report shall be submitted by each permittee certifying that there have been no changes in operational procedures, or if there have been such changes, furnishing information thereon in such detail as may be required by the WPCA. Failure to submit such report shall constitute cause for the suspension or revocation of the industrial waste discharge permit. In the event a permit is cancelled for any cause under the provisions hereof, a fee shall be charged for a subsequent initial permit issued to such applicant on completion by the applicant of forms provided by the WPCA and approval of such forms by the general manager. All fees to be established and revised by the WPCA. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-28. - Permit conditions. 
(a)  Industrial waste water discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances or regulations. Permits may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the waste water to be discharged to the city's sanitary sewer; 
(2)  Allowable average and maximum strengths, characteristics or constituents or the user's waste water discharge; 
(3)  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(4)  Regulations for installation of inspection and sampling facilities which include requirements for the sewer staff's access to such facilities; 
(5)  Pretreatment requirements; 
(6)  Regulations for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards of tests, and reporting schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for the submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Requirements for the maintenance of plant records relating to waste water discharge and affording the sewer staff access thereto; 
(9)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the general manager to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Any significant change in waste water strength or volume discharged shall be reported to the general manager for determination of need to change the permit conditions no later than thirty (30) days prior to effecting the significant change. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-29. - Permit suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The general manager is authorized to suspend or revoke any permit issued and to terminate service at any time that the permittee violates any of the provisions of this article or any other city ordinance pertaining to sewage disposal into the city sewers, fails or refuses to pay, when due, charges made by the WPCA for such sewer services, or discharges waste water in a quantity or a quality violating the provisions of the permit or otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other related city ordinances. 
(b)  If a permittee violates any condition of its permit, the permittee shall notify the general manager by telephone immediately and submit written notice to the general manager within three (3) days of such violation outlining the steps which will be taken to effectuate correction of such violation. The violation shall be corrected within five (5) days after the occurrence of such violation, unless a different time schedule for correction is approved by the general manager. 
(c)  If the sewer staff discovers a violation of a permit condition, the general manager will give written notice of such violation to the permittee, and the permittee shall, within five (5) days after receipt of such notice, furnish the general manager a description, in writing, of the action which will be taken to effectuate correction of such violation. The violation shall be corrected within five (5) days after the occurrence of such violation unless a different time schedule for correction is approved by the general manager. 
(d)  No provision contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent any contract authorized by the WPCA in the usual manner between the WPCA and any industrial waste discharger whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or characteristic may be accepted by the WPCA for treatment when the industrial waste will not be discharged directly into the city's sanitary sewer system but will be delivered directly to the waste water treatment plant, and which will not violate or cause a violation of federal or state discharge standards and which will not be harmful to the waste water treatment plant or the treatment process. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-30. - Quantity determination. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, the quantity of waste water delivered to the city sewers will be construed as being the same as the water delivered to the producer by the company water system. If it is ascertained that the water meter has inaccurately measured the amount of water delivered to the permittee, then and in that event the sanitary sewer charge established herein shall be adjusted in the same manner as adjustments are made to the water bill. 
(b)  Should the producer evaporate or otherwise dispose of water delivered by the company water system other than to the city sewer system, the industrial waste producer may avail himself of the provisions of section 25-15 and section 25-16. 
(c)  Under the provisions of section 25-15, it shall be the obligation of the permittee to conduct a test on the flow measuring equipment as follows: meters measuring four and five-tenths (4.5) ccf or greater per day shall be tested at least once every twelve (12) months; meters measuring four and forty-nine-one-hundredths (4.49) ccf or less per day shall be tested at least once every four (4) years. The test shall be used to determine the meter accuracy and the results thereof shall be furnished in writing to the general manager. It shall also be the permittee's responsibility to notify the general manager within a reasonable time in advance so that the general manager may, if he chooses, have a witness present during such test. If, upon any such test, the percentage of accuracy is found to be within the accuracy tolerance established by the manufacturer's specifications, such measuring equipment shall be determined to have correctly measured the quantity delivered to the sewer system. If, however, upon any such test, the percentage of accuracy is found to be in excess of the accuracy tolerance specified by the manufacturer's specifications, then such measuring equipment shall be immediately adjusted to register correctly the quantity delivered to the sewer system. The billings to such permittee shall be adjusted for a period extending back to the time when the inaccuracy began, if such time is ascertainable, or for a period extending back one-half of the time elapsed since the date of the last test or the date of the last adjustment, if the time is not ascertainable. 
(d)  Any producer for which the water supply is from private wells shall install, operate and maintain at its expense such meters or other devices as are necessary to determine quantity discharge to the sewer system. Such meters shall be approved by the general manager. 
(e)  In the event none of the above provisions are applicable, all producers for which the water supply is from other than the company, shall furnish to the WPCA either a certified meter reading of water delivered to its plant or company or a copy of the billing from the water supplier. In this event, the permittee's charges will be calculated and the same conditions will apply as if the company were the supplier of water to the permittee. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-31. - Quality determination. 
(a)  Determination of the average concentration or strength of the waste delivered shall be the obligation of the WPCA, and tests made on representative average samples shall be made at such intervals as the WPCA may designate, not less than annually. The cost of all such analyses required by the general manager shall be borne by the permittee. 
(b)  Samples may be taken and tests made at the WPCA's option without notice to the permittee, and such tests' results made by the WPCA shall fix the applicable user charge established herein; provided, however, a permittee may request in writing that its user charge be established pursuant to a composite sample secured and analyzed by an independent laboratory approved by the WPCA. Such request must be approved in writing by the general manager. If approved by the general manager, all costs of such composite sampling and subsequent analysis shall be borne by the permittee and shall be conducted at intervals determined by the general manager. The WPCA approval of sampling and analysis permitted by an independent laboratory shall not prevent representatives of the sewer staff from taking additional samples at its option without notice to the permittee. 
(c)  Written notice from the general manager approving sampling and analysis by an independent laboratory to establish user charges hereunder may be cancelled by the general manager by giving written notice of such cancellation to the permittee. 
(d)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods. If, after receiving the permit application, the general manager determines that the operations or characteristics of the producer's industrial waste water discharge requires composite sampling; the general manager may require same, which shall be provided by the producer on the basis of an average work day. Otherwise, the analysis will be made on the basis of grab samples. Guidelines for the examination and analysis of the characteristics will be as recommended in "Standard Methods." The WPCA may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD and suspended solids at the permittee's expense. 
(e)  The general manager may make periodic tests to determine the quality of waste being discharged into the city sewer from the premises of permit holders under the provisions hereof. If at any time the industrial process changes or the quality of the industrial waste water changes such that the addition, modifications or alteration of pretreatment is required to meet city standards, the general manager will then have the authority to require that approved pretreatment facilities be installed by the permit holder. Should any permit holder fail or refuse to install such facilities or initiate their installation to the satisfaction and approval of the general manager within the dates and time specified in the permit, the general manager shall have the authority to suspend or revoke such permit and to terminate sewer service to such premises until such time as the permit holder has completed with the requirements hereof, and take other action as may be permitted under section 25-42 and section 25-43. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-32. - Standard of quality of discharge. 
(a)  Unless otherwise required or approved, the delivery of all industrial waste water from the producer to the city sanitary sewer shall be at a reasonably uniform rate, as provided, without storage by the producer, except that storage which is necessary in the pretreatment plan of the producer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged any subsurface drainage, storm or groundwater, downspout or roof runoff, yard sprinklers, drains, fountains or ponds into any sanitary sewer, excluding combined sewers. Water from swimming pools, boiler drains, blow-off pipes or cooling water from various types of equipment may be discharged into the sanitary sewer by an indirect connection whereby such discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the sanitary sewer at a rate not to exceed the design capacity of the sanitary sewer, provided that the waste water does not contain materials or substances in suspension or solutions in violation of the limits prescribed by this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged into any city sewer any of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any waste water which contains wax, grease, oil, plastic or other substances in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit or zero (0) and sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade. 
(3)  Flammable or explosive liquid, solids or gas, such as gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, etc. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sanitary sewers or interference with the proper operation of the treatment works such as, but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, fiberglass or bulk solids. 
(5)  Wastes from garbage grinders, except those wastes generated in the preparation of foods that are generally consumed on the premises, and not unless it has been properly comminuted or shredded to reduce all food scraps and like particles to three-sixteenths inch or less in greatest dimensions. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastics, paper products, garden refuse, hospital or veterinarian refuse, or similar refuse for disposal into a city sanitary sewer. 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous substance which can form a gas, or which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of causing objectionable odors or hazard to life and property, or which forms solids in concentrations exceeding limits established herein, or which creates any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or which requires unusual facilities, attention or expense to handle such materials. 
(d)  Except in quantities or concentrations as herein authorized, it shall be unlawful for any individual or corporation to discharge waste water to the sanitary sewer containing: 
(1)  Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of one hundred (100) mg/l (one thousand six hundred sixty-six (1,666) pounds per million gallons) of either or both or combination of free or emulsified oil and grease, if such wastes: 
a.  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such manner as to obstruct the sewer; 
b.  Overload the discharges, skimming and grease handling equipment. 
c.  Are not amenable to biological treatment and will therefore pass to any receiving waters without being affected by normal sewage treatment processes; or 
d.  Have adverse effects on the treatment process due to the excessive quantities. 
(2)  Acids or alkalies which attack or corrode sewers or sewage disposal structures, equipment and/or personnel, or have a pH value lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or which, due to contents, may be reduced or changed with age or by sewage to produce acid or alkaline reactions. 
(3)  Metallic ions and salts of the heavy metals, in solutions or suspension, in concentrations exceeding the following, the analytical results to be expressed in terms of the element indicated: 
Element     Mg/l 
Arsenic ..... 0.05 
Barium ..... 5.0 
Boron ..... 5.0 
Cadmium ..... 0.1 
Chromium ..... 1.0 
Copper ..... 1.0 
Cyanide ..... 0.1 
Lead ..... 0.10 
Manganese ..... 1.0 
Mercury ..... 0.01 
Nickel ..... 1.00 
Selenium ..... 0.02 
Silver ..... 0.1 
Zinc ..... 1.0 
No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged to the sewer system without an industrial waste permit which shall specify permitted concentrations. 
(4)  Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating hydrocyanic gas or acidification in excess of one tenth of one mg/l as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the city sewers. 
(5)  Radioactive materials exceeding the standards of the State of Connecticut or the United States. 
(6)  Any waste water containing phenols or other taste-producing substances in such concentrations as to produce odor or taste in the effluent as to affect the taste and odor of the receiving waters. 
(7)  Discharges which exert or cause: 
a.  Excessive discoloration; 
b.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantity as to cause a significant load on the sewage treatment works; 
c.  Unusual concentrations of solids of composition, as an example, in TSS's of inert nature (such as fuller's earth) and/or in total dissolved solids (such as sodium sulfate); 
d.  High hydrogen sulfide content; or 
e.  Unusual volume flow and concentration constituting "slugs". 
(8)  Any substance which is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the waste water treatment process employed, or is amenable to treatment only to such degree that the waste water treatment plant cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters without first pretreating to a concentration acceptable to the WPCA. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and tanning solutions, unless, by actual test, it is found that such discoloration will be removed by pretreatment at the existing WPCA treatment plant. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of New Haven, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city any waste water or other polluted waters, except where a permit has been issued by the department of environmental protection. 
(f)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the general manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in section 25-32(d)(1), or any flammable wastes, sands, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the general manager, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the general manager. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner(s) personnel must be performed by licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-33. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Each permittee shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. 
(b)  For countermeasures to be taken by the WPCA to minimize damage to the sanitary sewer system and/or degradation of the receiving waters, permittee shall notify the WPCA immediately upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this chapter. This notification shall be followed within three (3) days of the date of occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification will not relieve permittee of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sanitary sewer system, or for any fines imposed on (by) the WPCA on account thereof and/or for any WPCA enforcement action pursuant to this occurrence. 
(c)  In order that officers, agents and employees of permittees will be informed of the WPCA's requirements, permittees shall make available to their employees copies of this chapter, together with such other waste water information and notices which may be furnished by WPCA from time to time for the purpose of improving and making more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the permittee's bulletin board advising officer agents and employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in excess of the limits authorized by the permit. 
(d)  Any possible connection or entry point for a hazardous and/or prohibited substance to the permittee's plumbing or drainage system shall be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of such substance in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-34. - Changes of ownership. 
In the event a producer of industrial waste which is authorized to make a connection to the city sewer for industrial waste water disposal under the provisions hereof is sold, leased or its operation is assumed or taken over by another person, firm or corporation, other than that named in the permit, a new application for permit shall be made by the new owner, lessee or operator. No permit issued under the provisions hereof shall be assignable, and a violation of this provision shall be grounds for summary suspensions or revocation of such permit by the general manager. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-35. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Pretreatment will be required in the following instances, and the general manager shall submit to the applicant the pretreatment levels which must be obtained: 
(1)  If the general manager determines upon the initial application for a permit under this chapter that the industrial waste water must be pretreated by the applicant to lower the level of any of the components of the industrial waste water before discharge to the city sewer. 
(2)  If the WPCA must improve the discharge from the waste water treatment plant to the receiving waters as a result of directives from federal or state regulatory agencies, orders or judgments from courts of competent jurisdiction or changes in the discharge permit for the WPCA's waste water treatment plant or plants, then and in that event, the general manager will require that a permit holder install or enlarge pretreatment facilities to lower the affected component of the permittee's industrial waste water discharge. 
(3)  If any waste waters prohibited under the conditions of this chapter are produced, such producer shall pretreat the waste water to the extent required to comply with the standards established herein before discharging to any city sewer. 
(4)  If the general manager determines that a permittee, because of plant expansion and/or changes in plant operations, has increased either the strength or volume of discharge, the general manager may require additional pretreatment to lower the level of the volume and/or any components of the industrial waste water before discharge. Pretreatment facilities required under the foregoing subsections of this section shall be provided, operated and maintained at the permit holder's expense. 
(b)  Any sludge or other material removed from the industrial waste water by the pretreatment facility shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(c)  Dilution of waste water discharged to the city sanitary sewer system is prohibited, whether accomplished by the combination of two (2) or more waste water streams by a producer or producers or by the addition of other liquids solely for the purpose of diluting the quality of the waste water discharge. 
One or more producers may, upon application and approval by the general manager, combine industrial waste water streams prior to discharge to the city sanitary sewer system if, and only if, such combination of industrial waste water streams produces a combined discharge of better quality than the two (2) industrial waste water streams would have been if discharged separately. 
(d)  Detailed plans showing any proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the general manager for approval before construction of the facilities. The review of such plans will in no way relieve such permit holders from the responsibility of modifying and operating the facilities to produce an effluent complying with the established conditions of the permit. Any subsequent significant changes in the approved facilities or method of operating shall be reported to the general manager and must be reviewed and approved by him as complying with the provisions herein established. 
(e)  After the construction plans for such pretreatment plants have been approved and a permit issued, the plans shall be placed on file in permanent, reproducible form, with the general manager, without cost to the WPCA or city, before a building permit will be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-36. - Testing waste water. 
(a)  It is a condition of the permit that the WPCA may at any time test any of the waste water being discharged by the company or plant for quality or quantity. A duly authorized WPCA representative may enter the permittee's premises at any time during business or operational hours for the purpose of inspecting the plant operations to estimate quality and quantity of wastes, as defined herein. 
(b)  It is a condition of the permit that the permittee will install facilities at the permittee's expense for the purpose of the WPCA's representative inspecting, observing and sampling representative flows. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-37. - Trade secrets. 
All information and data relating to a permittee obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and inspections, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the permittee specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the WPCA that the release of such information to the general public would divulge information or processes or methods that would give a business advantage to competitors who do not otherwise have this information. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-38. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating these provisions shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-39. - Computation of WPCA's average unit costs. 
(a)  The following items shall be used to compute the average unit cost, but shall not be deemed to be exclusive of other pertinent factors: 
(1)  The total proposed sewer fund budget for the next fiscal year will be used as a basis for figuring operation, maintenance, and debt service expenditures. No credit will be allowed for contract services or other service charge collections. 
(2)  The WPCA's average unit cost will be computed for each of the three (3) functions: Volume of flow, BOD and TSS. 
(b)  The cost of operation shall be recomputed no less often than annually to reflect increases or decreases in operation and maintenance costs and annual debt service, and billing rates shall be revised by the WPCA. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-40. - Computation of industrial user charges. 
(a)  The user charges to be determined for all permitted manufacturing or other producers of waste water to which this chapter applies, except for dry industries, will be computed by the use of the following formula: 
UC = V [X + Y (BOD) + Z (TSS)]. 
UC 	= 	User charge (in dollars) for each billing period. 
V 	= 	Volume in ccf discharged to the City sanitary sewer system during the billing period. 
X 	= 	Cost per ccf of waste water treated. 
Y 	= 	Cost to remove one mg/l of BOD per ccf. 
Z 	= 	Cost to remove one mg/l of TSS per ccf. 
 
(b)  Those industries defined herein as dry industries, or industries producing wastes containing both BOD and TSS or less than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, will pay a sewer service charge as established and revised from time to time by the WPCA. 
(c)  When either BOD or TSS in a discharged waste water is more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, the formula in subsection (a) will be used, but in no event will either be used at less than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l in the computations. 
(d)  When an industry produces both domestic and process waste water with one connection to the sewer system, the waste water so delivered will be considered as industrial waste water and the user charge computations will be in compliance with (a) and (b) above, based on the combined volume, BOD and TSS content. 
(e)  A permittee may reduce his user charge rate by greater removals in pretreatment or plant operation procedure, but once the pretreatment or plant procedure is established to obtain a uniform or lower rate, written consent from the general manager to increase the delivered strength shall be required, and charges for a higher rate based on tests by the WPCA may be made without other notice to the permittee. 
(f)  Monthly billing or quarterly billing for industrial waste water disposal will be accomplished, using the established procedures. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-41. - Charges effective after meters read; installation of meters. 
(a)  For producers with installed water meters, the charges established shall become effective from and after each producer's first regular meter reading date after the issuance of the industrial waste permit. Producers who are required under the provisions of this article to install water meters for the purpose of determining the charges established by this chapter shall do so in compliance with the dates and times established by the general manager, and the installation will be at the producer's expense. Such meters will be of a type and standard and in a location approved by the general manager. 
(b)  Any person required to install a water meter under the provisions hereof who fails or refuses to do so in the time and manner required, shall be charged as provided herein based on water usage estimated by the general manager. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-42. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any or all of the following remedies may be employed by the WPCA to abate and prevent further violations of the provisions of this chapter: Disconnection and sealing of sanitary sewer connection. The WPCA's counsel may, and is hereby authorized to, proceed in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure appropriate judicial relief from violation by such producer of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of an application for a permit for discharge of industrial waste water into the city sanitary sewer system, the general manager shall issue or deny such industrial waste water discharge permit. If such permit is denied, the general manager shall within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the application notify the applicant of such denial and state for reasons for such denial in writing by certified mail. Upon receipt of such notification of denial, the applicant shall immediately revise such application to comply with the reasons for denial stated in such notice, if the applicant desires to proceed under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The general manager shall require each producer of industrial waste water to secure the permit required for discharge into the city sanitary sewer system as required by this chapter. A copy of each permit so issued shall be forwarded to the applicant. The general manager, upon being made aware in any manner that any producer is discharging industrial waste water into the city sanitary sewer system without having secured a permit, or is discharging industrial waste water into the city sanitary sewer system in excess of the limits prescribed in a permit issued by the WPCA, or is discharging a prohibited industrial waste into such system, shall exercise any or all of the remedies provided herein to secure compliance with the provisions of this article. Any representative of the sewer staff is hereby authorized to observe for the quantity and/or quality of waste, as appropriate, being discharged into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-43. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Each violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day's violation shall be and constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-44. - Establishment of a sewer fund. 
There is hereby established a sewer fund. This fund will be used for the operation, maintenance and administration of the sewerage system, and for payment of principal and interest on bonds and notes of the city issued for the acquisition and construction of sewerage facilities. The sewerage system will be treated as an asset of the fund. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-45. - Accounting and recordkeeping. 
The accounts and records of the sewer fund shall be maintained under enterprise fund accounting, a self-sustaining activity as described by state law, governmental accounting auditing and financial reporting, and generally acceptable accounting principles. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-46. - Annual audit. 
The sewer fund shall be audited annually by an independent certified public accounting firm selected by the WPCA no later than thirty (30) days prior to the end of the fiscal year which is to be audited. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82; Ord. of 2-22-89, § 2)  
Sec. 25-47. - Establishment of a Water Pollution Control Authority. 
Pursuant to sections 7-246 through 7-269A inclusive of the General Statutes Revision of 1958 as amended, there is hereby created an authority to be designated and known as the water pollution control authority of the City of New Haven (hereinafter referred to as the WPCA). The purpose for which the authority is hereby created is to operate the sewerage system of the City of New Haven, to use, equip, re-equip, repair, maintain, supervise, manage, operate and perform any act pertinent to the collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-48. - Members, terms, officers, quorum, compensation, employees, financial interest, removal from office. 
(a)  The WPCA shall consist of seven (7) members of which one (1) shall be a member of the board of aldermen, one (1) shall be the city controller, one (1) shall have training in civil or sanitary engineering, and one (1) shall have training or experience in finance and accounting. The aldermanic representative shall be elected by the board of aldermen. Members other than the city controller and the aldermanic representative shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  The aldermanic member of the WPCA shall serve from the date of his or her appointment until the expiration or earlier termination of his or her current aldermanic term. Members other than the controller and the aldermanic representative shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years and serve staggered terms. 
(c)  The officers of the WPCA shall be a chairman and vice-chairman, who shall be members of the WPCA and a secretary and treasurer, who need not be members of the WPCA. All officers shall be elected by the WPCA for one-year terms. 
(d)  Except as the bylaws of the WPCA may provide in emergency situations, the powers of the WPCA shall be exercised by the members at a meeting duly called and held. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. 
(e)  The members of the WPCA shall serve without compensation. 
(f)  The WPCA may employ such persons as it may determine to be necessary of convenient for the performance of its duties and may fix and determine their qualifications, duties and compensation. 
(g)  No member or employee of the WPCA or any corporation, partnership or firm in which such member or employee has a financial interest, direct or indirect, shall do business with the WPCA or have any financial interest, direct or indirect, in any business transacted by the WPCA. 
(h)  Any member of the WPCA may be removed by the mayor for cause except for the aldermanic representative who shall be removed by the members of the board of aldermen, pursuant to their rules. 
(Ord. of 11-18-85; Ord. of 2-22-89, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-89, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-91, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 25-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 25-49, which pertained to residency requirements for WPCA members, was repealed by an ordinance of May 15, 1989. The repealed provisions derived from an ordinance of Nov. 18, 1985.  
Sec. 25-50. - Cost of service study. 
The general manager will ensure that a cost of service study is performed at least annually. The general manager shall review the results of the study and shall submit the study along with a schedule of recommended rates and charges at least four (4) months before the end of the appropriate fiscal year to the WPCA for consideration and public hearing. If the general manager's recommendations as to the proposed rates and charges are not disapproved, approved or approved with modifications by the WPCA by the first day of the next fiscal year, the general manager's recommended rates and charges shall automatically become effective and shall be implemented by him until such time as they are superseded by a renewal of the above procedure. Billings for services shall be rendered as the WPCA shall determine. In the period intervening between cost of service studies, the WPCA shall be authorized to amend user charges so long as such charges are based upon the anticipated cost of operating the system and such charges are presented to the general public at a public hearing in accordance with the notice provisions of section 7-255 of the General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82; Ord. of 2-22-89, § 3)  
Sec. 25-51. - Powers. 
In furtherance of the purpose for which it is created, the WPCA may exercise any and all of the powers granted to such an authority by sections 7-246 through 7-269a of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-52. - Organization of sewer staff. 
(a)  The sewer staff, under the general manager, shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance and administration of the sewerage system. 
(b)  The general manager shall have the responsibility for creating an organization structure, which fulfills the requirements of the sewer fund. The personnel needs of the sewerage system shall be presented annually with the sewer fund budget in accordance with the procedures established by the WPCA. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82; Ord. of 11-18-85)  
Sec. 25-53. - Authority to incur debt. 
The city controller may issue and sell tax anticipation notes from time to time as necessary to meet the short term liabilities of the sewer fund prior to the receipt of revenues, provided such notes are authorized by the WPCA, the board of aldermen and the city controller determines that said notes are payable from sewer fund revenues prior to the end of the fiscal year during which said notes are issued. The city controller may issue and sell long term debt on behalf of the sewer fund, in the form of general obligation bonds, or other legal debt instruments, provided such issuance is authorized by the WPCA and the board of aldermen, and that adequate sewer fund revenues have been identified to repay such debt. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82; Ord. of 8-2-93)  
Sec. 25-54. - Flow of funds. 
(a)  The gross revenue of the sewer fund shall be applied as follows: 
(1)  The first call on gross revenues shall be to satisfy the next annual payment of principal and interest on any outstanding debt of the city issued after July 1, 1979, for purposes of the sewage system; 
(2)  The second call on gross revenue shall be to satisfy all current and accrued operation and maintenance expenses; and 
(3)  The third call on gross revenue shall pay debt service on general obligation debts of the city incurred for sewage purposes prior to July 1, 1979, to the extent budgeted. 
(b)  Any excess revenues remaining at the end of the fiscal year shall be used for one or more of the following purposes: Deposit in reserves for repair, replacement, or contingencies; rate relief in the subsequent fiscal year; retirement of outstanding debt; or purchase of capital assets. Approval for disposition of excess revenues shall be made by the WPCA. 
(c)  Any deficit net of receivables remaining at the end of the fiscal year shall be added to the cost of service for the following years and recovered through rates and charges for sewer service. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-55. - Budgeting. 
An annual budget of the next fiscal year's projected revenue and expenditures of the sewer fund and recommended sewer user charge shall be submitted to the water pollution control authority and filed with the city/town clerk by the general manager on or before the third Monday in April and within ten (10) days after such submission shall be published once in a daily newspaper having circulation in the City of New Haven and Towns of East Haven, Hamden and Woodbridge. After such publication, but no earlier than ten (10) days after public notice thereof, the WPCA shall hold a public hearing on such projected revenue and expenditures and recommended sewer user charge and consider and act on such projected revenues and expenditures of the sewer fund and recommended sewer user charge on or before the first Monday in June. The sewer fund budget and sewer use charge, if said charge is revised by the WPCA, shall be filed with the city/town clerk and published in a daily newspaper having circulation in the City of New Haven and the Towns of East Haven, Hamden and Woodbridge no later than five (5) days after their filing. Each year the budget of the sewer fund shall include a line item for unanticipated operating contingencies. The general manager shall make specific requests to the WPCA for authority to expend funds from the contingency account from time to time subject to certification of the controller as to their availability. Expenditures from the repair/reconstruction fund, if funds shall be available, shall be approved in the same manner as requested for expenditures under the annual appropriation for unanticipated operating contingencies. 
(Ord. of 10-4-82)  
Sec. 25-56. - Advisory committee. 
There is hereby created an advisory committee composed of a representative of each town or city which has a contractual agreement with the New Haven WPCA for waste water interception, treatment and disposal services. 
(Ord. of 11-18-85)  
Secs. 25-57—25-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GREATER NEW HAVEN WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 25-81. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this concurrent ordinance, each of the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
Asset Purchase Agreement shall mean an agreement by and among Stratford, the Stratford Water Pollution Control Authority and the GNHWPCA which shall set forth the terms and conditions of the transfer of the Stratford Wastewater System Assets to the GNHWPCA. 
Bonds shall have the meaning set forth in CGS 22a-500. 
Bylaws shall mean the rules and regulations governing the administration of the property of GNHWPCA and the conduct of its affairs. 
CGS shall mean the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended. 
Concurrent ordinance shall mean this concurrent ordinance adding the Town of Stratford as a Constituent Municipality of the GNHWPCA. 
Constituent Municipality shall have the meaning set forth in CGS 22a-500. 
East Haven shall mean the Town of East Haven, Connecticut. 
Effective Date shall mean the later to occur of (1) the date upon which this Concurrent Ordinance becomes effective in (i) New Haven, (ii) East Haven, (iii) Hamden, (iv) Woodbridge, and (v) Stratford, and (2) the closing of the transfer and sale of the Stratford Wastewater System Assets to the GNHWPCA. 
GNHWPCA shall mean the Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority established pursuant to the ordinance previously adopted by each of New Haven, East Haven, Hamden and Woodbridge, as revised by this Concurrent Ordinance. 
Hamden shall mean the Town of Hamden, Connecticut. 
New Haven shall mean the City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
Plan of operation shall mean the preliminary plan of operation prepared and submitted by the Constituent Municipalities in accordance with CGS 22a-500 to 22a-519, inclusive, as may be amended from time to time, which shall include the procedure by which Bonds of the GNHWPCA shall be approved and be in furtherance of the environmental protection laws of the State. 
Sewer ordinance shall have the meaning set forth in section 25-88 of this concurrent ordinance. 
State shall mean the State of Connecticut. 
Stratford shall mean the Town of Stratford, Connecticut. 
Stratford Wastewater System Assets shall mean the entire municipal wastewater system of Stratford and the Stratford Water Pollution Control Authority and all assets related to such wastewater system, including, but not limited to, any device, equipment, appurtenance, plant facility and method of collecting, transporting, receiving, reducing, treating, reclaiming, separating, disposing of or discharging sewage or the residue from the treatment of sewage, including any component of the foregoing, but specifically excluding all of Stratford's stormwater assets. 
Woodbridge shall mean the Town of Woodbridge, Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § I, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-82. - Statement of purpose of GNHWPCA. 
The GNHWPCA is a regional water pollution control authority previously created in accordance with CGS 22a-500 with each of New Haven, East Haven, Hamden, and Woodbridge as a Constituent Municipality. The purpose of the GNHWPCA is the furtherance of the environmental protection laws of the State and to gain efficiencies and economies of scale with respect to the planning, design, construction, management, operation and maintenance of the Wastewater System of New Haven, East Haven, Hamden, Stratford and Woodbridge and any other Constituent Municipality which may adopt a concurrent ordinance and become a member of the GNHWPCA in the future. The GNHWPCA, the existing Constituent Municipalities of the GNHWPCA and Stratford each desire that Stratford become a member and Constituent Municipality of the GNHWPCA. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § II, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-83. - Incorporation of the GNHWPCA. 
The name of the regional water pollution control authority created pursuant to CGS 22a-500 to 22a-519, inclusive, shall continue to be the Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority. The principal office of the GNHWPCA is 260 East Street, New Haven, Connecticut. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § III, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-84. - Plan of operation. 
The GNHWPCA shall be operated in accordance with a plan of operation and in accordance with CGS 22a-500(c) and 22a-501(a). The plan of operation may be revised from time to time upon the approval of a majority of the directors, subject to and in accordance with CGS 22a-501. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § IV, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-85. - Board of directors. 
(a)  Number of directors . The GNHWPCA shall increase the size of its board of directors, created under CGS 22a-500(b), to consist of eleven (11) directors. Four (4) directors shall be appointed by New Haven, two (2) directors shall be appointed by each of Hamden, East Haven and Stratford, and one (1) director shall be appointed by Woodbridge. 
(b)  Directors . The terms of office and appointing Constituent Municipality of each member of the revised eleven-member board of directors of the GNHWPCA are set forth on Exhibit A attached hereto, and shall be effective as of the effective date. Each director shall be entitled to one (1) vote on any matter that shall come before the board of directors for their approval. 
(c)  Authority and compensation . The business of the GNHWPCA shall be managed by or under the direction of the board of directors which may exercise all such powers of the GNHWPCA and do all such lawful acts and things as are allowed by the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, and the bylaws. 
The compensation, if any, and method for determining same for each director on the board of directors shall be as set forth in the bylaws. 
(d)  Term of office . The current term of each director of the GNHWPCA shall commence on the effective date and expire on the dates set forth on Exhibit A attached hereto. Directors shall be divided into two (2) groups of four (4) directors and one (1) group of three (3) directors, each as more fully set forth in the bylaws. The current term of the first, second and third groups shall expire on December 31, 2017, December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2016, respectively, as more fully set forth in the bylaws. Upon the expiration of each initial term of office for each of the current directors of the GNHWPCA, a new term of office of three (3) years shall commence as more fully set forth in the bylaws. 
(e)  Appointment of directors and removal . The directors to be appointed by New Haven shall be appointed by the Mayor of New Haven, subject to the approval of the Board of Aldermen of New Haven. The directors to be appointed by East Haven shall be appointed by the Mayor of East Haven, subject to the approval of the Town Council of East Haven. The directors to be appointed by Hamden shall be appointed by the Mayor of Hamden, subject to the approval of the Legislative Council of Hamden. The directors to be appointed by Stratford shall be appointed by the Mayor of Stratford, subject to the approval of the Town Council of Stratford. The directors to be appointed by Woodbridge shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen of Woodbridge. 
Any director may be removed from office as more fully set forth in the bylaws. The appointment of subsequent directors shall be as more fully set forth in the bylaws. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § V, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A is not set out herein but is available at the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 25-86. - Powers. 
The GNHWPCA shall have all the powers set forth in CGS 22a-500 to 22a-519, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § VI, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-87. - Bylaws. 
Any and all amendments to the bylaws of the GNHWPCA to include Stratford as a Constituent Municipality are hereby approved and adopted in all respects pursuant to the provisions of CGS 22a-501(a)(1) and Section 8.1 of the bylaws. 
A copy of the bylaws of the GNHWPCA and all amendments thereto, duly certified, shall be filed in the office of each Constituent Municipality and the State of Connecticut Secretary of the State in accordance with CGS 22a-501(a)(1), as amended. The bylaws may be revised in accordance with the express terms contained therein and CGS 22a-501(a)(1), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § VII, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-88. - Sewer ordinance. 
The GNHWPCA previously adopted the sewer ordinance (the "sewer ordinance"). With respect to Stratford, the sewer ordinance shall become effective in Stratford as of the effective date and shall, as provided therein, supersede, amend, restate and replace the existing sewer ordinance of Stratford or portions thereof. The sewer ordinance may be amended, modified, restated or replaced by the board of directors of the GNHWPCA from time to time after adoption without the need for separate approval from the Constituent Municipalities. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § VIII, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-89. - Transfer of assets. 
The transfer, sale and purchase of the Stratford Wastewater System Assets among the GNHWPCA, Stratford and the Stratford Water Pollution Control Authority is hereby approved. Prior to the execution of the Asset Purchase Agreement and the transfer of the Stratford Wastewater System Assets to the GNHWPCA, the proposed transfer and sale of the Stratford Wastewater System Assets shall, pursuant to the provisions of CGS 8-24, as amended, be referred to the Planning Commission of Stratford for a report, and a public hearing shall be held by Stratford so that the users of the water pollution control system and residents of Stratford may be heard concerning the proposed transfer of real property and the proposed provisions of the Asset Purchase Agreement in accordance with CGS 22a-509(d) and CGS 7-163e. 
(Ord. No. 1383, § IX, 6-27-05; Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Sec. 25-90. - Severability. 
The invalidity of any one (1) or more of the words, phrases, sentences, clauses, sections or subsections contained in this concurrent ordinance shall not affect the enforceability of the remaining portions of this concurrent ordinance or any part hereof, and, if any one (1) or more of the words, phrases, sentences, clauses, sections or subsections contained in this concurrent ordinance shall be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this concurrent ordinance shall be construed to most closely effectuate the intentions of the Constituent Municipalities and the remainder of the concurrent ordinance shall be valid and effective. 
(Ord. No. 1779 , § 3, 6-1-15)  
Chapter 26 - STORMWATER DISCHARGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1800 , §§ 1.1—7.9, adopted June 6, 2016 has been included as Ch. 26 at the discretion of the editor. Former Chapter 26 was reserved. The numbering of provisions has been provided by the editor in order to conform to the format used in this Code. 
Cross reference— Buildings and property, Ch. 9; subsurface sewage disposal systems, Ch. 24; Sewers, Ch. 25; flood damage prevention, Title IV. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 1.1, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-2. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 1.2, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-3. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 1.3, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-4. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 1.4, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-5. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city engineer and his or her designee(s) (each and collectively hereinafter, the "city engineer"), shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 1.5, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-6. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this ordinance which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Connecticut Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater and Dewatering Wastewaters from Construction Activities. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in sections 26-21 and 26-22. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14) or CGS 22a-430b. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Connecticut DEP under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the City of New Haven; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Connecticut which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 2, 6-6-16)  
Secs. 26-7—26-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF STORMWATER DISCAHARGES 
 
Sec. 26-21. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above providing they contain no pollutants: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City Engineer, or as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 3.1, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-22. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority ("GNHWPCA"). 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city engineer requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 3.2, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-23. - Industrial, commercial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial, commercial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city engineer prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 4, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-24. - Access and inspection of properties and facilties. 
The city engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City of New Haven. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city engineer ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city engineer shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city engineer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city engineer may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city engineer. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city engineer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city engineer access to a facility is a violation of this chapter. 
(7)  If the city engineer has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city engineer is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city engineer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 5, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-25. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city engineer within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 6, 6-6-16)  
Secs. 26-26—26-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 26-41. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city engineer is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City of New Haven is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 26-45. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.1, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-42. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city engineer finds that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the city engineer may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of New Haven by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.2, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-43. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city engineer. The notice of appeal must be received within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of violation and a hearing shall be scheduled and held in accordance with section 32-3(d) of the City's Code of Ordinances. The decision of the hearing officer, or his or her designee, shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.3, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-44. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30) days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the city's engineer, then representatives of the City of New Haven may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.4, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-45. - Costs of abatement of the violation. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The foregoing remedy shall not be exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies available to the City of New Haven including, but not limited to, such remedies described in section 32-3(e) of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City of New Haven by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.5, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-46. - Civil penalties. 
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city engineer shall deem appropriate, after the city engineer has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city engineer may impose a penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.6, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-47. - Criminal penalties. 
For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city engineer may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in Connecticut Superior court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or imprisonment for ninety days (90) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.7, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-48. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.8, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 26-49. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State or local law and the City of New Haven may seek cumulative remedies. 
The City of New Haven may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1800 , § 7.9, 6-6-16)  
Chapter 27 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1426, adopted Sept. 28, 2006, amended and restated former Ch. 27 in its entirety. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
Cross reference— Procedures for naming of corners, § 18-2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - "Street" defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter "street" shall include alleys, lanes, courts, and public spaces for which the public has the right of passage and use within the accepted right-of-way as defined by the City of New Haven. All improvements thereon extend to the right-of-way limits, and may include sidewalks, tree belts, curbs, drainage structures, utilities and road surfaces. 
(Code of 1928, § 778; Code of 1985, § 27-1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-2. - "Right-of-way" defined. 
"Right-of-way" shall mean the accepted area for public use as defined by the state's statutes, and as accepted by the city's board of aldermen. The right-of-way is influenced by the following four (4) city departments: 
(1)  Department of public works is responsible for its overall maintenance and use; 
(2)  City engineer is responsible for infrastructure improvements, engineering standards and the design of major repairs; 
(3)  Department of traffic and parking is responsible for the safe movement of traffic including people, vehicles and trucks; and 
(4)  Department of parks, recreation and trees is responsible for trees and tree pits within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Secs. 27-3—27-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES, OBSTRUCTIONS AND DANGEROUS CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 27-31. - Nuisances on streets. 
No person shall commit any nuisance in any street in the city. This shall include but not be limited to any impediment, obstruction or interference with the free flow of movement within the public right-of-way. Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction, and, upon conviction, shall result in a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00), or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute, for each day that the violation continues. Such person shall be required to abate the violation. 
(Code of 1928, § 524; Code of 1985, § 27-8; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 15; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-32. - Ice, snow, sleet—Duty of abutting owner to remove or abate. 
(a)  Removal. The owner of land or a building, bridge or premises fronting upon the sidewalk, or connected with a footway, shall remove snow, sleet or ice within a minimum of forty-two (42) inches of such property including handicap ramps within twenty-four (24) hours after a storm ends. 
(b)  Abatement. If the owner of the property referred to in subsection (a) cannot entirely remove the snow, sleet or ice within the aforesaid parameters, he/she shall cover the affected portion(s) with an abrasive substance so as to keep the property in a reasonably safe condition at all times. 
(c)  Penalty. If a property owner fails to comply with subsections (a) and (b), above, within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving notice to remove the snow, sleet or ice from an appropriate city official, said owner shall be punished by a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine, or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-9; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 16 Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-33. - Ice, snow, sleet—Duty of abutting property owner to clean gutters and catch basin tops. 
Every person having the care of any property abutting a paved gutter and catch basin top shall keep them free from snow, ice, sleet and any other substance so as to permit the free passage of water through them. Failure to comply with this section shall result in an infraction and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code of 1928, § 773; Code of 1985, § 27-11; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 18; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-34. - Same—Disposal by throwing into streets. 
No person or property owner shall throw, place or plow ice or snow into any street in the city, nor cause such disposal. Failure to comply with this section shall result in an infraction and a fine of one hundred dollar ($100.00), or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 775, 776; Code of 1985, § 27-12; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 19; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-35. - Sidewalk sandwich board signs; permit required. 
No sandwich board may be placed on the sidewalk or the street without a permit from the issuer stating the exact location of the sign. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-36. - Insurance. 
Before a permit is issued the applicant shall secure insurance naming the city as an additional insured party. The policy shall protect the city against all claims resulting from the actions and/or negligence of the permittee. The permittee, his/her successors and assigns shall maintain the policy in full force as long as the sandwich board sign is displayed. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage to sidewalks or other public property resulting from display of the sandwich board sign. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-37. - Maintenance. 
The sign permittee shall properly maintain the sign installation consistent with permit regulations so as not to cause injury to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-38. - Inspection. 
The city shall reserve the right to inspect sandwich board signs to ensure compliance with this article and with permit regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-39. - Regulations. 
The director of the department of public works shall develop regulations for the issuance of sidewalk sandwich board signs. The regulations may be amended from time to time and shall be available from the permit issuer. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-40. - Sandwich board signs prohibited downtown. 
Unless approved by the board of aldermen under permitted obstruction, no sidewalk sign shall be placed in the inclusive area bound by the south side of George Street, east side of High Street, north side of Grove Street, and the east site of State Street. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-41. - Annual fee. 
Before a permit may be issued under this article, the applicant shall pay to the issuer an annual fee as established by the board of aldermen, and included in the portion of the Code that contains all fees. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-42. - Renewal. 
Permits shall be renewed on an annual basis. The permit issuer shall collect and maintain information from each permit applicant when permits are initially issued. In subsequent years it shall not be necessary for the applicant to provide detailed information unless there are any changes to the documentation submitted with the original permit request. If there are no changes, the applicant shall submit a written permit renewal request, an updated insurance certificate and the required permit fee. 
(Ord. of 8-1-83, § 3; Ord. of 9-19-83, § 3; Ord. of 12-5-83, § 3; Code of 1985, § 14.1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-43. - Damaging, defacing public property on streets. 
(a)  No person shall damage any public property including fences, fountains, walls, seating, light poles, ornaments, signs or other amenities that are within the public right-of-way. 
(b)  No person shall damage any merestone or street line marker in the city without permission from the city engineer. 
(c)  Failure to comply with subsection (a) or (b) shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute, per offense. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 737, 743; Code of 1985, § 27-15; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-44. - Permission required for certain activities on streets, sidewalks. 
(a)  No person or property owner shall restrict the use of the right-of-way for public purposes without applying for a permit. This includes the placing of any obstruction within the right-of-way, sidewalk or tree belt. 
(b)  Obstruction permits shall be obtained from the appropriate city authority. Violation of this ordinance shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute, per offense. 
(c)  Permits for the obstruction of streets (encompassing hereby the broad meaning of "street" provided in section 27-1, shall be obtained from the director of public works, or his designee in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 27-75 and 27-78 herein, and shall be paid for in proportion to the street frontage occupied, at the rate set out in section 17-201 of this Code. 
(Code 1928, §§ 83, 593, 724, 725; Ord. of 2-5-62; Code of 1985, § 27-18; Ord. of 8-2-88, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 20; Ord. of 4-1-91; Ord. No. 1325, § 1, 4-21-03; Ord. No. 1345, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-45. - Memorials in the public right-of-way. 
(a)  No memorial shall be placed in the public right-of-way or on public land without a permit from the director of the Livable City Initiative nor for a period of more than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of said permit. The department of police service shall monitor how long memorials are left in place and shall notify the Livable City Initiative when the thirty-day period has expired. The Livable City Initiative shall then cause the memorial to be removed. 
(b)  There shall be a grace period of seven (7) days after construction of a street memorial to apply for a permit for the memorial. 
(c)  The permittee must remove the memorial within five (5) days after the thirty-day expiration of the permit after which the Livable City Initiative staff shall remove the memorial. 
(d)  Upon the issuance of said permit the alderman of the ward shall be notified of the permit request through a form included in the application packet that will be filled out by the applicant and forwarded to the alderperson of the area. 
(Ord. No. 1560, 12-17-07)  
Secs. 27-46—27-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 27-71. - Compliance with article; control and direction of director of public works; license required; permit required. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall make any opening or excavation, or perform any construction work within, on or through any street except state highways for any purpose except under the director of the department of public works or his/her agent's control and direction, and in conformity with this article. 
(b)  All work on driveways, sidewalks, curbs, roadways and drainage shall be in accordance with city engineering standards. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-35; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-72. - License required; fee. 
The director of the department of public works or his/her agent may issue a license to any qualified person to perform specific work within the public right-of-way. Such person shall submit an application to perform such work, and satisfy said director or his/her agent that he/she is competent and intends to comply with all applicable conditions, rules, regulations and specifications including, but not limited to, those in this article as amended from time to time. The board of aldermen shall set a fee for such license, and said fee shall be included in the portion of the code that contains all fees. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-36; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. 1(k)(3), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-73. - Proof of insurance; surety bond; agreement to indemnify. 
(a)  Before any such license is granted, every applicant shall file a certificate of liability insurance with the director of the department of public works or his/her agent. Thereafter, such licensee shall provide renewal certificates as appropriate in an amount specified by the city as deemed appropriate by the corporation counsel's office. The city shall be named as additional insured on the certificate; and, for city projects, such certificate shall contain such endorsements as are required by the "general conditions" of construction agreements between the city and its contractors. 
(b)  Before such license is granted, every applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city conditioned substantially as follows: that the applicant shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of New Haven, its officers, servants, agents and employees, from any and all claims, suits, liability and actions for an account of any injuries, loss, cost or damages received or sustained by any person, the applicant, his/her servants or agents, in connection with any opening, excavation, installation or other work performed on any such public right-of-way, or as the result of the use of equipment belonging to the applicant or used by him/her in connection with excavation or installation, or from any negligence or omission in guarding the work or maintaining such work and its immediate area in a safe condition, or from any act or omission of the applicant, his/her servants or agents. 
(c)  All required insurance coverage shall be maintained in full force and effect for the periods required. A representation binding upon the insurer shall be furnished to the director that the insurance coverage cannot be canceled or amended by the insurer less than thirty (30) days after the director has received written notice of cancellation or amendment by certified or registered mail, along with a binding representation that the insurer will notify the director immediately of any such cancellation or lapse in coverage. 
(d)  No insurance coverage required or furnished shall in any way relieve the applicant or person performing excavation work of any of his/her or its responsibilities, obligations, or liabilities under this article, or under any other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations. 
(e)  At the time of the license application, every applicant shall file with the director of the department of public works, or his/her agent, a surety bond securing to the city complete, competent and proper performance of the permitted work, in amount deemed sufficient by the director of the department of public works for such purpose. The surety bond will be in effect for a period of three (3) years from April 1 of the year in which application was made for the license. 
(f)  No license shall be issued if the licensee or permittee has outstanding debts to the city for charges, penalties or fees due under this chapter. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-37; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-74. - License; conditions for issuance. 
The director of the department of public works or his/her agent shall issue a license upon compliance with section 27-72 of this article, in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The applicant shall file his/her business address with the director of the department of public works, or his/her agent, and shall notify the director of any change therein. Any orders or notices that the director or his/her agent may have to give such applicant, mailed to the address so filed, shall be considered due personal notice. 
(2)  All licenses will expire on the first day of April next following the date of issue, unless sooner revoked. Upon expiration, the licensee must apply for and obtain a new license before performing any additional work. 
(3)  The director of the department of public works or his/her agent may cancel or suspend any license at any time for just cause. License suspension shall occur immediately upon cancellation of any required bond; and suspension of a permit granted under section 27-75 shall occur automatically upon cancellation of liability insurance as required under this article. 
(4)  Only an excavator duly licensed by the director of the department of public works, or his/her agent, as herein provided shall do any work upon any public right-of-way within the city. 
(5)  All licenses are nontransferable. 
(6)  All licensed contractors shall maintain the name or names of emergency contact persons, their telephone numbers and addresses with the director of the department of public works or his/her agent. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-38; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-75. - Permits; application and posting required. 
(a)  Application for permits to perform any work within the public right-of-way in the city must be submitted in writing by a licensed contractor who is licensed under this article, or governmental agency, public service company, or their respective agent(s), on forms provided for this purpose by the permit issuer. Applications must be submitted no less than five (5) business days before work is scheduled to commence. Additionally, the permit applicant must provide detailed maps, drawings and/or descriptions of the limits of the excavation work and must provide a detailed work zone traffic and/or pedestrian control plan. Only persons, contractors or public service companies licensed under this article may be issued a permit to excavate in a city owned street. No work shall commence or be continued unless the permit is posted by the permittee or his/her agent at the location of the work and must be displayed to all authorized persons upon request. 
(b)  The director of public works shall establish administrative procedures for coordinating excavation permits and field work to assure work zone safety. 
(c)  The board of aldermen shall set a fee for such license, and said fee shall be included in the portion of the Code that contains all fees. 
(d)  All applicants must file an endorsement to a liability insurance policy as required by this article which names the City of New Haven as an insured to the full extent of coverage before he/she is granted a permit. 
(e)  Suspension of any permit granted under this section shall occur automatically upon cancellation of liability insurance as required herein, or: upon failure to provide notice as required in section 27-75(a) and section 27-78 of this article. 
(f)  Such permit application and work zone plan shall be reviewed and approved by the director of traffic and parking and the chief of police or their agent/s prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(g)  No permit issued under this article is transferable. The applicant for a permit shall be that person, firm or corporation doing or performing the actual excavating work or activity. 
(h)  If any additional work or repairs not designated in the original permit must be done at the same location, the permittee shall apply for an authorization to extend the permit area from the director of the department of public works. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-39; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(2), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-76. - Inspection of work by city engineer or, if designated, the director of public works or their agent(s); procedure when work does not meet specifications, etc.; permits void when work not performed within certain time; guarantee of work by permittee. 
(a)  The city engineer or, if designated, the director of public works or, their agent(s) are empowered to inspect, or cause to have inspected, at any time, any or all work being performed under a permit issued under this article. 
(b)  If the city engineer or, if designated, the director of public works or his/her agent believes that the work being performed does not meet the specifications and conditions approved or required, by these articles, the permit or approved work zone traffic and/or pedestrian control plans he/she shall immediately notify the permittee. Upon receiving such notice, the permittee shall immediately commence work to correct such condition, unless the city engineer or director of public works or his/her agent provides for a longer period of time. If the permittee cannot immediately address safety requirements called for in the work zone traffic and/or pedestrian control plan the work zone will be closed by the city engineer, director of public works or their agent/s until such time as safety requriements can be met. Penalties for violations of this article III and applicable sections of article II may be assessed in accordance with section 27-82. 
(c)  All permittees shall conform to the following: 
(1)  The pavement surface shall be disrupted only within the area requiring excavation. 
(2)  Excavations shall be made in open cut. Requests for tunneling require the city engineer's or his/her agent's special permission, and under such additional conditions as he/she may impose. Trenches shall be protected whenever bracing and sheeting is necessary as required by the Occupational Safety and Health Act. All excavated material shall be compactly piled and shall not interfere with public travel to any greater extent than necessary. 
(3)  The area to be excavated shall be precut in a straight line with 90-degree angles at the point of intersection. 
(4)  All edges shall have a clean vertical face. Any structures within the construction site shall be leveled to the adjacent surfaces. 
(5)  The permittee shall backfill and compact all excavations. Backfilling materials and methods shall conform to standard detail regulations as established and promulgated by the city engineer or his/her agent. All shall be backfilled and compacted, or suitably covered to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his/her agent at the end of each workday, unless suitable alternatives have been approved by the city engineer or his/her agent. 
(6)  Temporary patching shall be provided immediately upon backfilling and closing of the excavation or opening. Temporary patch materials and methods shall conform to standard detail regulations as established and promulgated by the city engineer or his/her agent. 
(7)  The permittee shall be responsible for the cost of repairs due to settlement or use of improper backfill material or defective work. Improper backfill shall be re-excavated and temporarily patched in accordance with this article's provisions. 
(d)  If a temporary patch fails within two (2) years of completion, the permittee will be notified and will repair the same within twenty-four (24) hours of notification. Upon failure to comply with this provision, the city engineer or his/her agent may direct the repair to be done and will bill the permittee. The permittee shall be liable for the full expense of such work, and such expense to be paid within forty-five (45) days of billing. Delinquent payments will be charged against the surety bond. 
(e)  Any opening or excavation made without a permit shall be immediately filled and temporarily patched, and a permit immediately obtained. If a permit is unobtainable, the city or its contract representative shall permanently patch such temporary opening or excavation in accordance with this article's provisions. The person making such excavation, and the property owner on whose behalf such excavation is made, shall be liable for the full cost thereof, plus the costs provided for in section 27-72. Penalities for violations of this article III and applicable sections of article II may be assessed in accordance with section 27-84. 
(f)  If no work is performed, all permits shall be voided within three (3) months of issuance. If a permit is voided, the permit fee that is included in the portion of the Code that contains all fees shall be forfeited. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-40 Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-77. - Necessary excavation or related work. 
This article shall not be construed to prevent the making of any necessary excavation or the performance of any related work by any governmental agency, public service company, or holder of a properly granted easement in an emergency. A permit or permits associated with such emergency excavation(s) shall be obtained on the next business day. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-41; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-78. - Closing of public highways; protection of excavation site; barriers and lighting required. 
(a)  If the permittee's work requires the closing or obstruction of any streets and/or sidewlaks, or a portion thereof, for any period of time, notice shall be given, as required in section 27-75(a) herein, on forms provided, to the director of the department of public works or his/her agent, no less than twenty-four (24) hours before such work commences. The director of public works or his/her agent and the police department may determine the need for any such closing or obstruction of any streets or a portion thereof, and may require the work or work method to be so altered as to provide for traffic flow. The permittee shall receive approval from the director of public works, the police and fire services and the director of traffic and parking in advance of closing any street. Emergency medical service shall be notified of any such street closing. 
(b)  The permittee shall safeguard the security of the general public, protect the public from injury or harm, and ensure that public rights are not unreasonably curtailed under this article. 
(c)  If the location and extent of work is such that the chief of police or his/her agent believes that a trained flagger is required, such trained flagger shall be provided at the expense of the permittee. Where such trained flagger provides services to more than one (1) permittee, each permittee shall be responsible proportionately for such expense. If such conditions exist at the close of the working day, a watchman and a sufficient number of traffic control persons shall be employed and assigned by the permittee to direct traffic at night. The work shall be planned to avoid such conditions whenever possible. 
(d)  Any permittee making any opening or excavation in a right-of-way shall establish and maintain protective safety measures at any such opening or excavation. The permittee shall be responsible for the costs of the protective safety measures. 
(e)  The permittee shall notify the director of the department of public works or his/her agent and the police department of its plans regarding excavation no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to performing the initial excavation or any subsequent excavation, and will cooperate with the director to ensure that excavation, construction, filling and patching are performed in the least disruptive manner practicable. 
(f)  Unless specifically stated by the permit, only one-half (½) of the traveled way of a street may be excavated upon at one time, and the same shall be properly restored for the safe passage of vehicular and pedestrian traffic before the remaining half (½) of the traveled way of said street is excavated upon. 
(g)  Where an excavation involves or affects a public sidewalk, the adjacent street may not be excavated concurrently. Where a sidewalk is excavated or impeded by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for pedestrian travel and convenient for users, and which shall be barricaded and otherwise protected from vehicular traffic. Where a portion of any street other than the sidewalk is excavated, the sidewalk must be made safe and passable. 
(h)  The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the work, traffic and pedestrian conditions can be maintained as near to normal as possible at all times, so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of adjoining property and to the general public. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-42; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-79. - Permanent patching. 
(a)  After a proper settling period, the city or its contract representative shall make all temporary patches permanent as directed by the city engineer except in those instances where the permittee elects to do the permanent patching. 
(b)  Permittees who elect to do permanent patching themselves shall, at their own expense and once approved by the city engineer or, if designated, the director of public works, or their agents, have a utility company or contractor, permanently restore the trenches or road surface in accordance with the city's engineering standards. Said work shall apply to all excavations that have occurred within the past year prior to September 15th and shall be permanently restored by November 15th prior to winter. 
(c)  Permittees who elect to do permanent patching themselves shall be responsible for any subsequent repair work required for the patch itself or for any underground damage caused by the excavation work for a period of five (5) years. If settlement occurs after permanent pavement patching and restoration within the five (5) year period the city may again restore the damaged area(s) at the additional expense of the permittee. 
(d)  Contractors who elect to pay the city to complete permanent patching shall be charged a fee to cover the permanent patching. The city engineer shall establish a permanent patch restoration the fee to cover all costs associated with restoring and maintaining sections of the street that were excavated and temporarily patched. The fees shall be based upon the following criteria: actual cost of pavement repair to the level required by the city's specifications; and a fifteen (15) percent surcharge for administration and inspection. The monies collected shall be deposited in a special account, and utilized to cover expenses incurred by the city for restoration work caused by the issuance of permits under this article and for similar pavement repairs. Once the city has completed a permanent patch it will be responsible for ongoing maintenance. If the fee paid by the contractor turns out to be lower than the city's actual cost plus fifteen (15) percent then the permitee shall be responsible for the full actual cost of permanent patching completed by the city and shall pay the city the shortfall balance due immediately upon written notice from the city. 
(e)  The permittee shall reimburse the city for any and all costs the city may incur in replacement or repair of traffic controls or pavement markings disrupted, damaged or removed by work performed under an excavation permit. 
(f)  The city may bill the permittee and persons liable under section 27-78 for all patching items and police protection. If the city so bills, there will be an additional percentage charge for administration and handling costs. 
(g)  All invoices shall be paid no later than forty-five (45) days from the date of billing. A service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be imposed on accounts forty-five (45) days past due. 
(h)  When a permittee under this article excavates fifty (50) percent or more of the width of the existing paved surface of a street, or if the integrity of the remaining road surface is compromised by the excavation, the city engineer or his/her agent may direct that the entire area of the existing pavement be milled and/or resurfaced. The expense of such work by the city or its agents shall be collected from the permittee, or its surety by any proper action. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-43; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-80. - Parking. 
(a)  The permittee, his/her agent(s), servant(s) or employee(s) do not have the right to use any ption of the street as a parking area for his/her benefit except as authorized by the director of traffic and parking at his/her discretion. 
(b)  Upon the permittee's request, the director of traffic and parking may issue a written authorization for him/her to use, occupy, or block one or more metered parking spaces, or a specific portion of a sidewalk if necessary to accommodate construction or demolition adjacent to such parking spaces, or to such specific portion of a sidewalk. The director of traffic and parking shall establish a fee or fees for the authorization to use metered parking spaces. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-44; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-81. - Street moratoriums; reconstructed and resurfaced streets. 
No excavations shall be made in a street that has been reconstructed or resurfaced within the last five (5) years. When the city engineer or his/her agent deems excavations unavoidable, they will be subject to special restoration requirements according to standard detail regulations as established and promulgated by the city engineer or his/her agent. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-45; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-82. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who which violates any provision of this article III shall be subject to a fine in an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(b)  In addition to the fine set forth in subsection (a) above, upon a second violation, the director of public works or his/her agent shall have the authroity to suspend for thirty (30) days, any license and/or permit issued pursuant to this article III. 
(c)  In addition to the fine set forth in subsection (a) above, upon a third violation, the licensee's/permittee's license/permit shall be automatically suspended for a period of sixty (60) days, so that the licensee/permittee shall be prohibited from carying on such business in the city for a sixty (60) day period. 
(d)  In addition to the fine set forth in subsection (a) above, upon the licensee's/permittee's fourth violation, the license/permit shall be automatically suspended for a peirod of twelve (12) months so that the licensee/permitte shall be prohibited from carrying on such business in the city for said twelve (12) month period. 
(e)  Failure to comply with all of the requirements and conditions of this article III may result in revocation of the license/permit issued hereunder and/or in the commencement of such legal proceedings as may be necessary to enforce all such obligations. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-46; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-83. - Public utilities. 
(a)  Any public utility utilizing the city right-of-way as defined by the state statutes shall restore the roadway surfaces in accordance with city engineering standards. 
(b)  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prevent the making of any necessary excavation, or the performance of any related work by any public service company or holder of a properly issued easement in the event of an emergency. In the event of an emergency, the public utility company shall notify the city immediately or, if after hours, the start of the next business day, and apply for the required permit. Any public service company which has complied with the provisions of Conn. General Statutes section 16-230 as amended from time to time shall be exempted from the requirement of posting a bond as herein set forth. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-47; Ord. of 10-18-95, § 2; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-84. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a penalty pursuant to this article III may appeal such action in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 17-1.16 of this Code as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Secs. 27-85—27-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND DEDICATION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 27-101. - Standards for construction, curbing, drainage of dedicated streets. 
No street or street extension shall be accepted by the city unless said design of such street conforms to the city engineering standards, or to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and until the following minimum specifications concerning road construction, curbing and drainage are complied with to the satisfaction of the city engineer or his/her duly authorized representative(s). All work shall be under the supervision of the city engineer or his/her duly authorized representative(s): 
(1)  City standards shall be published by the city engineer; 
(2)  Where city standards do not cover items of technical detail, state Department of Transportation, (DOT), standard specifications for road bridges and incidental construction shall apply; 
(3)  All utilities, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and services intended to support such road improvements shall be approved by the respective utility or authority. Final approval of the location of such utilities shall be to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
(4)  A bond satisfactory to the city engineer and the corporation counsel to be furnished by the owner of said property for the faithful performance of the work in accordance with the specifications as outlined above; and 
(5)  Monuments shall be set at street corners and other control points designated by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 4-2-56; Ord. of 8-5-57; Ord. of 8-3-59; Code of 1985, § 27-48; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-102. - Notice, hearing on recommendations to repair or build new sidewalks. 
(a)  The city engineer in consultation with the director of the department of public works is responsible for the repair of sidewalks as funded by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  Where sidewalks do not exist, the board of aldermen, after a public hearing held by the director of the department of public works, shall approve such installation. Once funded, the city engineer shall design and install such walkway as approved. All recommendations from the department of public works to the board of aldermen for the laying of any new sidewalk in the city shall be accompanied by the name of the owner of the property adjoining such sidewalk, or his/her agent, and the street and number of such property. Whenever a hearing is to be held concerning the laying of new sidewalks as aforesaid, the city clerk shall cause an advertisement to be published in the daily papers of such hearing for at least two (2) days prior to the time fixed for the hearing. Additionally, the city clerk shall cause notice to be given to said property owners, their agents, or persons having charge of said property or estate. Such notice shall be left at the usual place of abode of such property owner or his/her agent. If any person so interested does not reside in the city at the time, or under any legal disability, or in case the owner of such property is unknown, such notice shall be given as ordered by a judge of the Superior Court in the Judicial District of New Haven. 
(Code of 1928, § 755; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-49; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-103. - Authority of the director of the department of public works to lay, repair sidewalks; lien for costs. 
After due notice is given to an abutting property owner to repair a structurally defective sidewalk, the director of the department of public works is authorized to cause such repairs to be made if such owner fails to do so within thirty (30) days after such notice has been given. Such repairs are to be those that he/she believes are necessary to insure reasonable and safe use by the public, including the laying of curbs, sidewalks and gutters. The cost of the laying of any such sidewalk and the making of such repairs shall become a lien upon such property collectible as in the case of sewers and permanent street pavements. 
(Code of 1928, § 756; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-50; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-104. - Residential sidewalk repair. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the above section, the director of the department of public works is authorized to enter into a written agreement on behalf of the city with the owner/occupant(s) of residential property having no more than six (6) dwelling units, to repair any portion of, or an entire, structurally defective sidewalk abutting the property. Under this agreement, the city and the abutting property owner/occupant(s) will each pay fifty (50) percent of the costs of such sidewalk repair. Such costs are to be computed based upon the contracted unit price for such repair, and the area to be repaired, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  There must be sufficient funds available in the budget to make such repair; 
(2)  The city engineer or his/her designee, must find that the repair is appropriate and necessary; 
(3)  The city engineer shall have sole discretion in the direction and supervision of procurement rules for a contractor to effect such sidewalk repair; and 
(4)  The abutting property owner/occupant(s) must enter into a written agreement with the city to have the sidewalk repaired. 
The abutting property owner's share of the sidewalk repair cost shall be due and payable in full no later than twelve (12) months from the date such repair is completed. If payment is made within said period, then no interest shall accrue on the abutting property owner's fifty (50) percent share of the repair cost. If the abutting property owner fails to pay his/her share of the sidewalk repair cost within that period, then interest shall accrue from the payment due date on the unpaid portion at the rate of one (1) percent per month. The city shall have a lien for the property owner's share of the repair cost as provided in section 92 of the city charter as amended from time to time. In order to perfect such lien, a certificate of lien shall be recorded within sixty (60) days after the date on which the sidewalk repair covered by this section was completed. The lien shall be released upon payment of the property owner(s)'s share of the repair costs. 
(b)  The benefits of this section shall not be available to abutting property owners who: 
(1)  By their acts, or those of their employees/agents, caused the damage to the sidewalk for which repair is sought; or 
(2)  Owe any delinquent taxes to the city; or 
(3)  Are delinquent in any other financial obligation owed to the city. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-50.1; Ord. of 4-2-01; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-105. - Walk and curb contractors—License required; exception. 
No person, firm or corporation shall as contractor, engage in the work of constructing, relaying or repairing sidewalks, curbs or combined curb and gutter upon the public streets of the city unless licensed by the director of the department of public works. However, a property owner or his/her agent may make minor repairs to an existing walk in an area the length of which shall not exceed two (2) feet and the width of which shall not exceed two (2) feet, or to a curb not to exceed two (2) feet in length in front of which such walk or curb is located. 
(Code 1928, § 757; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-51; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-106. - Same—Application for license; conditions, duties. 
Every person applying for a license as a walk and curb contractor must file a satisfactory bond of a surety company authorized to do business in the city, in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with the city. The bond shall be conditioned substantially on the applicant indemnifying and saving harmless the city, said director and his/her agents from all suits and actions against said city, or any of its officers, for or on account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any persons resulting from any work performed by them, or of or from any negligence in guarding said work, or of or from any act or omission of said applicant, his/her servants or agents. The applicant shall faithfully perform said work in all respects; and shall also replace and restore that portion of any street in which said applicant, his/her servants or agents shall make any excavation, to as good condition as that in which the same was before said work was performed. Said applicant shall comply in all respects with the rules and regulations established by the department of public works relative to such work, and with the terms or the permits which may be issued to him/her, and shall also pay all fines imposed upon him/her for violation of any such rule or regulation. He/she shall state in his/her application his/her actual place of business, together with the name under which the business is done, and shall notify the director of the department of public works of any change in either thereafter. He/she shall give personal attention to the work done under his/her license. 
(Code 1928, § 759; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-52; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-107. - Licenses; expiration and fee. 
All licenses concerning walk and curb contractors shall expire December 31 next following their date of issue, unless sooner revoked. The board of aldermen shall approve such license fee, and said fee shall be included in the portion of the Code that contains all fees. Said license is not transferable. 
(Code 1928, § 758; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-53; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(13), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-108. - Same—Duty to give notice before commencing work; oral permits. 
No licensee shall commence the construction, relaying or resetting of any sidewalk, curb, or combined curb and gutter until he/she has applied for and received a permit for doing said work from the city engineer or his/her agent. In an emergency the director of the department of public works or city engineer may permit a licensee to begin work upon oral notice, which shall be followed immediately by written permit. The fee shall be included in the portion of the code that contains all fees. 
(Code 1928, § 760; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-54; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(14), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-109. - Same—Availability of permit on job; condition of permit, revocation. 
The permit must be available on the job during the continuance of the work, and must be shown to all authorized persons when required. The licensee will also agree to comply with the special conditions printed on the back of the permit, including the following: 
(1)  All materials shall be promptly removed from the street. 
(2)  Work shall be done to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and in conformity with the city standards. The city may revoke permission now granted for just cause after the permit has been issued without payment of compensation or damages, and the said grantee, his/her or their heirs and assigns shall save the city harmless from all loss, cost or damage on account of the construction, maintenance, operations and use of said work. 
(Code 1928, § 760; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-55; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-110. - Adoption of rules, regulations governing construction. 
The city engineer is authorized and empowered to adopt, from time to time, such reasonable rules, regulations and specifications for the conduct of the work relating to sidewalks and curbs as he/she may deem appropriate and in the best interests of the city. Rules and regulations are to be made consistent with the City's Complete Streets Policy and the Complete Streets Design Manual of March, 2010. 
(Code 1928, § 762; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-57; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 1638, 9-7-10 )  
Sec. 27-111. - Penalty for violations of this article. 
Every person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article inclusive, shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute. In the case of a licensed contractor found guilty of an offense, the contractor's license may be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1928, § 764; Ord. of 10-6-41; Code of 1985, § 27-59; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Secs. 27-112—27-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BRIDGES 
 
Sec. 27-131. - Bridge safety. 
(a)  The city engineer shall maintain an accurate inventory of bridges that exceed twenty (20) feet in length. He/she shall also review or cause to be reviewed the condition of the bridge to support the loading of vehicle and/or pedestrian usage. 
(b)  Should the bridge be deemed unsafe for specific vehicle usage, the city engineer shall restrict traffic loads to the load limit of the bridge capacity. 
(c)  Should a bridge be determined unsafe for any usage, the city engineer shall declare the bridge unsafe, and close said bridge to all traffic. Closure of any bridge shall be adequately signed and fully restricted to avoid any possible inadvertent traffic movement on walkways over bridges. 
(d)  Any bridge replacement shall be designed by a professional engineer, and conform to engineering standards for the type of bridge being installed. 
(Code of 1928, § 789; Code of 1985, § 27-67; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Secs. 27-132—27-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UNACCEPTED STREETS 
 
Sec. 27-151. - "Unaccepted streets," defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, an "unaccepted street" is a street, (right-of-way), that has been identified for public use where no or only partial improvements have been made, and where the city has not formally accepted the perpetual maintenance of the same. 
(Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-152. - Building permits on unaccepted streets. 
No building permit shall be issued on unaccepted streets without the approval of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 8-1-66, § 1; Code of 1985, § 27-76; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-153. - Acceptance of unaccepted streets. 
All unaccepted streets will be accepted by the board of aldermen only as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 8-1-66, § 2; Code of 1985, § 27-77; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-154. - Procedure for acceptance of unaccepted streets. 
(a)  The following procedures shall apply to all unaccepted streets: 
A property owner and/or developer may petition the board of aldermen for acceptance of an unaccepted street. Such petitions shall be referred by the board of aldermen to the city plan commission for preliminary review, and if deemed appropriate, site plan review. If the petition is denied, the city plan commission shall notify the board of aldermen. If the petition is acceptable, the city plan commission shall conduct a formal site plan review in a manner consistent with section 64 of the New Haven Zoning Ordinance as it is amended from time to time, and obtain from the owner/developer documentation assuring that the street shall be improved in accordance with all city engineering standards, and be designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Connecticut. The owner/developer's plan shall consider any and all unique characteristics of the land and surrounding neighborhood and will assure implementation of all public improvements that support development of property consistent with the zoning laws of the city. Further, unless otherwise approved by the board of aldermen, such improvements shall be made at no expense to the city. Upon approval of the site plan, the city plan commission shall refer it to the board of aldermen for approval. 
(b)  Upon completion of all public improvements in accordance with the approved site plan, the city engineer shall petition the board of aldermen to accept the street for perpetual maintenance. 
(Ord. of 8-1-66, § 4; Code of 1985, § 27-79; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-155. - Official basis for administering article. 
The most current right-of-way information as used by the city shall serve as the official basis for administering this article. 
(Ord. of 8-1-66, § 5; Code of 1985, § 27-80; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-156. - Administration of article. 
(a)  The building official shall be responsible for the administration of issuing building permits on unaccepted streets as approved by the board of aldermen. 
(b)  Unless otherwise stated, the city engineer shall administer all other provisions, and shall be responsible to provide all necessary data and information to the board of aldermen as it may require to effectuate this article's provisions. 
(Ord. of 8-1-66, §§ 6, 7; Ord. of 1-5-81, § 1, Code of 1985, § 27-81; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-157. - Waiver. 
(a)  An applicant requesting a waiver of the prohibition against building on an unaccepted street shall file such request with the city's board of aldermen on such forms and shall follow such procedures as are prescribed by the board. 
(b)  The applicant shall indicate whether access over an unaccepted street is not more than two hundred fifty (250) feet in length, and a right-of-way fifty (50) feet in width, or that access can only be gained by passing over a right-of-way which is not within the ownership or control of the applicant or the present owners. 
(c)  In determining whether to waive the prohibition against the issuance of a building permit on an unaccepted street the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  The lot(s) in the designated area shall comply with zoning regulations; 
(2)  The travel way to the property is maintainable and safe, i.e. can be plowed adequately, and provide for emergency services; 
(3)  There are no practical alternatives available to the applicant and the present owners to enable them to meet the requirements of this section; 
(4)  The denial of a waiver would effectively prohibit the use of the property for any purpose; 
(5)  There are adequate provisions for utilities, sewers and fire equipment access; 
(6)  The granting of such waiver would not significantly affect public safety; 
(7)  A petition for acceptance of the unaccepted street was denied by the city plan commission or board of aldermen. 
In granting a waiver, the board may attach such additional conditions as are deemed necessary to protect the neighborhood. Failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 1-5-81, § 2; Code of 1985, § 27-82; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-158. - Procedure for construction of unaccepted street. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "unaccepted street" shall mean any street, highway, passageway, alley, lane, court or driveway which serves as access to one or more lots, and which is not an accepted and approved city street or state highway. 
(b)  No unaccepted street, which serves as access from an accepted city street to more than one (1) dwelling unit, and which is in excess of one hundred (100) feet in length, shall be utilized as access to any dwelling unless such unaccepted street is designed and constructed in accordance with the standards of construction for accepted city streets, established by the city engineer, as may be amended from time to time, and which unaccepted street is approved by the board of aldermen, in a manner consistent with section 27-154 captioned "Procedure for acceptance of unaccepted streets." Said standards of the city engineer are to be considered the standards of the City of New Haven. 
(c)  No dwelling shall be erected on any lot which does not have frontage on a street, which is an accepted city street unless the unaccepted street to which the dwelling fronts is constructed in accordance with this section. 
(Code of 1985, § 27-83; Ord. of 3-19-90, § 1; Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Sec. 27-159. - Penalties for violations of this chapter. 
Any person violating any section in this chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or an amount up to the maximum allowed under state statute. 
(Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Secs. 27-160—27-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROCEDURE FOR ABANDONMENT OF STREETS 
 
Sec. 27-181. - Abandonment of streets. 
The following procedures shall apply where abandonment of accepted streets is requested: 
A property owner/developer shall petition the board of aldermen with a copy to the director of the department of public works. The board of aldermen shall refer the request to said director, who shall obtain any additional information pertinent to the request from the owner/developer, and shall hold a public hearing after notifying adjacent property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the roadway. The director of the department of public works will prepare a report after the public hearing, and submit it to the board of aldermen for their consideration in granting the request to abandon the street. Upon approval by the board of aldermen, the city town clerk will publish a public notice announcing the abandonment of the street. Appropriate documentation including an A-2 survey map shall be filed with the city engineer, the town clerk and the assessor identifying the land transfers as approved by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1426, 9-28-06; Ord. No. 1587, 4-20-09)  
Chapter 27½ - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 26, 1983, §§ 1—8 relative to public swimming pools did not specify manner of codification, and therefore, has been included by the editor as Ch. 27½, §§ 27½-1—27½-8. 
Ch. 27½ was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Sec. 27½-1. - Title and scope. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known as the "public swimming pool ordinance" may be so cited, and will be referred to as this chapter. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of the chapter shall apply to all public swimming pools as hereinafter defined including all facilities incident thereto. The purpose of this chapter shall provide a guide for the operation and maintenance of such pools so that health hazards will be minimized. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, §§ 1.1, 1.2)  
Sec. 27½-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. The word "shall" as used herein indicates a mandatory requirement. 
(1)  Swimming pool. Any structure of concrete, steel, or other relatively impervious material intended for bathing, swimming, or therapeutic purposes, located either indoors or outdoors, provided with controlled water supply (filtration, recirculation and chlorination) and having a depth of two (2) feet or more at any point. 
(2)  Public swimming pool. Any swimming pool other than a private residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by numbers of persons for swimming, bathing or therapeutic purposes, operated by any person as defined herein, whether he be owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. 
(3)  Private residential swimming pool. Any swimming pool, located on private property under the control of the home-owner, the use of which is limited to swimming or bathing purposes by family members or their invited guests. (The operation and maintenance of such pools are not subject to the provision of this chapter.) 
(4)  Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, governmental agency, club or organization of any kind. 
(5)  Director of public health. The director of public health of the City of New Haven or any duly or lawfully appointed member of his staff, as authorized by the board of health. 
(6)  Health department. Is the health department of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, §§ 2.1—2.6)  
Sec. 27½-3. - License to operate. 
(a)  No person as defined in section 27½-2(4) shall operate or maintain a public swimming pool unless said person has obtained a license to operate such pool from the director of health. Such license shall be required upon application and or subsequent inspection, the first year of this chapter and on January 1, each year thereafter and shall be valid for one (1) year unless otherwise revoked for cause. Only persons who comply with this chapter and Section 19-13B33a of the Public Health Code of the State of Connecticut, shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license. Such licenses are not transferable. 
(b)  The director of health is authorized to promulgate regulations and establish fees to cover inspections and other services in connection with the operation and maintenance of public swimming pools for the protection and promotion of public health and safety. The health department shall perform inspections at reasonable hours to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, §§ 3.1, 3.2)  
Sec. 27½-4. - Suspension of license. 
(a)  If upon inspection, conditions detrimental to the public's health are found, either due to violation of Section 19-13-B33a of the Connecticut Public Health Code, including negligence, faulty equipment or inadequate operational procedures, the director of health may, by written order, immediately suspend the license to operate the pool until such time as the conditions for the suspension have been corrected. 
(b)  A suspended license may be reinstated by written permission of the director of health when, upon reinspection, the conditions causing the suspension of the license have been corrected. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, §§ 4.1, 4.2)  
Sec. 27½-5. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The director of health may revoke any license to operate a pool for failure to comply with a written order following suspension of the license, or where the license has been obtained through nondisclosure, misrepresentation, or mis-statement of a material fact. 
(b)  Before a license is revoked, the person to whom the permit has been issued shall have notice in writing enumerating the instances causing such revocation. 
(c)  After revocation, a license to operate shall be reissued upon proper reapplication and upon presentation of evidence that the deficiencies causing revocation have been corrected. A re-license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be required for all reissued licenses. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, §§ 5.1—5.3; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 8; Ord. of 5-24-99)  
Sec. 27½-6. - Appeal. 
The person or persons to whom the license was issued may appeal a written order by the director of health. The appeal shall be made in writing and shall be received by the director of health within two (2) working days after receipt of the order. The director of health shall immediately review the case and may vacate, modify, or affirm such order. The licensee aggrieved by the action of the director of health, may within forty-eight (48) hours after the making of such decision, appeal to the state commissioner of health, who shall thereupon immediately notify the authority from whose order the appeal was taken, and examine into the merits of such case, and may vacate, modify, or affirm such action. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, § 6.1)  
Sec. 27½-7. - Inspection. 
(a)  The director of health is authorized to conduct such inspections as it deems necessary to insure compliance with all provisions of this chapter and shall have right of entry at any reasonable hour to the swimming pool for this purpose. 
(b)  After issuance of a license, water samples for analysis will be obtained from each pool on a schedule as determined by the director of health. Analysis of the water samples will include coliform, free chlorine, chlorine and pH level determination; in addition, a visual inspection of water clarity and the pool area will be effected. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, §§ 7.1, 7.2)  
Sec. 27½-8. - Fees for license. 
(a)  The fee for a license to conduct, operate and maintain a public swimming pool shall be as set out in section 17-20 of this Code. 
(b)  An owner or operator may request the director of health to perform an additional water analysis at any reasonable time. The fee for this request shall be as set out in section 17-20 of this Code. 
(c)  Also, as a public service to individual home owners with nonpublic pools, the director of health, will, upon request, during the months of June, July and August, analyze pool water taken from individual nonpublic pools for a fee as set out in section 17-20 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-26-83, §§ 8.1—8.3; Ord. of 4-15-85, § 8; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 6a; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1345, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05)  
Chapter 28 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 28 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Charter reference— Preparation, recommendation of annual appropriations and tax rate, § 58; board of tax review, § 65; department of assessments, § 81. See also Compilation of Special Laws, §§ 55—68. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - List of exempt property prepared by assessor. 
The assessor shall annually, on or before the first day of June, present to the mayor, to be by him presented to the board of aldermen, an accurate, detailed statement of all lands and buildings on which local taxes are not assessed, giving locations, descriptions, assessor's valuations, names of owners, and reason for exemptions. Said report shall include the results of an audit by the assessor of tax-exempt commercial activity undertaken by nonprofit entities to ensure conformance with local and state tax requirements, and said report shall also contain the valuation of personal property owned by tax-exempt institutions and utilities. Failure to comply with reports and information required by the assessor pursuant to this section shall result in a penalty payable to the City of New Haven of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per parcel per day of failure to comply. 
(Code 1928, § 840; Ord. of 8-5-85)  
Sec. 28-2. - Issuance of tax bills, warrants. 
Whenever any tax has been duly laid, the mayor and the controller shall prepare and sign a proper rate bill therefor; and the mayor shall cause such rate bill with a proper warrant for the collection of such tax to be delivered to the collector. 
(Code 1928, § 838; Ord. of 8-2-93)  
Sec. 28-3. - Due date for taxes not exceeding fifty dollars. 
Any property tax laid by said city and due on the grand list of 1954, or on the grand list of any year thereafter, and which does not exceed the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), shall become due and payable in a single payment on the first day of January next after said tax is laid. If such tax shall not be paid on or before the first day of February next after the same becomes payable, interest shall be charged thereon, after said date, at the same rate that interest is legally charged on other delinquent property taxes due the city. 
(Ord. of 12-6-54) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish due date for taxes under $50.00, § 12-144 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 28-4. - Tax abatement on low and moderate income housing. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section 28-4: 
Low and moderate income housing means housing, the construction or rehabilitation of which is aided or assisted in any way by any federal or state statute, which housing is subject to regulation or supervision or rents, charges or sale prices and methods of operation by a governmental agency under a regulatory agreement or other instrument which restricts occupancy of such housing to persons or families whose incomes do not exceed prescribed limits. 
Owner means a person or persons, partnership, joint venture, or corporation who or which has executed, or will execute, a regulatory agreement or other instrument with a governmental agency, either federal, state or local, which limits occupancy of the low and moderate income housing owned or to be owned by such person or persons, partnership, joint venture or corporation to persons or families whose income do not exceed prescribed limits. 
(b)  Contracts for abatement. The mayor may, with the approval of the board of aldermen, enter into contracts for the city with owners of low and moderate income housing, granting abatement, in whole or in part, of the taxes on the real estate used for such low and moderate income housing. The amount of such abatement shall be established in each such contract, giving due consideration to the purpose or purposes to which the money equivalent of the taxes so abated is to be applied. Each such contract shall require that the owner apply the money equivalent of the taxes so abated to one or more of the following specified purposes: (1) to reduce rents below the levels which would be achieved in the absence of abatement; (2) to improve housing quality and design; (3) to effect occupancy by persons and families of varying income levels, within prescribed limits; or (4) to provide necessary related facilities or services. 
(c)  Term. The abatement shall become effective on the date specified in the contract between the city and an owner of low and moderate income housing. The term of abatement shall extend for the remainder of the fiscal year in which abatement becomes effective and may continue for a period not to exceed thirty-nine (39) consecutive fiscal years thereafter; provided, that such abatement shall terminate at any time when the property for which tax abatement has been granted is not used solely for low and moderate income housing; and provided, further, that the continuation of such abatement may be conditioned upon the continuation of state reimbursement to the city for such abatement. The abatement authorized herein shall be granted only for low and moderate income housing upon which construction or rehabilitation commenced after July 1, 1967. Any contract heretofore entered into between the City of New Haven and an owner of low and moderate income housing may be amended by the parties to extend the period of abatement up to thirty-nine (39) years in accordance with this section. 
(d)  State assistance. The mayor shall, with the approval of the board of aldermen, executed on behalf of the city contracts with the state for financial assistance by the state in the form of reimbursement for the tax abatement granted to an owner of low and moderate income housing in accordance with this section 28-4. 
(Ord. of 1-8-68; Ord. of 11-10-69) 
Editor's note— An ordinance enacted January 8, approved January 15, operative and effective January 25, 1968, amended this Code by adding § 28-4. An ordinance enacted Nov. 10, approved Nov. 14 and effective Dec. 4, 1969, amended § 28-4(c) by increasing the number of fiscal years from 19 to 39 and adding the authority to amend contracts with owners of housing to extend the period of abatement.  
Sec. 28-5. - Abatement of taxes on structures of historical or architectural merit. 
(a)  Authority to provide. In accordance with Section 12-127a of the Connecticut General Statutes, the City of New Haven may provide for the abatement in whole or in part of real property taxes on structures of historical or architectural merit, for such time as determined necessary by the committee on tax abatement, in accordance with the purpose of this section. 
(b)  Duty to determine eligibility of structures for abatement. Determination of which historical or architecturally meritorious structures shall be eligible for potential tax abatement shall be made by the aldermanic committee on tax abatement after written recommendation of the city plan commission and the New Haven Preservation Trust. 
(c)  To whom abatement available; committee to request advisory reports. Such tax abatement shall be available to the owners of real property which is so classified if upon petition and after public hearing it can be shown to the satisfaction of the aldermanic committee on tax abatement with the current level of taxation as a material factor which threatens the continued existence of the structure, necessitating either its demolition or remodeling in a manner which destroys the historical or architectural value. In reaching their decision, the aldermanic committee on tax abatement shall request from the city plan commission, the New Haven Preservation Trust and from the New Haven Historic District Commission, where appropriate, a written recommendation as to whether the required relief should be granted. Such advisory reports shall be available at the time of the public hearing. 
(d)  Payment of taxes, interest when structure demolished, remodeled. If, after taxes on such structure have been abated under the terms of this section, such structure is demolished or remodeled in a way which destroys its architectural or historical value, the then owners shall pay to the City of New Haven an amount equal to the total amount of taxes which had been abated under the provisions of this section, plus reasonable interest thereon as determined by the aldermanic committee on tax abatement. 
(e)  Contracts for state financial assistance. The City of New Haven may enter into a contract for state financial assistance for structures of historical and architectural merit in the form of reimbursement for tax abatement according to the terms of Section 12-127a of the Connecticut General Statutes. Such contract shall provide that payments shall be made annually in an amount equal to the difference between the taxes that would be paid on such property were there no abatement and the taxes actually paid by the owners and that in consideration of such grant-in-aid the municipality shall abate taxes to the agreed amount during the period of the contract. If an owner repays the tax abatement to the City of New Haven as provided in subsection (d) of this section, such repayment shall be returned to the state. 
(Ord. of 4-3-72, §§ 1—5) 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 3, 1972, §§ 1—5 did not specifically amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as §§ 28-5 was at the discretion of the editors.  
Sec. 28-6. - Admissions tax on certain places licensed by the State Commission of Revenue Services. 
(a)  Authority to impose. In accordance with Chapter 226a of the Connecticut General Statutes (sections 12-579 to 12-582), the City of New Haven hereby imposes a tax of ten (10) percent of the admission charge, as defined in subsection (3) of section 12-540, to any place licensed by the State Gaming Policy Board and containing a pari-mutuel system therein or to any off-tract betting facility located within the City of New Haven. 
(b)  Collection. The tax, as provided in subsection (a) above, shall be imposed, administered and collectable in accordance with Chapter 226a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended (sections 12-579 to 12-582). 
(c)  Appeals. Any taxpayer aggrieved because of any order, decision, determination or disallowance of the tax collector of the City of New Haven under the provisions of Chapter 226A of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended (sections 12-579 to 12-582) and this section of the Code of Ordinances, may take an appeal therefrom to the Superior Court, Judicial District of New Haven at New Haven, in accordance with the provisions of said Chapter 226a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
(d)  Effective date; not to affect receipt of other taxes. This section shall take effect from its passage and shall apply to all monies already collected by the Teletrack off-track betting facility as a municipal admission tax in anticipation of the passage of this section. Further, nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal the election of the City of New Haven to receive a portion of the sales tax imposed upon sales within the meaning of subdivision (h) of subsection (2) of section 12-407 by any hotel or lodging house located within the City of New Haven, pursuant to section 7-136b(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 5-28-80)  
Sec. 28-7. - Staged increases in real property tax assessments. 
(a)  Any increase in assessed values on the list of October 1, 1991, shall be gradually phased in, according to the ratio set forth in 12-62c, Conn. Gen. Stats., as amended by P.A. 91-79. 
Said statute essentially provides for the excess of said excess assessment on any piece of real property shall be divided into five (5) equal increments, and each of said increments shall be effective on each of the succeeding five (5) list years, thereby successively increasing each such real property assessment increase until the full assessments originally fixed in October 1, 1991, is implemented. 
(b)  Any decrease in any property assessment shall be fully effective on the list of October 1, 1991. 
(c)  Notice of the amounts of each of said phased assessments of said five-year period shall be delivered to each taxpayer of real property simultaneously with each of the succeeding four (4) annual assessment notices. 
(Ord. of 10-4-78; Ord. of 12-12-78; Ord. of 10-7-91) 
Editor's note— An Ordinance adopted Oct. 4, 1978, which was nonamendatory of the Code, has been codified in Ch. 28 at the request of the city. Designation of said ordinance, as amended, as a new § 28-7 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Note— An Ordinance adopted June 23, 1994, exercised the option of the City of New Haven, pursuant to Section 51 of Bill No. 6003 entitled "An Act Modifying Certain Taxes Affecting Business and Individuals" (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), to stay further implementation of the "Ordinance Providing for Staged Increases in Certain Real Property Tax Assessments" (hereinafter referred to as the "phase-in"), which ordinance is codified as section 28-7 of the Code of General Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
Exercising the option to stay further implementation of the phase-in thereby ratifies the estimated Net Grand List of October 1, 1993, as specified in the Tax Levy and Revenue Appropriating Ordinance for Fiscal Year 1994-95, and as otherwise utilized for the preparation, estimation, and implementation of the budget, tax levy, and revenue estimates for the fiscal year commencing on July 1, 1994, as specifically allowed for in the Act.  
Sec. 28-8. - Limited exemption from real property taxation of certain solar energy heating or cooling systems, solar energy electricity generating systems and passive solar energy systems. 
(a)  Authority to provide. In accordance with subsections (56), (57) and (61) of section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the City of New Haven, hereby authorizes, commencing with the October 1, 1981, grand list, the exemption from real property taxation of eligible solar energy heating or cooling systems, solar energy electricity generating systems for private residential uses only and passive solar energy systems as set forth within this section. 
(b)  Eligibility, extent and duration. Solar energy heating or cooling systems, solar energy electricity generating systems for private residential use only and passive or hybrid solar energy heating or cooling systems, which meet the requirements of subsections (56), (57) or (61) of Section 12-81 of the General Statutes, as amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, respectively, shall be eligible for not more than fifteen (15) successive annual limited exemptions from real property taxation as set forth in said subsections and regulations. 
(c)  Procedure. The exemption shall be waived for any assessment year, unless any person who desires to claim said exemption files, with the assessor between October 1st and October 31st each year, a written application claiming such exemption on Form 12-246-28, entitled "Alternative Energy Systems," of the State Department of Revenue Services or such other form as is prescribed by the State Commissioner of Revenue Services. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the assessors relating to a claim of exemption as provided herein may appeal the doing of the assessor to the New Haven Board of Tax Review and the Superior Court, Judicial District of New Haven at New Haven, as provided for in Sections 12-110 to 12-119 of the General Statutes, as amended. 
(Ord. of 1-5-81) 
Editor's note— Due to the prior existence of a § 28-7, the editor has redesignated as § 28-8, provisions originally adopted as § 28-7 by an ordinance of Jan. 5, 1981, approved Jan. 12, 1981, and effective Jan. 24, 1981.  
Sec. 28-9. - Fixed tax assessment in the enterprise zone. 
(a)  Authority to provide. In accordance with Public Act 81-445, as amended by Public Act 82-435, the City of New Haven, which has designated an area within the city as an enterprise zone, shall provide for the fixing of assessment on all real property in the zone. 
(b)  Eligibility. All real property within the enterprise zone which is improved during the period when such area is designated as an enterprise zone shall be eligible for the fixing of assessments. No improvements of any real property which qualifies as a manufacturing facility under Section 32-9p(d) of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be eligible for any fixed assessment pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Duration of fixed assessment. Fixed assessment on real property improvements shall be for a period of seven (7) years from the time of the completion of improvement. Any increase in assessment attributable to such improvements shall be fixed as follows: For the construction period and for the first and second years following completion of such improvements, the entire increase shall be deferred; for the third year following such completion, fifty (50) percent of the increase shall be assessed against the property; thereafter an additional ten (10) percent of the increase shall be assessed each year against the property until, in the eighth year, one hundred (100) percent of the increase has been assessed. 
(d)  Cessation of fixed assessment. Any fixed assessment on any residential property in the enterprise zone shall cease if: 
(1)  For any residential rental property, any dwelling unit in such property is rented to any person whose income exceeds two hundred (200) percent of the median family income of the City of New Haven; or 
(2)  For any conversion condominium declared after the designation of the enterprise zone, any unit is sold to any other person whose income exceeds two hundred (200) percent of the median family income of the City of New Haven. 
(e)  General revaluation. In the event of a general revaluation by the City of New Haven in the year in which such improvement is completed, resulting in any increase in assessment on such property, only that portion of the increase resulting from such improvement shall be deferred. In the event of a general revaluation in any year after the year in which such improvement is completed, such deferred assessment shall be increased or decreased in proportion to the increase or decrease in the total assessment on such property as a result of such evaluation. 
(f)  [Effective date.] This section shall not be in effect until the board of aldermen designate an enterprise zone within the City of New Haven. 
(g)  Administration. The enterprise zone assessment deferral program will be administered as described in the enterprise zone guidelines and enterprise zone administrative procedures, as approved. 
(Ord. of 1-24-83; Ord. of 9-4-84) 
Editor's note— Aldermanic designation of the enterprise zone was adopted January 24, 1983.  
Sec. 28-10. - Tax reports required of tax-exempt organizations. 
The assessor shall secure from any organization in the City of New Haven claiming an exemption from property tax, whether personal or real, under the provisions of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, Revision of 1958, and which files a Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax (Form 990) or a Federal Unrelated Business Income Tax Return (Form 990T) with the federal government, a copy of said Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax (Form 990) and Federal Unrelated Business Income Tax Return (Form 990T) within three (3) months of its being filed. 
(Ord. of 8-12-85)  
Sec. 28-11. - Additional exemption from property taxation—For blind persons. 
Authority to provide. In accordance with the provision of PA 85-165 as approved by the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut on May 13, 1985, the City of New Haven hereby authorizes, commencing with the October, 1986 Grand List, the additional exemption from property taxation of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) of assessed value for property belonging to, or held in trust for any blind person, resident of the State of Connecticut, or lacking said out of property in his own name, so much of the property belonging to or held in trust for his spouse, who is domiciled with him, as is necessary to equal said amount, who meets the following qualifications and procedures: 
(1)  The person qualifies for three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) of exemption of assessed value of property under the provisions of subsection (17) of section 12-81 of the general statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
(2)  The total of such persons's adjusted gross income as determined for purposes of the federal income tax plus any other income of such person not included in such adjusted gross income, individually if unmarried, or jointly if married, in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is allowed, is not more than fourteen thousand dollars ($14,000.00) if such person is married, or not more than twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) if such person is not married. 
(3)  Such person files an application, on a form prepared for such purpose by the assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. 
(4)  Each such application shall include a copy of such person's federal income tax return, or in the event a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by the assessor for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to the approval of a claim for such additional exemption. 
(Ord. of 4-7-86)  
Sec. 28-12. - Same—For certain veterans and veterans' spouses. 
In accordance with the provisions of Public Act 85-432 as approved by the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut on June 25, 1985, commencing with the October 1, 1986 Grand List: 
(1)  a.  Any veteran who is entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with subsection (19) of section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to an additional exemption applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), provided that the total of such veteran's qualifying income, does not exceed twenty-six thousand five hundred dollars ($26,500.00), individually, if unmarried, or thirty-two thousand dollars ($32,300.00) jointly, if married, in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is allowed. 
b.  Any veteran's surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with subsection (22) of section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to an additional exemption applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), provided the total of such spouse's qualifying income does not exceed twenty-six thousand five hundred dollars ($26,500.00) in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is allowed. 
(2)  a.  Any veteran entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with subsection (19) of section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to an additional local option exemption applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of ten (10) percent or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) whichever amount is smaller, provided that the total of such veteran's qualifying income, does not exceed thirty-nine thousand six hundred dollars ($39,600.00), individually, if unmarried, or forty-five thousand six hundred dollars ($45,600.00) jointly, if married, in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is allowed. 
b.  Any veteran's surviving spouse entitled to an exemption from property tax in accordance with subsection (22) of section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to an additional exemption applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of ten (10) percent or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) whichever is less, provided the total of such spouse's qualifying income does not exceed thirty-nine thousand six hundred dollars ($39,600.00) in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is allowed. 
(3)  Any such veteran or spouse submitting a claim for such additional exemption shall be required to file an application on a form prepared for such purpose by the assessor, not later than the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. Each such application shall include a copy of such veteran's or spouse's federal income tax return for 2007, or in the event such a return is not filed, such evidence related to income as may be required by the assessor, for the tax year of such veteran or spouse ending immediately prior to the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. 
(4)  Any veteran with a condition of disability enabling such veteran to qualify for the exemption from property tax in accordance with subsections (20) or (21) of section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be entitled to an exemption from property taxation of one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of any one (1) motor vehicle, provided, however, that such motor vehicle must be specially equipped for purposes of adapting its use to the disability of such veteran. 
(5)  Pursuant to subsection (21)(c) of section 12-81 of the general statutes, and effective commencing with the grand list of October 1, 2000, the dwelling house and the lot whereupon the same is erected, belonging to or held in trust for any citizen and resident of the city, occupied as such person's domicile shall be fully exempt from local property taxation, if such person is a veteran who served in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard or Air Force of the United States and has received financial assistance for specially adapted housing under the provisions of Section 801 of Title 38 of the United States Code and has applied such assistance toward the acquisition or modification of such dwelling house. In the event that such acquisition or modification shall occur after October 1, 2000, then such exemption shall become effective on the date of such acquisition or modification. The same exemption shall also be provided on such housing unit owned by the surviving spouse of such veteran (i) while such spouse remains a widow or widower, or (ii) upon the termination of any subsequent marriage of such spouse by dissolution, annulment or death, or by such veteran and spouse while occupying such premises as a residence. 
(Ord. of 4-7-86; Ord. No. 1297, 12-3-01; Ord. No. 1444, 3-5-07)  
Sec. 28-13. - Same—For persons permanently and totally disabled. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of PA 85-294 approved by the General Assembly of the State of Connecticut on June 4, 1985, the City of New Haven hereby authorizes any person entitled to the exemption from property tax applicable to the assessed value of property up to the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), as provided under subsection (55) of section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes, shall be entitled to an additional exemption from such tax in an amount up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of such assessed value, provided the total of such person's adjusted gross income as determined for purposes of the federal income tax plus any other income of such person not included in such adjusted gross income, individually if unmarried, or jointly if married, in the calendar year ending immediately preceding the assessment date with respect to which such additional exemption is allowed, is not more than fourteen thousand dollars ($14,000.00) if such person is married, or not more than twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) if such person is not married. 
(b)  Any person submitting a claim for the additional exemption as provided under (a), above, of this section shall be required to file an application, on a form prepared for such purpose by the assessor, not later than the date of the assessment list with respect to which such additional exemption is claimed. Each such application shall include a copy of such person's federal income tax return, or in the event a return is not filed such evidence related to income as may be required by the assessor for the tax year of such person ending immediately prior to the approval of a claim for such additional exemption. 
(Ord. of 4-7-86)  
Sec. 28-14. - Same—For businesses offering child day care services to residents. 
(a)  Authority to provide; eligibility. In accord with section 12-81n of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958 as amended, there is established a program of property tax exemption for any business, subject to the corporation business tax imposed pursuant to chapter 208 of said statutes and operating on premises owned by it within the geographical boundaries of the City of New Haven, which offers child day care services on said premises to residents of the city, provided such business is not regularly engaged in the construction or operation of child day care facilities. No business shall be deemed ineligible for participation because it operates the child day care facility through a subsidiary incorporated and functioning solely to effect such operation when the only advantages to the business of such subsidiarization are (1) to enhance the administration of such facility and (2) to limit the liability of the business for the actions or negligence of the subsidiary or its employees or agents. 
(b)  Exemption provided. Any business which participates in the program shall receive exemption of one hundred (100) percent of the assessed value of the otherwise taxable real property of the business used exclusively in providing child day care services at a designated facility, provided that the business must be the taxpayer responsible for the payment of city taxes which (in the absence of the exemption provided by this section) would become due with respect to such property. Each such exemption shall be valid for a single year. No such exemption may be transferred to another business, facility, or location. 
(c)  Financial assistance. Any business which participates in the program shall provide financial assistance, in the form of reductions in the tuition payable by the parents or guardians of children enrolled in the child day care service, with a total value each year equal to not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the tax savings obtained by the business for the same year as a result of the exemption received under the program. The financial assistance required by this subsection shall be provided only to families, residing in New Haven, whose incomes do not exceed two hundred (200) percent of the poverty level determined by the appropriate state authority. The business shall advertise the requirement for and availability of the financial assistance. 
(d)  Application. Any business wishing to apply for participation in this program shall do so in writing, using such form or forms as the human resources administrator shall provide for such purpose or (if such forms are not provided) on the letterhead of the applicant. Each such application shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the business, with the name, title, and telephone number of the owner or officer of the business authorized to represent the business in regard to the application and any matters pertaining thereto; and 
(2)  The name (if different) under which the child day care facility operates; and 
(3)  A description of the property for which the exemption is requested, including the street address, the assessment section-map-block-parcel number, and a diagram showing the location and square footage of interior and exterior spaces used exclusively by the child day care facility; and 
(4)  A copy of its valid license, issued by the appropriate state authority, to operate the child day care facility on the property for which the exemption is requested; and 
(5)  A list showing the name and address of each child presently enrolled in the facility, with one notation stating the number of such children who are minorities and a second notation stating the number of families of such children whose incomes do not exceed two hundred (200) percent of the poverty level; and 
(6)  Evidence that the facility is accredited by or is in the process of applying for accreditation by the National Association for the Education of Young Children; and 
(7)  Brochures, advertising copy, or other materials used to market the service; and 
(8)  A list of all property, real or personal, owned by it which is located within the city, with a statement that no tax payments pertaining to those properties are delinquent; and 
(9)  In an instance where the business has previously applied for or received the exemption, such other information as the human resources administrator may require to ensure that deficiencies, if any, have been satisfactorily addressed; and 
(10)  An oath, acknowledged in accord with chapter 6 of said statutes, that the statements made and information provided in or with the application is true and complete to the best knowledge of the owner or officer submitting the application. 
It shall be the responsibility of the human resources administrator, acting with the assistance of such other city officials as may be appropriate, to determine whether the business has satisfied the requirements, and is therefore eligible in principle for participation in the program as established by this section. The business shall provide such additional information or documentation as the human resources administrator may deem necessary to fulfill the responsibilities imposed by this section. The information and documentation enumerated hereinbefore shall be submitted to the human resources administrator within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of this section [February 6, 1992] for businesses requesting the exemption for the grand list of October 1, 1991, and no later than the fifteenth day of September annually thereafter for businesses requesting the exemption for the grand list next following that date. 
(e)  Assessment. The human resources administrator shall deliver to the city assessor, within fifteen (15) days following the applicable deadline specified in subsection (d) hereinbefore, the application of any business deemed eligible for participation in the program. The city assessor shall demarcate and value the real property of the business used exclusively in providing child day care services, and shall exempt the assessment on such property (if any) from taxation for the tax year corresponding to the grand list then in preparation. An applicant may be required to provide such other information or documentation as the city assessor may deem necessary to enable him to fulfill the responsibilities imposed upon him by this subsection or other applicable laws. A business dissatisfied with the determinations of the city assessor pursuant to this section may appeal those determinations in the manner provided by law. 
(f)  Reporting. For each exemption granted pursuant to subsection (e) hereinbefore, the business receiving it shall submit to the human resources administrator by the fifteenth day of June next following the grand list date, and by the fifteenth day of December and June during the tax year in which the exemption is effective, a report on its compliance with all of the requirements of this section. The human resources administrator shall compile all such reports and shall communicate them, with such comments as he may deem appropriate, to the board of aldermen promptly thereafter. The city assessor shall include each exemption granted pursuant to this section in the annual report required by section 2½-7(c) of this Code of General Ordinances. 
(g)  Voiding of exemption. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, the exemption granted to a business by the city assessor pursuant to this section shall be null and void: 
(1)  If, at the time of preparation of the tax bills for the tax year in which the business has been granted the exemption or at any subsequent time during such tax year, the business is or becomes delinquent in its payment of any taxes due to the City of New Haven; or 
(2)  If the business loses its license (by suspension, revocation, or expiration) from the state to operate the child day care facility; or 
(3)  If the business ceases to operate the child day care facility. 
(Ord. of 1-21-92) 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 6, 1987, § 1, approved by the mayor April 10, 1987, and effective April 23, 1987, repealed § 28-14, pertaining to personal property assessment list filing, as derived from an ordinance enacted Jan. 20, 1987, Provisions similar to those formerly contained in § 28-14 are set out in § 2-37(b). Subsequently an ordinance adopted Jan. 21, 1992, added a new § 28-14.  
Sec. 28-15. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 21, 1998, provided for the repeal of § 18-15, definitions, derived from an ordinance adopted Mar. 2, 1987, and similar provisions were designated as § 2-154.  
Sec. 28-16. - List of taxable property prerequisite to license, or permit. 
Effective with the passage of this section, no person shall be granted by the City of New Haven, a license or permit of the type enumerated in the sections 14-11, 17-20, 17-21, 23-1 or 23-8 of the [Code of Ordinances] unless that person has filed a list of taxable property if required to do so by Connecticut General Statutes section 12-42, provided that nothing in this section shall be so construed as to prohibit the issuance of any building permit issued pursuant to the Building Code of the State of Connecticut. 
(Ord. of 3-2-87; Ord. of 10-16-89, § 1; Ord. of 2-18-97, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 7-6-98; Ord. of 12-21-98)  
Sec. 28-17. - Exemption from personal property taxation of certain ambulance-type motor vehicles. 
(a)  Exemption. Effective commencing with the grand list of October 1, 1996, the city assessor, acting pursuant to Section 12-81c of the state statutes and in accord with the definitions, prerequisites, and limitations specified hereinafter, shall exempt from personal property taxation any ambulance-type motor vehicle which is used exclusively for the purpose of transporting any medically incapacitated individual, except any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for profit. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of implementing this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Ambulance-type motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is (i) specially equipped or modified in a significant way for the purpose of transporting medically incapacitated individuals, including but not limited to the inclusion of lifts or handbrakes, the equipping with stretchers, beds or other special seating and equipment such as oxygen, or (ii) specially equipped for the physically disabled, including but not limited to lifts for wheelchairs, computer-type dash boards, braking and accelerating mechanisms for manual operation and other such devices designed to permit physically disabled persons to use and operate motor vehicles. 
(2)  Medically incapacitated individual means a person who has been certified by a physician as having a physical or other medical disability that justifies the special equipping of or modification to the ambulance-type motor vehicle. 
(3)  Any such vehicle used to transport any such individual for profit means the payment or receipt of money, goods, or services in exchange for conveying one (1) or more medically incapacitated individuals in an ambulance-type motor vehicle. 
(c)  Prerequisites. 
(1)  Before such exemption may be implemented, said assessor shall require the owner of such motor vehicle to file a written application for such exemption with the office of the city assessor no later than November 1st following the assessment year with respect to which such exemption is requested or, if such vehicle shall be purchased or relocated to the city on or after September 1st and on or before July 31st of the assessment year for which such exemption is requested, no later than sixty (60) calendar days after such purchase or relocation. With respect to the assessment year commencing on October 1st, 1996, such application shall be filed no later than December 2nd, 1996. 
(2)  Such application shall contain such information and be in such form as said assessor shall deem necessary for the proper implementation of this ordinance. 
(3)  Said assessor shall require the owner to submit documentation from a physician (i) explaining the physical or medical disability of the medically incapacitated individual to be transported and (ii) certifying that the special equipment installed in such vehicle and/or the modification made to such vehicle is justified by the physical or other medical disability of the individual to be transported. 
(4)  Said assessor may require the owner of such motor vehicle to submit additional documentation to substantiate the application for exemption. 
(5)  Said assessor shall require a physical inspection of such motor vehicle. 
(d)  Limitations. In order to ensure that such motor vehicle is and shall be used only for the purposes of this section, the following limitations are imposed: 
(1)  The owner of such motor vehicle must be an individual person, that is, the owner may not be a partnership, corporation, firm, business, etc. 
(2)  Such motor vehicle may not be used in the ordinary course of the business or other employment of the medically incapacitated individual, or of the owner or any operator of such vehicle if said owner or operator is not the medically incapacitated individual; nor may any use of such vehicle make such medically incapacitated individual, or owner or operator, eligible to obtain (i) any reimbursement for any costs associated with such use or (ii) any federal or state income-tax deductions or credits associated with such use. 
(3)  No more than one (1) such motor vehicle may be exempted with respect to the same medically incapacitated individual. 
(e)  Expiration. An exemption implemented pursuant to this section shall expire upon the earliest occurrence of one (1) or more of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Use of such motor vehicle which use does not conform to the requirements stated in this section; 
(2)  Change in ownership of such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Removal (except temporary removal for maintenance, repair, or replacement) from such motor vehicle of the special equipment or modification which made such motor vehicle suitable for exemption under this section; or 
(4)  Destruction or other permanent incapacitation of such motor vehicle. 
(f)  Report. On or before October 1st, 1997, said assessor shall submit to the board of aldermen a report listing each vehicle, and the assessment and tax impact with respect to each such vehicle, exempted pursuant to this section from personal property taxation for the grand list of October 1st, 1996 or the supplemental list thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-16-96)  
Sec. 28-18. - Abatement for surviving spouses of police officers and firefighters. 
Pursuant to section 12-81x of the general statutes, and effective commencing with taxes levied on the Grand List of October 1, 1999, taxes shall be and hereby are fully abated on the principal residence owned and occupied by the surviving spouse of any person who dies while in the performance of his or her duties as a city police officer or firefighter. 
(1)  In the event that such officer or firefighter died prior to July 1, 2000, taxes due or paid on the principal residence owned and occupied by his/her surviving spouse on or subsequent to that date shall be abated, and the tax collector shall refund such payments. 
(2)  In the event that such officer or firefighter died on or after July 1, 2000, taxes due or paid on the principal residence owned and occupied by his/her surviving spouse on or subsequent to the date of death of such officer or firefighter shall be abated, and the tax collector shall refund such payments. 
(3)  Once such surviving spouse has been determined to be eligible for the abatement provided by this section, no periodic reapplication shall be necessary. 
(4)  In the event that such surviving spouse shall not be the sole owner of his/her principal residence, the abatement shall be prorated to reflect such surviving spouse's interest in the property. 
(5)  If such surviving spouse shall change his/her principal residence, he/she may transfer the abatement to his/her new principal residence. 
(6)  If such surviving spouse remarries, the abatement shall cease commencing with taxes on the grand list next following the date of such remarriage. In the event that such remarriage shall terminate, such surviving spouse may apply for the abatement commencing with taxes due on the grand list next following the date of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 1298, 12-3-01)  
Sec. 28-19. - Property tax freeze or deferral for certain homeowners age seventy or over. 
(a)  Purpose. To provide a property tax "freeze" or "deferral" for residential property of certain homeowners age seventy or over under the provisions of Connecticut Public Act 
(b)  Effective date. The effective date of this section shall be the Grand List of October 1, 2006. 
(c)  Qualifications. Persons qualified for a benefit under this section are: 
(1)  Any person who owns real property located in the City of New Haven, and who occupies that property as his or her principal residence at least one hundred eighty-three (183) days of each year. However, a person eligible for a "freeze" of property taxes can also be a tenant for life or for a term of years who is liable for the payment of taxes thereon under Connecticut General Statutes (General Statutes), Section 12-48 or by contract. To be eligible for a "deferral" of property taxes, the person must own the real property. A tenant for life or for a term of years would not qualify for a deferral of property taxes. 
(2)  On December thirty-first of the calendar year preceding the year in which a claim for benefits afforded by this section is filed, such person is seventy (70) years of age or over; or whose spouse, domiciled with him or her is seventy (70) years of age or over, or who is sixty-two (62) years of age or over and the surviving spouse of a taxpayer qualified for relief under this section at the time of his or her death, provided such spouse was domiciled with such qualifying taxpayer at the time of his or her death; 
(3)  Such person or spouse has resided within the city for at least ten (10) years before filing a claim for benefits afforded by this section; 
(4)  In order to qualify for a property tax "freeze," a person applying must have a maximum "qualifying income," as defined in Public Act No. 06-176, during the calendar year preceding the year in which application is made in an amount not exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for 2006, calculated by multiplying 1.7361 times the annual income limit for a single person (twenty-eight thousand eight hundred dollars ($28,800.00) for 2006) and 1.4164 times the annual income limit for a married couple (thirty-five thousand three hundred dollars ($35,300.00) for 2006) set by the State of Connecticut through its Office of Policy and Management (OPM) for the application of tax credits under Section 12-170aa of the General Statutes. The 1.7361 and 1.4164 multiplication factors shall apply to each subsequent year's annual income limits for tax credits under Section 12-170aa as determined by OPM for single persons and married couples respectively. 
(5)  In order to qualify for a property tax "deferral," a person applying must have a maximum "qualifying income," as defined in Public Act No. 06-176, during the calendar year preceding the year in which application is made in an amount not exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) for 2006, calculated by multiplying 2.6042 times the annual income limit for a single person (twenty-eight thousand eight hundred dollars ($28,800.00) for 2006) and 2.1247 times the annual income limit for a married couple (thirty-five thousand three hundred dollars ($35,300.00) for 2006) set by the State of Connecticut through its Office of Policy and management (OPM) for the application of tax credits under Section 12-170aa of the general Statutes. The 2.6042 and 2.1247 multiplication factors shall apply to each subsequent year's annual income limits for tax credits under Section 12-170aa as determined by OPM for single persons and married couples respectively. 
(d)  Requirements/provisions. 
(1)  The tax on the real property for which the benefits under this Ordinance are claimed shall be the lower of: (1) the tax due with respect to the homeowner's residence for the assessment year commencing October first of the year immediately preceding the year in which the initial claim for tax relief is made, or (2) the tax due for any subsequent assessment year. A "mobile manufactured home", as defined in Section 12-63a of the General Statutes, shall be deemed to be real property for the purposes of this section. 
(2)  The benefits afforded by this section shall entitle such person who qualifies to continue to pay the amount of such tax or such lesser amount as may be levied in any year during each subsequent year so long as such person meets the qualifications and until the property is sold or transferred or the qualified person dies without being survived by a qualified spouse. 
(3)  For a property owner otherwise eligible for a "freeze' of real property taxes under this Ordinance, the amount of the real property tax increase in any given year over the previous year that is eligible for a "freeze" shall be limited to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). If the amount of the real property tax increase in any given year over the previous year is greater than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), the amount of the tax increase greater than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00 )shall be eligible for "deferral" under this section. 
(4)  or those applicants approved for a "deferral" of real property taxes on their principal residence, the city shall have a lien on such property in the amount of the total tax relief granted, plus interest at the rate of the federal prime rate per annum. Such lien shall be due and payable to the city, with accrued interest thereon, when the real property is sold or transferred, whether voluntarily or involuntarily. Any such lien shall also be due and payable to the city upon the qualified person's death, without being survived by a qualified spouse, and shall have a priority in the settlement of such person's estate. 
(5)  The benefits afforded by this section shall be limited to the principal residence of the taxpayer(s) as defined herein, and the standard minimum building lot for the zoning district in which the residence is located together with improvements, and shall not in any case be applied to taxes owed on excess acreage or other land beyond the aforementioned minimum building lot. An applicant owning another residence other than his or her principal residence shall be ineligible for tax relief on his principal residence under this section. 
(6)  The property tax benefits provided for by this section shall, in any case where title to real property is recorded in the name of the taxpayer or his/her spouse and any other person or persons, be prorated to reflect the fractional share of such taxpayer or spouse or, if such property is a multiple family dwelling, such relief shall be prorated to reflect the fractional portion of such property occupied by the taxpayer; 
(7)  Application for the benefit afforded by this section shall be made on a form prescribed by the tax assessor, which shall be filed between February 1 and May 15 of the year as to which tax benefits are sought. The assessor may extend the May 15 deadline for filing in his or her discretion. The application shall at a minimum include the information required by Section 12-170aa(e) of the General Statutes, and if such an application for state relief is filed, shall whenever possible be filed simultaneously with such application. Applications shall be re-filed biennially thereafter. In the case of an original application for benefits under this section, if a property owner qualifies after having applied for the Section 12-170aa of the General Statutes benefit in the previous year, he or she may file such application in the year following the state application, but the application for a benefit under this Ordinance shall be re-filed in the following year to be then and thereafter reviewed in conjunction with the state application. An extension of time for making an application for tax relief may be granted by the Assessor under the circumstances described in Public Act No. 06-176. Evidence of income shall be submitted to the city assessor in such form and manner as the assessor may prescribe, including such information such as copies of federal tax returns as may be necessary to substantiate such claim in accordance with requirements in such application. Upon determination by the Assessor that the applying homeowner is entitled to tax relief in accordance with the provisions of this section, the city assessor shall notify the homeowner and the city tax collector of the approval of such application. The tax collector shall determine the maximum amount of the tax due with respect to such homeowner's residence and thereafter the property tax with respect to such homeowner's residence shall not exceed such amount. 
(8)  In respect to such biennially required application after the filing and approval for the first year, the tax assessor shall notify each such homeowner concerning application requirements. In the year immediately following any year in which such property owner has submitted application and qualified for tax benefit, such property owners shall be presumed, without filing application therefore, to be qualified for tax benefit in the subsequent year; but if any property owner has qualified and received tax benefits under this section, and in that subsequent calendar year has qualifying income in excess of the maximum provided by this ordinance, he or she shall notify the tax assessor on or before the filing date for the second year, and shall be denied tax reduction under this section for such assessment year and for any subsequent year until he or she has reapplied and again qualified for the benefits of this section; 
(9)  To the extent permitted by applicable state and federal law, applications filed under this section shall be afforded the same confidentiality by the tax assessor's office as is required to be afforded to applications for tax benefits under Section 12-170aa(f) of the General Statutes; 
(10)  The property tax benefits afforded by this section shall not disqualify such taxpayer with respect to any benefit for which such taxpayer shall be eligible under the provisions of Sections 12-129b through 12-129d, inclusive, Section 12-129n, and Section 12-170aa of the General Statutes, and any such property tax benefits afforded by this section shall be in addition to any benefits for which such taxpayer shall be eligible under other ordinances of the City of New Haven or provisions of the General Statutes, including, but not limited to, Sections 12-129b through 12-129d, inclusive, Section 12-129n, and Section 12-170aa; 
(11)  No person who receives benefits from any other town or state, based on claimed principal residency in such other town or state, shall be eligible for benefits under this section. The tax assessor may require proof of residency as he or she deems appropriate; 
(12)  In the event that the qualifying property is transferred, sold, assigned, or granted or the qualifying taxpayer otherwise transfers ownership, voluntarily or involuntarily, in whole or in part, or in the event of the death of the qualifying taxpayer in the absence of a qualifying spouse, the benefits afforded under this section shall be disqualified and discontinued in such assessment year or shall be pro-rated for that assessment year in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 06-176. The grantee shall be required within a period not exceeding ten (10) days immediately following the date of such conveyance to notify the city assessor thereof, or in the absence of such notice, upon determination by the assessor that such conveyance has occurred, the assessor shall determine the amount of tax relief benefit to which the grantor is entitled for such assessment year with respect to the interest in real property conveyed and notify the tax collector of the reduced amount of the benefit. Upon receipt of such notice from the assessor, the tax collector shall, if notice is received after the tax due date, no later than ten (10) days thereafter mail or hand a bill to the grantee stating the additional amount of tax due as determined by the assessor. Such tax shall be due and payable and collectible as other property taxes and subject to the same liens and processes of collection, provided such tax shall be due and payable in an initial or single installment not sooner than thirty days after the date such bill is mailed or handed to the grantee and in equal amounts in any remaining installments as the same are due and payable. 
(13)  A change of principal residence within the city requires reapplication for the tax benefits afforded by this section; 
(14)  Any person who, for the purpose of obtaining a tax benefit under this section, fails to disclose all matters relating thereto or with intent to defraud makes a false statement shall refund all property tax relief improperly taken, with interest at the rate applicable to unpaid taxes. Any person knowingly making a false application for the purpose of claiming a tax benefit under this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per false application submitted. 
(Ord. No. 1445, §§ 1—4, 4-16-07)  
Sec. 28-20. - Property tax exemption for property authorized by state statute when such acquisition is of property already qualified for such tax exemption. 
Pursuant to Section 12-81b of the Connecticut General Statutes, the City of New Haven hereby provides, by this section, that the property tax exemption authorized by any of subdivisions (7) to (16), inclusive, (18) (27) and (29) of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be effective as of the date of acquisition of the property to which the exemption applies, but only if the property was tax exempt under any of the aforementioned subdivisions of Section 12-81 of the Connecticut General Statutes immediately preceding the date of the acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 1600, 9-21-09)  
Sec. 28-21. - Tower One classified as housing solely for low or moderate-income persons; tax abatement. 
(a)  Tower One, owned and operated by the New Haven Jewish Community Council Housing Corporation and located at 18 Tower Lane in the city, is hereby classified as being used for housing solely for low or moderate-income persons or families in accordance with Section 8-215 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(b)  Property taxes due the City of New Haven on the property known as Tower One, located at 18 Tower Lane, owned and operated by the New Haven Jewish Community Council Housing Corporation, a nonprofit corporation, shall be abated in accordance with an agreement between the owner of Tower One and the city, Section 8-215 of the Connecticut General Statutes and section 28-4 of the City of New Haven Code of General Ordinances. The agreement shall be effective as of July 1, 2009 and shall apply to taxes due and payable in July 2009 and January 2010 and all subsequent tax years, provided that the city will not abate taxes for any period during which it is not reimbursed by the State of Connecticut pursuant to Section 8-216 of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1618, 4-7-10; Ord. No. 1619, 4-7-10)  
Sec. 28-22. - Designation of entertainment districts. 
(a)  Designation of entertainment district. Under the authority granted in Connecticut General Statutes Section 32-76, those areas of the City of New Haven which include the Science Park Municipal Development Plan area, the Downtown Municipal Development area, the Mill River Municipal Development area, the Daggett-Gilbert area and specific adjacent blocks as more particularly identified on a map entitled City of New Haven Entertainment Districts, created March 10, 2010, and last modified May 10, 2010, which map is incorporated by reference as part of this section, are hereby designated as entertainment districts, subject to review and approval by the commissioner of economic and community development. 
(b)  Mayoral authority to obtain state approval. The mayor of the City of New Haven is hereby authorized to file an application with the Connecticut Department of Economic and Community Development seeking approval for such designation. 
(Ord. No. 1631, 6-7-10)  
Sec. 28-23. - Abatement of property taxes for improvements to real property in the entertainment district. 
(a)  Authority to provide. In accordance with Section 32-76a of the Connecticut General Statutes each municipality which has designated an entertainment district may provide for the abatement of one hundred (100) percent of the property taxes on improvements to real property in entertainment districts designated under section 32-76. 
(b)  Eligibility. All real property within the entertainment district which is improved during the period when such area is designated an entertainment district shall be eligible for abatement of property taxes. 
(c)  Duration of abatement. Abatement of property taxes under this section shall be for a period of seven (7) full assessment years following the assessment year in which the improvement is completed. 
(d)  Procedure and approval. Any person seeking abatement of property taxes under this section shall, prior to the start of any improvement, file an application with the office of economic development which shall be submitted to the board of aldermen for consideration. The board of aldermen shall, within a reasonable time, consider such application and after considering the application shall approve or disapprove such application. Upon making such decision the board of aldermen shall transmit is decision, in writing including the reasons for such approval or disapproval to the applicant with a copy to the Office of Economic Development. 
(e)  This section shall take effect only upon the approval of the entertainment districts by the Commissioner of Economic and Community Development. 
(Ord. No. 1631, 6-7-10)  
Sec. 28-24. - Acceptable documents for property tax pro rata credit on motor vehicles. 
The assessor and the staff of the assessor's office shall accept as acceptable any one of the following documents as proof that motor vehicles have been sold, totally damaged, stolen, removed or registered in another state, and update the assessor's database upon presentation to reflect that the taxpayer is eligible for a pro rata credit for the property tax on a motor vehicle: 
(a)  A bill of sale, 
(b)  Signed copy of title, 
(c)  Certified letter of transfer, 
(d)  Registration to another state, 
(e)  Lease termination document, 
(f)  Salvage certificate, 
(g)  Plate return receipt, 
(h)  Proof of date of repossession. 
The staff in the assessor's office will use the DMV database at its disposal to verify where possible the above documents. 
The updated information shall be posted in color on large posted boards in tax collector's office, in the assessor's office, in the Board of Aldermen's Office, in the public library's, in the substations and be posted on the front page of the city's website, and included any informational tax related pamphlets and brochures disseminated by the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1688, 10-15-12)  
Chapter 29 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Wherever in this Chapter a provision is noted as derived from "Traffic Reg. of" a certain date, it is derived from a regulation of the Traffic Authority promulgated on such date. 
Ch. 29 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Cross reference— Abandoned, inoperative, unregistered motor vehicles prohibited, § 18-40. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited as the traffic code. 
(Code 1928, § 957)  
Sec. 29-2. - Printing, distribution of traffic code by city clerk. 
The city clerk shall cause the traffic code, with such other information as to traffic signals, regulations and information as the Traffic Authority shall prepare, to be printed and shall deliver a copy to each person who shall apply therefor. 
(Code 1928, § 991)  
Sec. 29-3. - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter, or in any other rule or regulation of the Traffic Authority, the following words or phrases are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Bus stop shall mean that portion of the roadway adjacent to a curb or the edge of the roadway where buses may receive or discharge passengers. "Motor bus" shall include any public service motor vehicle operated in whole or in part upon any street or highway in such a manner as to afford a means of transportation by indiscriminately receiving or discharging passengers, or running on a regular route or over any portion thereof or between a fixed terminal. 
(2)  Commercial vehicle shall mean any vehicle registered for commercial purposes and designed and used primarily for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise. 
(3)  Crosswalk shall mean that portion of a highway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections, or any portion of a highway distinctly indicated as a crossing for pedestrians by lines or other markings on the surface, except such prolonged or connecting lines from an alley across a street. 
(4)  Express stands shall mean that portion of the roadway adjacent to the curb or edge of the road where express vehicles may stand to receive baggage or other personal property for transportation. 
(5)  Highway or street shall mean any street designated and used for vehicular and pedestrian travel. 
(6)  Intersection shall mean that area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets which join one another at an angle whether or not one such street crosses the other. 
(7)  Lane shall mean a longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles. 
(8)  Loading zone shall mean that portion of the roadway adjacent to the curb or the edge of the roadway where commercial vehicles may stop while loading or unloading goods, wares, or merchandise. 
(9)  Curb marking shall mean that portion of a curbing, the painting of which has been authorized by the traffic authority. 
(10)  Street marking shall mean any painted line, legend, marking or marker of any description painted or placed upon any highway which purports to direct or regulate traffic. 
(11)  Traffic control device shall mean all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 249 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, placed or erected under the direction of the traffic authority for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
(12)  Operator or driver shall mean and apply to any person using, operating, or having the care, custody, or control of a vehicle being used, operated, or found upon a highway. 
(13)  Parked vehicle, unless otherwise defined, shall mean a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not, or any other vehicle in a stationary position within the limits of a public highway. 
(14)  Parking meter shall mean and include a mechanical device, or any pre-printed one-time use voucher parking card authorized and licensed for sale by the city and having the legal time limit and pre-payable related parking fee already imprinted on the face thereof and then displayed in accordance with the instructions printed on the voucher parking card, designed to be activated for use by the owner or operator of a motor vehicle immediately upon the parking or standing of such vehicle during applicable hours of operation in any designated and posted parking space. 
(15)  Passenger vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle designed and used for the purpose of transporting persons with their necessary personal belongings. 
(16)  Pedestrian shall mean any person on foot. 
(17)  Person shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation. 
(18)  Police officer or officer shall mean every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or make arrests for any violation of the traffic regulations, statutes or ordinances. For the purposes of issuing notices of violation of city parking regulations, police officer or officer shall include any designated and appropriately trained employee or contractor of any city or state agency or any quasi city or state agency, provided such entity or agency has been approved to issue notices of violation of the city's parking regulations by the city's director of traffic and parking, and the designated officer's training has been approved by the city's parking enforcement administrator. 
(19)  Roadway shall mean that portion of a street or highway between its curb lines or edges for the use of vehicular traffic. 
(20)  Rotary traffic shall mean counterclockwise operation of a vehicle around an object, structure or island in the roadway. 
(21)  Safety zone shall mean that area of space officially set apart within a highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
(22)  Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street or highway between the curb and the adjacent property line for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
(23)  Taxicab stands shall mean that portion of the roadway adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway where taxicabs may stand to receive passengers. 
(24)  Traffic shall mean pedestrians, vehicles, and other conveyances, while using any highway for the purpose of travel. 
(25)  Traffic Authority shall mean the Board of Police Commissioners of the City of New Haven. 
(26)  Traffic control signal shall mean any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
(27)  U turn shall mean the turning of a vehicle whereby the direction of such vehicle is reversed. 
(28)  Vehicle shall mean any device for the conveyance, drawing or other transportation of persons or property, whether on wheels or runners. 
(29)  Livery stand shall mean that portion of the roadway adjacent to the curb or edge of the roadway where horsedrawn vehicles carrying passengers for hire may stand to receive passengers. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-2-52, § 2; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-96; Ord. of 4-19-99; Ord. of 5-17-99)  
Sec. 29-4. - Duty of police to control traffic; operators to obey; removal of violating vehicles. 
It shall be the duty of the department of police to regulate, direct and control traffic in the streets and highways of the city in accordance with the law and regulations of the Traffic Authority. All operators of vehicles shall obey the directions, as communicated by signals, or otherwise, of the traffic officers and police, given in the performance of their duty. 
Any policeman may direct any operator or driver to move his vehicle or horses so as to conform to the provisions of the traffic regulations, and his neglect or refusal, or in case of any vehicle being found without a driver, such policeman may remove such vehicle. And it shall be the duty of every operator or driver to comply with the reasonable direction of any police officer, so as best to accommodate the public. 
(Code 1928, § 960; Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, §§ 3, 5)  
Sec. 29-5. - Powers, duties of Traffic Authority; erection, effect of control devices. 
The Traffic Authority shall have all powers and duties concerning the regulation and control of traffic in the city that are or may hereafter be imposed on municipal traffic authorities by law, provided that no rules or regulations promulgated by the Traffic Authority shall be effective until appropriate traffic control devices are installed in such a manner as is reasonably calculated to give notice thereof to the operators of vehicles and pedestrians. 
The traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate traffic control devices for the control and regulation of traffic at such places and in such manner as the Traffic Authority shall direct.  
Sec. 29-6. - Obedience to control devices required. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator of any vehicle, other conveyance or any pedestrian to disobey the instructions of any traffic control signal, traffic sign or markings on the highway placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 4)  
Sec. 29-7. - Designation, marking of through streets, intersections; duty of operators. 
The Traffic Authority is authorized to designate any highway or part thereof under their control as a through street. The traffic engineer is hereby authorized and required to place and maintain or cause to be placed or maintained, conspicuous signs or signals on streets where they intersect the through streets. 
Such conspicuous signs or signals shall bear the word "stop" and be located in such position and be provided with letters of a size so as to be clearly legible from a distance of at least one hundred feet along such street intersecting a "through street" of travel. All such signs shall be illuminated at night or so placed as to be illuminated by street lights or by headlights of approaching motor vehicles. Each person operating any vehicle upon any street intersecting a through street where signs or signals shall be displayed as hereinbefore provided, shall, before crossing or turning into the same, bring such vehicle to a full stop, unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer or signal. The operator of any vehicle who has brought such vehicle to a full stop in accordance with the provisions of this section, upon entering the through street, as well as the operators of vehicles upon the through street, shall be subject to the provisions of the statutes relating to the right-of-way at intersections. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 4) 
State Law reference— Right of way at intersections is governed by §§ 14-245—14-246 and 14-301 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958).  
Sec. 29-8. - Right-of-way of emergency vehicles, mail vehicles. 
Police, fire department, fire patrol, emergency utility repair, traffic emergency repair, United States mail vehicles, and ambulances shall have the right-of-way through any street and through any procession. The driver of any vehicle on the approach of the fire engine, or any other fire apparatus, or an ambulance, shall immediately draw said vehicle up as nearly as practicable to the right hand curb and parallel thereto, and cause it to stop until the fire engine, apparatus, or ambulance has passed. 
(Code 1928, §§ 964, 965; Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 11) 
State Law reference— Right of way of ambulances, police vehicles, § 14-283.  
Sec. 29-9. - Pedestrians crossing streets. 
At any intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic signals and pedestrian "walk" and "don't walk" signals or devices, clearly visible and legible, no pedestrian shall cross the highway during the period of time when the "don't walk" signal or device shall be showing unless otherwise directed by a police officer: 
(a)  When the "walk" signal or device is showing, pedestrians may cross the highway only at the marked or unmarked crosswalks and shall not cross between diagonal corners of the intersection. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall only cross a street or highway at an intersection or at such other places between intersections as have been established as crosswalks and are so marked and posted. 
(c)  Any pedestrian violating any provision of this section, or who shall wilfully fail to obey the signal or any police officer, shall be subject to the penalties as provided by section 14-314 of the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 9)  
Sec. 29-10. - Vehicles on sidewalks. 
No person shall drive, wheel or draw any coach, cart, handcart, wheelbarrow, bicycle, or other vehicle of burden or pleasure, whether of the same description or not, except children's hand carriages drawn by hand, or permit any horse under his care to go or stand upon any sidewalk or footpath in the streets or public squares of said city, except going in or out of driveways. 
(Code 1928, § 751; Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 10)  
Sec. 29-11. - Regulation of parades, processions. 
No person or persons shall parade or participate in any parade, procession, or public display, upon any public street or streets in the city, without first obtaining a written permit so to do from the mayor of the city, or the chief of police thereof, and without first paying a fee as set out in section 17-20 of this Code. Such permit shall designate the approximate number of persons or vehicles to participate or be in said parade, procession or public display, and shall further specify the route to be taken by such parade, procession, or public display, and the time when such parade, procession, or public display shall stop; and the mayor of said city shall have the power to make regulations for the safe and orderly passage of such parade, procession, or public display within the city, and may forbid the operation of vehicles upon the streets during such time as parades, processions, or public displays are to take place, which regulations shall be published in one or more newspapers of said city at least twenty-four (24) hours before such regulations are to become effective; and shall be enforced by the police department in the same manner as the ordinances of the city. No circus parade shall be held on the streets, highways and thoroughfares of said city on Sunday or the day known as Memorial Day. 
(Code 1928, § 976; Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 12; Ord. of 6-6-88, § 7a; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 29-12. - Riding or driving motorized vehicles in unauthorized places. 
It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person to ride or drive a motorcycle, mini-motor bike, mini-motor car, motor scooter, three-wheel or four-wheel all terrain motor vehicles, or any motorized vehicle on any drive, trail, foot path, service road or any other portion or area of any public park or square that is not open for public use to motorized vehicular traffic. This section shall not apply to any municipal vehicle or other vehicle used in the service of the park commission. Any person who violates any provision of this regulation shall be punished by a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. of 9-10-73; Ord. of 2-18-97, § 1)  
Sec. 29-13. - All terrain vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful and prohibited for any person to ride or drive three-wheel or four-wheel all terrain motor vehicles [on streets, sidewalks or public ways] on any street or sidewalk in the City of New Haven or on any public property, including but not limited to school property, playgrounds and parks, within the city. 
Any person who operates a three-wheel or four-wheel motor vehicle on any street, sidewalk or public way shall be subject to [a fine of not less than ninety-nine dollars ($99.00) for each offense] a fine according to the provisions of Public Act 13-154 of the Connecticut General Assembly. 
(Ord. of 2-18-97, § 2; Ord. No. 1721, § 6, 9-16-13 )  
Sec. 29-14. - Reserved.  
Sec. 29-15. - Repairing of motor vehicles in the streets. 
(a)  No persons shall carry on or conduct the repair, rebuilding, modification, alteration or servicing of a motor vehicle as defined in section 29-3 of this Code, in any street of the city, if such repair, rebuilding, modification, alteration or servicing shall involve: 
(1)  The removal or replacement of the engine and drive train of the motor vehicle including the removal of the transmission and/or differential of the motor vehicle; or 
(2)  The removal and/or replacement of engine exhaust systems including mufflers and tail pipes; or 
(3)  Any other repair or servicing which will require the hoisting of and/or setting of said motor vehicle on blocks or any support, excepting the use of tire jacks; or 
(4)  Any servicing which results in spillage on the street of grease, oil, other lubricants and/or antifreeze. 
(b)  None of the foregoing is intended to prohibit leaving a vehicle unattended for fifteen (15) minutes or less, or changing of tires, batteries, adjusting of carburetors and emergency repairs. 
(c)  Motor vehicles found in violation of any of the provisions herein shall be ticketed and towed away pursuant to the provisions of law. 
(d)  Owners found in violation of any of the provisions hereof will be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such violation. 
(Ord. of 5-16-85; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 16)  
Sec. 29-16. - Safety standards for school buses. 
(a)  The superintendent of schools of the City of New Haven or his designee shall certify annually that all school buses servicing New Haven students are no older than seven (7) years old and meet all current applicable state and federal safety regulations. 
(b)  Any buses not meeting these requirements shall not be permitted to transport New Haven school children. 
(c)  The department of education shall submit on a quarterly basis to the board of aldermen a report on all complaints and incidents concerning maintenance and safety involving school buses. 
(Ord. of 7-8-89, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-92, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-94, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance of Oct. 3, 1994, re-enacted the provisions of section 29-16 with a proviso that said section will revert back to the provisions that existed prior to April 15, 1992, in two (2) years after the adoption and approval of the ordinance of Oct. 3, 1994, unless further extended. 
Cross reference— Procurement of personal services by board of education, § 2-150.  
Secs. 29-17—29-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Hitching to vehicles prohibited, § 18-13; operation in parks, § 19-2(n); hospital zones, §§ 27-20, 27-21; coasting, skating and games on streets and sidewalks, §§ 27-22—27-24. 
 
Sec. 29-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 29-20, prohibiting U-turns in the territory bound by York Street, Grove Street, State Street and George Street, derived from § 7 of a traffic regulation adopted July 7, 1952, was repealed by an ordinance adopted Nov. 16, 1992, approved Nov. 24, 1992, and effective Dec. 3, 1992.  
Sec. 29-21. - General speed limit; exceptions. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle on any street, highway or bridge within the municipal limits of the city at a rate of speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour except where otherwise designated. Nothing in this section shall apply to members of the police department or the fire department operating vehicles in the performance of official business. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 13)  
Sec. 29-22. - Driving over safety zones prohibited. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle over or through any safety rotary zone, located upon any street, that has been authorized by the Traffic Authority and designated by appropriate signs or markings. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 25)  
Sec. 29-23. - Effect of "yield" signs. 
The driver of the vehicle approaching a "Yield Right-of-Way" sign at any intersection which is so posted shall slow to a speed not more than ten (10) miles an hour, or stop if necessary, before entering the intersection and so yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and such other traffic as may be necessary to avoid collision. If such driver is involved in a collision of a pedestrian or any other vehicle such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of such driver's failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(Traffic Reg. of 11-14-55) 
State Law reference— Identical provision of state law, § 14-302.  
Secs. 29-24—29-29. - Reserved. 
_____ 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 29-30. - Penalties for violation of parking regulations. 
(a)  Penalties shall be levied as follows against the registered owners of motor vehicles found in violation of parking regulations: 
GROUP I: $25.00 penalty for violation of parking regulation: 
Beyond posted time 	Meter expired 
Meter repeater 	Occupying 2 spaces 
Away from curb 	
72-hour parking 	
 
GROUP II: $30.00 penalty for violation of parking regulation: 
Parking prohibited 	Obstructing driveway 
Mayor's proclamation 	Entrance to public building 
Unauthorized off street 	Residential parking zone 
Loading zone 	
 
GROUP III: $50.00 penalty for violation of parking regulation: 
Fire zone 	10 feet of hydrant 
Illegal repair 	Street cleaning 
25 feet of corner 	Safety zone 
25 feet of stop sign 	Bus stop 
Vehicle on sidewalk 	No standing 
25 feet of crosswalk 	Obstructing traffic 
Wrong way on a one-way street 	Wrong side of street 
Delinquent parking tickets (tow ordered) 
 
GROUP IV: $100.00 penalty for violation of parking regulation: 
Snow Emergency 	
Commercial vehicle in residential area 	
 
GROUP V: $150.00 penalty for violation of parking regulation: 
Handicapped Zone 
 
If voluntary appearance and payment are made within the specified period of fifteen (15) calendar days at the office of the tag division of the city, or if payment is made by use of the postal system within said period, acceptance of such payment by the city shall constitute waiver of the right to further prosecution for each such violation. Any person wishing to contest a violation of this section may request and file an application for contestment at the Department of Traffic and Parking, City of New Haven, at 200 Orange Street, during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, within fifteen (15) calendar days of the time indicated on the notice of violation of parking regulation. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from prosecuting and levying fines up to the maximum provided in state statues for violation of traffic regulations or pursuing lawful civil remedies whenever the requirements of this section are not fully complied with. 
(b)  In the event the penalties set forth herein are not paid in full within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of the violation, said penalty shall double. In the event the penalties set forth herein are not paid in full within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the violation the penalty established in section 29-30(a) shall triple, such penalty shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(c)  Every four (4) months, the controller shall provide the board of aldermen with a complete list of those persons owing parking penalties to the city. 
(Traffic Reg. of 5-31-56; Ord. of 5-3-76; Ord. 3-26-80, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 5-28-80, § 11; Ord. of 5-4-81; Ord. of 11-3-82; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 2; Ord. 3-21-88; Ord. of 5-29-90; Ord. of 12-11-00; Ord. No. 1331, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 1554, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 1555, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 1747, 5-27-14 ; Ord. No. 1839 , 5-29-18) 
_____ 
Sec. 29-30.1. - Hearing and collection procedure for parking violation adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts the parking violation hearing and collection procedure as set forth below, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint one (1) or more parking violations hearing officers, all of whom shall serve without pay, other than policemen or persons who issue parking tickets or work in the police department, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section. No person shall be appointed to the position of hearing officer unless such person is: 
(1)  At least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  In the opinion of the appointing official, a person capable of fairly administering the applicable provisions of law based on such person's background and experience, including but not limited to his education, special skills and training, and history of criminal and motor vehicle violations. 
Any hearing officer whose personal interests do or may give the appearance of conflict with his official responsibilities herein enumerated shall remove himself from presiding over any such hearing, and in such case the appointing official shall appoint a substitute hearing officer for the hearing. Any hearing officer may be removed at any time by the appointing official for whatever reason such official deems sufficient. 
(c)  The city may, at any time within two (2) years from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any alleged violation under any ordinance adopted pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 7-148 or sections 14-305 to 14-308 inclusive, send notice to the motor vehicle operator, if known, or the registered owner of the motor vehicle by first class mail at his address according to the parking violation records of the city, or the registration records of the department of motor vehicles. Such notice shall inform the operator or owner: 
(1)  Of the allegations against him and the amount of fines, penalties, costs or fees due; 
(2)  That he may contest his liability before a parking violations hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten (10) days of the date thereof; 
(3)  That if he does not demand such a hearing, he shall be deemed to have admitted liability; and 
(4)  That the city may pursue all legal means available to collect all fines and penalties due without further notice. 
Whenever a violation of such an ordinance occurs, proof of the registration number of the motor vehicle involved shall be prima facie evidence in all proceedings provided for in this section that the owner of such vehicle was the operator thereof. 
(d)  If the person who is sent notice pursuant to subsection (c) wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of the fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to in person or by mail to an official designated by the city. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. 
Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of the first notice provided for in subsection (c) shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated city official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of notice, unless an earlier date is agreed to by the person requesting the hearing, and provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party for postponement or continuance. The original notice of violation, a certified copy of such notice, the violator's copy, or a certified copy of the violator's copy issued by a policeman or other issuing officer shall be presented by the city at such hearing, shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of section 52-180 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and shall be evidence of the facts therein. The presence of the policeman or issuing officer shall not be required at such hearing, unless the person so requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his behalf, or may request the hearing be conducted by mail, and may submit documents and copies of reports for the hearing officer's review. A designated city official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the city. 
If the person fails to appear, or fails to request a hearing by mail within the set time frame, the hearing officer may enter a judgment of liability by default upon finding of proper notice and liability under applicable statutes or ordinances. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his decision at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of the city. 
(f)  If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall turn all records of the proceedings over to the parking enforcement administrator, who may instruct the city to use any and all legal means to collect fines and penalties due: Such means may include (but not be limited to): 
(1)  Use of a collection agency; 
(2)  Civil proceedings; 
(3)  Issuance of a state infraction; 
(4)  Vehicle impoundment; or 
(5)  Withholding registration renewal. 
(g)  In any instance where the city can determine the owner of the motor vehicle received the original notice of violation issued by a police officer or other issuing authority, and the owner failed to contest such violation within the time prescribed by ordinance, the hearing officer shall assess a finding of liability by default, no hearing notice to the owner shall be required, and the provisions of subsection (f) shall apply. 
Editor's note— A nonamendatory ordinance enacted Nov. 9, 1981, §§ 1—6, approved Nov. 18, 1981, and effective Dec. 5, 1981, has been codified herein as § 29-30.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Additional provisions relative to contesting penalties and appointment of hearing officers, § 29-31(c), (d).  
Sec. 29-31. - Removal of vehicles illegally parked on public streets; towing charge; issuance of parking ticket, payment of fine. 
(a)  Towing. 
(1)  A police officer is authorized to direct the removal or conveyance of any vehicle by towing it or otherwise to a public garage in the city under any of the following circumstances: 
(i)  When the vehicle is parked in any parking meter space on a public street or highway beyond the legal parking time established by the traffic authority; 
(ii)  When the vehicle is parked in any parking meter space during any period when parking is prohibited; or 
(iii)  When the vehicle is found parked in violation of any resolution, rule or regulation of the traffic authority, or of any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  The motor vehicle shall not be released from custody until the owner does the following: 
(i)  Furnishes evidence of his identity, current address and ownership or right of possession of such vehicle; and 
(ii)  Pays the towing and storage fees and booting fee, if applicable, prescribed by this chapter, and pays any penalties for violation of parking regulations owed to the city. 
(3)  Whenever an officer determines that it is unnecessary to take a vehicle found parked in violation into custody for the performance of city services of short duration, a vehicle may be removed during such service. This may involve utility emergencies, street cleaning, or snow removal. Once the service is performed, the vehicle is to be replaced as near as practicable to its original location within a reasonable period of time. 
(b)  Parking tickets. A police officer or officer may personally serve a notice of violation upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, attach such notice to the vehicle in a conspicuous place, or mail such notice to the owner of record by first class mail, directing such person to pay the fines as prescribed in this chapter. 
(c)  Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. If the owner or person in charge of the vehicle fails to remove the vehicle within forty-eight (48) hours from the custody of the city or tower in accordance with (a) of this section, the city may sell said vehicle at public auction or otherwise dispose of same upon compliance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The city shall notify the owner of the vehicle by registered or certified mail at such owner's last known address and any lien holders of record by mail at their last known address that: a) said vehicle is in custody and that the owner may remove the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section; or b) the owner may, without removing the vehicle, elect to contest the validity of such taking by application, on a form prescribed by the commissioner of motor vehicles, within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. 
(2)  In the event the owner fails to notify the department of police services within ten (10) days of being notified under this subsection, the city shall permit the municipal tower to dispose of the vehicle in a manner permitted by statute, with any proceeds from such disposal distributed as follows: 1) Cost of municipal tow and storage to tower; 2) Fines and penalties to municipality; and 3) balance to vehicle owner. 
(3)  The municipal tower having custody of such vehicle shall be responsible for compliance with statute regarding notification forms and all costs including postage associated with such forms. 
(d)  Delinquent parking fines owed on vehicle. No person shall park a vehicle or a vehicle displaying a license plate on any city street, in any public parking garage or on any public property within the city, if the last registered owner of the vehicle or license plate owes delinquent parking fines in a cumulative amount of or exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00). If any vehicle is found in violation of this subsection, said vehicle shall be subject to impoundment and a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, §§ 8, 9; Ord. of 8-4-58; Ord. of 9-10-58; Ord. of 4-5-65; Ord. of 1-6-75, § 2; Ord. of 5-3-76; Ord. of 8-4-80; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 3; Ord. of 12-11-00; Ord. No. 1331, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 12-18-06) 
Cross reference— Hearing and collection procedure re parking violation, § 29-30.1.  
Sec. 29-32. - Parking ticket for illegal parking in public facilities, payment of fine; consistency between penalties for on-street, off-street parking violations. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any parking meter space in a parking facility operated or maintained by the parking authority overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time established for such space by the parking authority, or shall be found parked in violation of any of the provisions of any resolution, rule or regulation of the parking authority, a police officer may serve upon the owner or operator of such vehicle or attach to such vehicle a notice directing the owner or operator thereof to appear at the tag division of the city before the time specified in such notice. When any person shall receive such notice from the police department to appear at the tag division of the city, such person shall pay to the tag division an amount not exceeding the penalty fixed pursuant to sections 29-32(b) and 29-30 of this Code, and upon payment of such amount a prosecution under this article shall be barred. 
(b)  Whenever the penalty or penalties for on-street parking violations shall be revised or changed by the traffic authority, the penalty or penalties for violations in any of the parking facilities maintained and operated pursuant to section 29-64(b) of this chapter shall be the same as those fixed for said revised or changed on-street parking violations. 
(Ord. of 12-15-53, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 4)  
Sec. 29-33. - Maximum time limit for parking. 
Subject to regulations of the traffic authority concerning the parking of vehicles in certain streets, no operator of a vehicle shall park or leave said vehicle on any street or streets in the city in one position or in several positions as herein defined, beyond the time limit posted at said position, except as permitted under section 29-55 regarding residential parking zones. When a vehicle shall be removed from one position to another or other positions within five hundred (500) feet from where the same was first parked or left in the city streets, the time such vehicle shall have been parked or left in all of such positions shall be reckoned together in computing the time the same has been parked or left, within the meaning of this section. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 14(e); Ord. of 1-6-75, § 1; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 5; Ord. of 4-1-91, § 2)  
Sec. 29-34. - Obstructing safety zones. 
No person shall permit any vehicle to remain standing in such position within or adjacent thereto of any safety rotary zone as will obstruct pedestrians from its safe usage or preventing moving vehicles from properly and safely passing unhindered. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 26)  
Sec. 29-35. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
No operator shall stop, stand, or leave any horse or other animal or vehicle, in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic sign or signal: 
(a)  Within an intersection, or 
(b)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersection, or a marked crosswalk, or 
(c)  On a crosswalk, or 
(d)  In front of and so as to obstruct a driveway, or 
(e)  On any street so as to obstruct traffic, or 
(f)  Within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, or 
(g)  On the side of any street within twenty-five (25) feet of any stop sign, or 
(h)  On any street that is posted to prohibit parking pursuant to traffic authority regulations, or 
(i)  On any street posted no parking for street maintenance pursuant to regulation or permit by the director of public works, or 
(j)  On any sidewalk, or 
(k)  In any handicapped parking space without a permit to use such space, or 
(l)  In any space for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, provided that nothing in this subsection (l) shall be so construed as to apply to those spaces posted as residential parking spaces in a residential parking zone created pursuant to section 29-55 of this Code of General Ordinances. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 18; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 6) 
Cross reference— Damaging or blocking access to hydrants prohibited, § 13-706.  
Sec. 29-36. - Standing prohibited in posted areas. 
For the purposes of this section, standing shall mean the leaving of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not, or any other vehicle in a stationary position within the limits of the public highway otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers, and parking shall mean the leaving of a motor vehicle whether occupied or not or any other vehicle in a stationary position within the limits of the public highway otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or receiving or discharging passengers. 
No operator and no person having the care, custody, or control of any vehicle shall leave or permit the same to remain standing at any time as designated on any street so posted otherwise than for the purpose of or while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Traffic Reg. of 6-15-55; Traffic Reg. of 6-10-60; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 7)  
Sec. 29-37. - Angle parking. 
Only on streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking shall vehicles be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs. 
(Ord. of 7-7-52, § 19)  
Sec. 29-38. - Proximity to right-hand curb; permit required to back to curb. 
Except as otherwise provided or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals, no operator of any vehicle shall cause the vehicle being operated by him to stop or remain standing upon a public street unless such vehicle is facing in the direction of legal traffic movement, and unless such vehicle is as near as possible and approximately parallel to the curb to the right side of such vehicle, provided, however, that if the vehicle is stopped on a one-way street and pointing in the direction of legal traffic movement, the vehicle may be stopped in such a way as to have the left side of said vehicle as near as possible and approximately parallel to the curb to the left of said vehicle, and further provided however, that operators of vehicles may cause the same to stop and remain standing with the rear or left side of such vehicles to or away from the curb of a public street when permitted to do so by the chief of police, such permit to be issued by the chief of police in writing, designating the length of time and place during which and where said vehicle may be stopped. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 20; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 8)  
Sec. 29-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 9 of an ordinance enacted March 7, 1988, approved by the mayor March 15, 1988, and effective March 24, 1988, repealed § 29-39, pertaining to authority of fire marshal to prohibit parking on Pitkin Street, as derived from Code 1928, p. 611, § 480A.  
Sec. 29-40. - Authority of fire marshal to order removal of vehicles parked near dwellings at night. 
The fire marshal is hereby empowered to order the removal of any motor vehicle left standing within ten (10) feet of any building used for living purposes between the hours of 8:30 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. when he has reason to believe that said motor vehicle left standing in said location endangers the lives and property of the occupants of adjacent buildings, provided this section shall not prohibit the right of any person to leave a standing motor vehicle in this prescribed distance when such standing motor vehicle is provided with approved garage. Any person or persons violating this section or neglecting to comply with any order or notice issued by the fire marshal in conformity herewith shall, upon conviction, after complaint to the city attorney, pay a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and a like penalty for each subsequent offense, provided however, that any person feeling aggrieved by such order may appeal to the board of aldermen at their next regular session upon giving written notice to said fire marshal or within the time limited in said order and such order may be affirmed, modified or rescinded by said board of aldermen. Any neglect or refusal to comply with the order as approved by said board of aldermen shall be punished as above provided. 
(Code 1928, § 966A; Ord. of 3-4-29)  
Sec. 29-41. - Parking on private property without permission prohibited; impounding vehicles authorized; towing fee. 
(a)  Any person who parks any motor vehicle upon property other than his own without the consent of the owner, or the owner's agent in charge thereof, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section 29-30(a), herein. 
(b)  Any officer upon complaint of said property owner or owner's agent, shall take such motor vehicle into his custody and may cause the same to be taken to and stored in a suitable place. There shall be no liability attached to such property owner, owner's agent or police officer for any damages to such motor vehicle while in such police officer's custody. All charges necessarily incurred by such officer in the performance of such duty shall be a lien upon such motor vehicle. The owner or keeper of any garage or other place where such motor vehicle shall be stored shall have a lien upon the same for his towing and storage charges. 
(c)  The tower and owner or keeper of such garage or other place of storage shall be entitled to a towing fee and storage charges as set forth in section 29-119 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-2-56; Ord. of 1-6-75, § 3; Ord. of 3-7-88, §§ 10, 11)  
Sec. 29-42. - Public service vehicles—Exempted from parking time restrictions. 
Nothing contained within this chapter establishing a maximum time limit for parking shall in any manner abrogate or affect any traffic rules and regulations relating to public service motor vehicles. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 15)  
Sec. 29-43. - Same—Establishment of stands. 
Public service vehicle stands or stops shall be established as are authorized by the traffic authority. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 24)  
Sec. 29-44. - Same—Stopping at stands. 
Every operator or driver of a public service vehicle resorting to any designated public stand or stop under the provisions of this article shall close up in line from the front in such a way as to accommodate the full number, and any such operator or driver resorting to such stand or stop and finding it full, shall immediately drive away. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 21)  
Sec. 29-45. - Same—Use of stands by other vehicles prohibited. 
No person other than an operator or driver of a public service vehicle shall park any vehicle in any officially designated public service vehicle stand or stop. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 23)  
Sec. 29-46. - Same—Driver not to leave vehicle. 
No owner operator or driver of a public service vehicle subject to the terms of this chapter shall await or solicit employment while his vehicle is on a designated public stand or stop unless he is occupying his vehicle or is in a place lawfully designated. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 22)  
Sec. 29-47. - Bus stops. 
Bus stops for the transportation of passengers officially authorized, marked and posted, are established for the purpose of permitting buses only to stop while actually receiving and discharging passengers. Authorization of said bus stops are subject to approval of the public utilities commission. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 28)  
Sec. 29-48. - Express stands. 
Express stands for the transportation only of baggage or other personal property officially authorized, marked and posted, are established for the purpose of permitting licensed express vehicles only to stand while awaiting to receive baggage or other personal property. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 29)  
Sec. 29-49. - Loading zones. 
Loading zones for the transportation of goods, wares or other merchandise, officially authorized, marked and posted, are established for the purpose of permitting commercial vehicles only to stop while actually loading or unloading goods, wares or other merchandise for the period during the hours so posted. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 30)  
Sec. 29-50. - Taxi stands. 
Taxicab stands for the transportation of passengers, officially marked or posted, are established for the purpose of permitting taxicabs to remain standing to await passengers for transportation. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 31)  
Sec. 29-51. - Parking, loading area for public buildings, hotels, etc. 
Open spaces are required for a distance of ten feet on either side of and including the width of the main entrance at any railroad depot; the main entrance to any hotel which has thirty or more rooms; the main entrance of any theater; the main entrance to a public building; or the main entrance to any building where there may be a large gathering of people, for the accommodation of vehicles arriving and departing with passengers; and the driver of any vehicle, public or private, discharging or receiving passengers at such opening, shall do so with the least possible delay, and then immediately drive away. No driver shall leave his seat on the vehicle which he drives while he remains in line with other vehicles while waiting to receive or discharge passengers. 
(Traffic Reg. of 7-7-52, § 17)  
Sec. 29-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1304, Pt. 1(f), adopted Dec. 17, 2001, deleted § 29-52, Privately operated parking lots and garages, derived from ordinances adopted Apr. 2, 1956, §§ 1—9; Sept. 10, 1956; and Apr. 10, 1961. Provisions which pertain to similar subject matter may be found in Ch. 17.  
Sec. 29-53. - Parking trucks in residential zones. 
No person having the custody and control of a vehicle or vehicles with capacities of more than half-a-ton, shall be permitted to park on any street in any residential zone at any time of the day or night. However, such vehicles shall be permitted in residential zones when in the conduct of a service being simultaneously performed. 
Any operator or person operating such vehicle or vehicles in violation of the above provisions shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section 29-30(a), herein. 
(Ord. of 1-6-75; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 12) 
Editor's note— An ordinance of Jan. 6, 1975, effective Feb. 6, 1975, did not specifically amend the Code, hence codification as § 29-53 was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 29-54. - Parking privileges for specific officials. 
(a)  Members of the New Haven Board of Aldermen, New Haven delegation to the state legislature, city/town clerk and mayor shall be issued by the city's traffic and parking department an official marker to affix to their vehicles which shall permit them to: 
(1)  Park in a parking space adjacent to any parking meter on a public street or highway for the purpose of conducting official city business without the deposit of a proper coin in said parking meter; and 
(2)  Park in a parking space in any public parking facility in the city, as defined in Section 85 of the Special Laws of New Haven, for the purpose of conducting official city business without paying a fee for the usage of said facility. Except as specifically provided herein regarding the exemption from payment of fees and meter charges, the board of aldermen members and state legislators shall be subject to and obey all other traffic and parking and city laws. 
(b)  In the case that a question arises whether an alderperson, city/town clerk or mayor has properly used the privileges outlined in subsection 29-54(a) above, for the actual conduct of city business, an appropriate city official designated by the traffic and parking authorities shall require the alderperson, the state legislators, the city/town clerk or mayor in question to attest in written, sworn affidavit form as to the nature and length of the business conducted. If it is found that the alderperson, the state legislators, city/town clerk or mayor did not park for the purpose of official city business, the appropriate penalty for violation of traffic and/or parking regulations shall be applied. 
(c)  The following provisions of the Code of General Ordinances of the city shall not apply to members of the board of aldermen of state legislators while engaging in official city business: section 29-30, references to Group I penalties only; section 29-31, references to parking in meter spaces on a public street or highway overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, only; section 29-32(a) references to fines for parking in any parking meter space in a parking facility overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, only; sections 29-61, 29-62, and 29-65, references to deposit of coins into parking meters and limitation on parking time at meters only. 
(Ord. of 10-17-83, § 1; Ord. of 11-18-85) 
Editor's note— Section 29-54 was originally designated as § 29-13, and has been redesignated for classification purposes at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 29-55. - Residential parking. 
(a)  Upon petition thereto of the residents of a majority of the residences on a block, the board of aldermen may create a residential parking zone, which shall include, but not be limited to, that block from which said petition originated. 
(b)  When signs are erected designating a block, or a portion of a block, as a park of a residential parking zone, no person shall park a vehicle along the street curb in such designated block or portion of a block, without having displayed in plain view a permit to park in such designated zone. However, upon petition by a member of the board of aldermen for a designation as below described within the ward represented by such alderman, the traffic authority may designate time limit parking within specified portions of residential parking zones, which time limits shall not apply to vehicles displaying a residential parking permit. 
(c)  The director of traffic and parking shall adopt, and amend when necessary, with board of aldermen approval, regulations to implement subsection (b) of this section 29-55, which regulations shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Decals. Each resident of a block designated as a part of a residential zone may apply for a permanent resident decal, which decal shall have the symbol of the residential zone permanently affixed to it as a part of its design and shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle for which it is issued. 
(2)  Visitor's permits. Each residential household may apply for temporary permits for use by visitors to the zone for which the decal allows residential parking. Said visitor's permits shall only be used for parking in the residential zone for which they are issued, and the symbol designating such zone shall be permanently affixed to such visitor permits. The director of traffic and parking shall determine an appropriate number of visitor permits to be issued to each household, said number to be uniformed throughout all residential zones. 
(3)  Special event permits. Each residential household may, upon application to the department of traffic and parking, be issued special event visitor permits, of a number in excess of the number of visitor's permits issued pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subsection, except that in no case shall such special event permits be issued which are valid for more than two (2) consecutive days, and each special event permit shall have its expiration date clearly marked in large characters and shall be so placed in the vehicle as to be plainly visible. 
(4)  Signage. All residential zones shall be clearly signed as same by the department of traffic and parking. Motor vehicles parked in a residential zone so signed and not having a permit to park within the zone so signed shall be in violation of this section and shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in section 29-30(a), hereof, and shall be ordered towed upon complaint to the authority issuing the violation. 
(5)  No decal shall be issued to any person who has not paid the current taxes and all back taxes owing on the motor vehicle to which the decal is to be affixed, said payment to be attested to by the tax collector of the city in a form suitable for the purposes. 
(6)  No decal shall be issued for affixing to any vehicle unless all current and past parking fines owned on said vehicle have been paid, payment to be attested to by the tag division of the department of traffic and parking. 
(7)  Decals shall be issued during the month of September. Decals for new residents may be issued during other months, but the full fee for such issuance shall be charged. 
(8)  Misuse: 
a.  No person shall sell, offer for sale, give, trade or otherwise transfer his or her resident parking decal to another person, or affix said decal to a motor vehicle other than the one for which it was issued, nor shall any person alter any such decal. 
b.  No person shall use a visitor permit, or allow his or her visitor permit to be used, for any purpose except paring while actually visiting the household of the person to whom the visitor permit was issued. 
c.  Misuse of any permits issued pursuant to this section shall constitute an infraction, punishable by a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. 
(d)  The director of traffic and parking shall, annually on January 15th or the next business day thereafter, submit to the board of aldermen a report of the operation of this section, with data to include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The number of permits issued pursuant to the regulations established pursuant to this section. 
(2)  The number of special event visitor permits issued pursuant to this section. 
(3)  Changes to the regulations established pursuant to this section, which recommended changes shall take effect upon favorable vote of the board of aldermen, pursuant to the rules of that board. 
(e)  The director of traffic and parking shall establish a fee schedule for the issuance of permits issued pursuant to this section. The fee schedule is included in section 17-201 of this Code. All permits shall be issued on an annual basis to run from October 1 until September 30 of the following year. In the first year of the implementation of a new or updated residential parking zone, all initial permits issued to residents shall be prorated in one-twelfth increments for each month left in the permit year. 
(f)  (1)  Sporting and/or special events residential parking zones may be created upon petition of the residents of said zones (per section 29-55(a)) and approval of the board of aldermen. Resident-only parking shall be in effect in these zones only when sporting and/or special events are taking place in the sites specified for each zone. 
(2)  Residents of these sporting and/or special events residential parking zones will be provided three (3) resident car permits per residence, at no charge, to display in their vehicles or their guests' vehicles. 
(3)  All other relevant portions of section 29-55 shall apply. 
(Ord. of 7-6-87; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-91, §§ 1, 3; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 12-4-95; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 13; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. No. 1386, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 1663, 9-19-11 ; Ord. No. 1797 , 6-6-16; Ord. No. 1839 , 5-29-18)  
Sec. 29-56. - Free on-street parking for hybrid vehicles and other authorized alternative fuel vehicles. 
(a)  The City of New Haven shall encourage the use of hybrid/AFV technology by granting free on-street parking to New Haven hybrid/AFVs earning over thirty-five (35) miles per gallon in USEPA fuel testing for either highway or city driving, as well as manufacturer authorized alternative fuel vehicles. 
(b)  Qualifying vehicles shall be alternative fuel or hybrid vehicles registered in New Haven where the owner does not owe back taxes or parking tickets. Owners will be granted a non-transferable pass from the department of traffic and parking to be placed on the qualifying vehicle's dash-board or to be hung from the rear-view mirror identifying their vehicle as eligible for free parking. The one (1) year pass shall expire annually on a fixed date, initially one (1) year after this ordinance takes effect. The pass is valid only in legal on-street parking spaces, in compliance with all time and other posted restrictions. This ordinance amendment [Ord. No. 1424] reauthorizing the pilot program shall need to be reauthorized three (3) years from the date it first takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 1385, §§ 1, 2, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 1424, 8-7-06)  
Sec. 29-57. - Vendor parking spaces. 
Vendor parking spaces, officially authorized, marked, and posted, are established for the purpose of permitting licensed vendor trucks or trailer carts only to stop to sell goods, wares, or other merchandise for the period during the hours so posted. 
(Ord. No. 1819 , 4-19-17)  
Secs. 29-58, 29-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— For penalties for overtime parking, see §§ 29-30—29-82. 
 
Sec. 29-60. - Definitions. 
(a)  Operator shall mean the person operating or in control of a vehicle on a parking facility or public highway. 
(b)  Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not upon a highway or parking facility otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or when stopped for any traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals. 
(c)  Parking facility shall mean and shall include lots, garages, parking terminals or other structures and accommodations for the parking of motor vehicles off the street or highway and open to public use. 
(d)  Vehicle as used in this division shall mean any device used for conveyance, drawing or other transportation of persons or property, whether on wheels or runners or otherwise, when on a public highway, except those which are operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, § 1, Ord. of 12-15-53, § 1)  
Sec. 29-61. - Interpretation, purpose of parking meter provisions. 
The provisions of this division are adopted in the interest of public safety, convenience and welfare, and shall be liberally construed to effect the purpose hereof. Every person shall comply with, observe and obey, when applicable, all the provisions and requirements contained herein. The funds generated by parking meters are required to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets in the city; to provide for the cost of supervision; the regulating and control of the parking of vehicles in parking meter zones and parking facilities; and to cover the cost of purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control, and use of parking meters and parking facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, §§ 12, 13; Ord. of 12-15-53, §§ 11, 12; Ord. of 8-5-96)  
Sec. 29-62. - Penalty for violating parking meter provisions. 
Any violation of or failure to comply with the parking meter provisions of this article, or the rules or regulations adopted by the Traffic Authority or Parking Authority in connection with parking meters, and evidenced by suitable signs or marks indicating such rules, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, § 14; Ord. of 12-15-53, § 13; Ord. of 1-15-54)  
Sec. 29-63. - Registration plate prima facie establishes operation of illegally parked vehicles. 
In any prosecution or proceeding for a violation of any provision of this division concerning parking meters, the registration plate displayed on the motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such vehicle was the person who parked such vehicle at the place where such violation occurred. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, § 11; Ord. of 12-15-53, § 9)  
Sec. 29-64. - Authorization, installation of meters on streets, in public facilities. 
(a)  On public streets. Whenever because of traffic conditions or otherwise the parking of vehicles on any public street or part thereof cannot, in the opinion of the Traffic Authority of the city, be adequately and efficiently regulated and controlled, the traffic authority may authorize the installation of parking meters and designate parking meter zones, fix the zone parking fee and the legal parking time in such zone, and fix the hours during which the use of parking meters shall be required. 
(b)  In public parking facilities. The Parking Authority, with the approval of the board of aldermen, may maintain or operate a parking facility and may have installed thereon parking meters and designate parking meter zones, fix the zone parking fee and the legal parking time in such zone and also fix the hours during which the use of parking meters shall be required. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, § 2; Ord. of 12-15-53, § 2)  
Sec. 29-65. - Duties of operators parking in metered spaces; overtime parking defined. 
When any vehicle shall be parked in any parking meter space adjacent to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall park it within the lines or marks established, excepting such vehicles whose length, width or load overlap the said lines or marks, and upon entering said parking meter space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in said parking meter such proper coin of the United States as is required by the Traffic Authority or Parking Authority for such parking meter and as is designated by proper direction on the meter, and when required by directions on the meter, the operator of said vehicle after the deposit of the proper coin shall also completely turn or cause to be turned the crank handle on said parking meter for the purpose of starting the time mechanism, and failure to deposit such proper coin and to turn the crank handle when so required shall constitute a violation of this article. Upon the deposit of such proper coin, and placing said meter in operation, the parking meter space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time which has been prescribed for the part of the street in which said parking meter space is located. When any vehicle shall be parked in any parking meter space at which a mechanical meter has been installed, the operator may use a pre-paid voucher parking card appropriate for that space in lieu of depositing coins into the mechanical meter. At any parking meter space at which a mechanical meter has never been installed, has been removed, or is not functioning so as to register time, the operator shall use a pre-paid parking voucher card appropriate for that parking space in accordance with the instructions printed on the voucher parking card. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking meter space beyond the parking time limit fixed for such parking meter space, and if the parking meter shall by its dial and pointer or otherwise indicate such illegal parking, then in that event, such vehicle parking time and such parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, § 3; Ord. of 12-15-53, § 3; Ord. of 8-5-96) 
Cross reference— Penalties for overtime parking, §§ 29-30—29-32.  
Sec. 29-66. - Depositing slugs, additional coins in meters; damaging meters. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a proper coin of the United States, and it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter additional proper coins of the United States or to place additional pre-paid voucher parking cards on a vehicle for the purpose of increasing or extending the legal parking time which has been established by the traffic authority or parking authority for the parking meter space adjacent to which said parking meter is placed. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deface, damage, tamper with, open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division or aid or abet in doing the same. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, §§ 4—6; Ord. of 12-15-53, §§ 4—6; Ord. of 8-5-96)  
Sec. 29-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An Ordinance of Aug. 5, 1996, repealed former section 29-67 in its entirety which pertained to an exemption for commercial vehicles to use metered parking spaces without payment and derived from an Ordinance of April 1, 1940, § 7.  
Sec. 29-68. - Collection of proceeds from parking meters. 
(a)  Collections from meters on public streets. It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to designate an agent to make regular collections of the coins deposited in parking meters on public streets and highways. It shall be the duty of such person to take out the sealed boxes containing the coins which are deposited in said parking meters and deliver such boxes with seals unbroken to the office of the traffic engineer. 
(b)  Collections from meters in public parking facilities. It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to designate an agent to make regular collections of the coins deposited in parking meters in public parking facilities. It shall be the duty of such person to deliver such coins to the office of the traffic engineer. The traffic engineer shall in turn deliver said coins to the parking authority or its agent. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to designate an agent to make regular collections of all funds derived from the sale of pre-paid parking vouchers. It shall be the duty of such person to deposit such funds into an account designated by the controller of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-1-40, § 11; Ord. of 12-15-53, § 10; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 13; Ord. of 8-5-96)  
Sec. 29-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An Ordinance of Aug. 5, 1996, repealed former section 29-69 in its entirety which pertained to days and time periods when the regulations of this division were not in effect. Former section 29-69 derived from an Ord. of Dec. 15, 1953, and an Ord. of April 5, 1954.  
DIVISION 3. - FIRE ZONES (FIRE LANES)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1432, § 3, adopted Dec. 18, 2006, amended and restated former Division 3 in its entirety, which pertained to the same subject matter. 
 
Sec. 29-70. - Definition. 
A fire zone is a designated, unobstructed passageway sufficient in size to permit free passage of fire and other emergency equipment from a public highway to all necessary areas or portions of any private or public property as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. of 10-2-72, § 1; Ord. No. 1432, § 3, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-71. - Issuance of order establishing. 
The fire marshal shall consult with the department of traffic and parking to determine whether any premises having a capacity of at least fifteen (15) persons requires the establishment of a fire zone for orderly access of fire and other emergency equipment. If so, he shall establish such fire zone by written order and cause such establishment to be publicized. He shall cause a copy of such order to be delivered to the owner(s) or their agent(s) of any private land on which the fire zone is established. 
(Ord. of 10-2-72, § 2; Ord. No. 1432, § 3, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-72. - Filing copies of orders; appealing by aggrieved persons. 
When a fire marshal establishes a fire zone, he shall file one (1) copy of his orders with the city clerk and another with the traffic authority. Any person aggrieved by such order may file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the date of such order. The notice of appeal shall set forth reasons of aggrievement. After a hearing, the board of aldermen may affirm, modify or rescind such order. 
(Ord. of 10-2-72, § 3; Ord. No. 1432, § 3, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-73. - Erecting signs; collection of cost when on private property. 
When a fire zone is established, the traffic authority shall have adequate signs, markings and other devices erected or installed to delineate it. The owner of privately owned premises shall bear the cost of signs, markings and other devices to be erected or installed on his land. Such amount may be charged and collected in the same manner as municipal taxes, provided the traffic authority causes a notice of lien to be filed on the land records within sixty (60) days after such erection or installation. 
(Ord. of 10-2-72, § 4)  
Sec. 29-74. - Parking motor vehicles therein. 
No person shall park, or permit a motor vehicle to stand in a properly established fire zone except when the operator is actually picking up or discharging passengers. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-72, § 5; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 14; Ord. No. 1432, § 3, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-75. - Towing of vehicles parked therein; citation for violation. 
(a)  Towing. A police officer is authorized to direct the removal or conveyance of any vehicle found standing in a properly established fire zone by towing it or otherwise to a public garage in the city. 
The motor vehicle shall not be released from custody until the owner does the following: 
(1)  Furnishes evidence of his identity, current address and ownership or right of possession of such vehicle; and 
(2)  Pays the towing and storage fees prescribed by this chapter, and any penalties for violation of parking regulations owed to the city. 
(b)  Parking tickets . A police officer or officer may personally serve a notice of violation upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, attach such notice to the vehicle in a conspicuous place, or mail such notice to the owner of record by first-class mail, directing such person to pay the fines as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-2-72, § 6; Ord. No. 1432, § 3, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1432, § 3, adopted Dec. 18, 2006, repealed former section 29-76 in its entirety which pertained to citations for violation § 29-74, provided for early payment of fine and derived from Ord. of 10-2-72, § 7; Ord. of 3-5-86; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 15  
Secs. 29-77—29-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SNOW EMERGENCIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1432, § 4, adopted Dec. 18, 2006 amended and restated former Art. IV in it entirety. Former Art. IV pertained to the same subject matter. 
 
Sec. 29-81. - Short title. 
This article shall hereafter be referred to as the "snow emergency ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 1; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-82. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article: 
(a)  Highway. The word "highway" shall mean and include any public street, road, avenue, highway, alley, driveway, parkway or place, under the control of the city, dedicated, appropriated or open to public travel or other use; 
(b)  Operator. The word "operator" shall mean the person using, operating or having the care, custody or control of a vehicle being used, operated or found upon a highway; 
(c)  Owner. The word "owner" shall mean any person, firm, corporation or association holding title to a vehicle or having legal right to register same; 
(d)  Park. The word "park" shall mean the standing of a vehicle otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers on a public highway, whether occupied or not; 
(e)  Tower. The word "tower" shall mean a licensed tower included on the municipal towers list and performing municipal towing services under the provisions of section 29-118 of this Code; 
(f)  Vehicle. The word "vehicle" as used herein shall mean any device used for conveyance, drawing or other transportation of person or property, whether operated on wheels or runners or by other means, when upon a public highway, public square or other public place, under the control of the city, except those which are propelled or drawn by human power or exclusively operated on rails or tracks. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 2; Ord. of 12-14-81; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-83. - Necessity, purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the public safety, convenience and welfare of the city to regulate and restrict the parking of vehicles on public highways within the control and limits of said city, during a period of snow emergencies, so as not to impede the transportation and movement of food, fuel, medical care, fire, health, police protection and other vital facilities of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 3; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-84. - Definition of snow emergency. 
A snow emergency is hereby defined to be a period of time prior to, as forecast by the United States Weather Bureau, during or after, a fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain, during which period vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic is expected to be hazardous or congested due to the elements, and during which period the parking of vehicles could hinder, delay or obstruct the safe flow of such traffic and/or the proper cleaning, clearing and making safe of the public highways of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 4; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-85. - Declaration of snow emergency. 
The mayor in his discretion shall declare a snow emergency before, during or after a fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain, when the circumstances warrant the determination of such an emergency in the interest of safety upon the city's public highways. The mayor shall base his determination on sound judgment, and cause public announcement of such determination of snow emergency at least two (2) hours prior to the time of becoming effective. The snow emergency shall continue in effect until the mayor determines that it no longer exists and he shall make public announcement of the same. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 5; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-86. - Parking restricted. 
(a)  Towing. A police officer is authorized to direct the removal or conveyance of any vehicle found standing during a declared snow emergency on any city highway properly declared, posted, announced or otherwise promulgated in accord with regulations adopted by the traffic authority by towing it or otherwise to a public garage in the city, or by direction of the chief of police or his designee, to a garage or parking area under city control. 
The motor vehicle shall not be released from custody until the owner does the following: 
(1)  Furnishes evidence of his identity, current address and ownership or right of possession of such vehicle; and 
(2)  Pays the towing and storage fees prescribed by this chapter, and any penalties for violation of parking regulations owed to the city. 
(b)  Parking tickets. A police officer or officer may personally serve a notice of violation upon the owner or operator of such vehicle, attach such notice to the vehicle in a conspicuous place, or mail such notice to the owner of record by first-class mail, directing such person to pay the fines as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 6; Ord. No. 458, § 6, 5-22-62; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Secs. 29-87—29-91. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1432, § 4, adopted Dec. 18, 2006, repealed former sections 29-87—29-91 in their entirety. The subject matter and history of these repealed sections follows: 
Section 	Subject Matter 	Legislative History 
Sec. 29-87. 	Owner presumed responsible. 	Ord. of 5-17-62, § 7 
Sec. 29-88. 	Penalty. 	Ord. of 5-17-62, § 8; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 17 
Sec. 29-89. 	Removal, storage of violating vehicles. 	Ord. of 5-17-62, § 9 
Sec. 29-90. 	Storage charge when vehicle stored in private facility. 	Ord. of 5-17-62, §§ 10, 11; Ord. of 1-6-74, § 4 
Sec. 29-91. 	Payment of towing fees required. 	Ord. of 5-17-62, § 12; Ord. of 1-6-75, § 5; Ord. of 12-14-81 
  
Sec. 29-92. - Designation of public facilities for storage; liability of city; manner of parking impounded vehicles. 
The director of public works may designate available municipally owned and controlled areas for voluntary use without storage fee by the general public for parking of vehicles during any snow emergency period. However, the use by a vehicle owner of the parking areas or the storage of towed vehicles as provided by this chapter shall be at his sole risk for damage or injury to property or person while upon said premises. Parking of vehicles in these areas shall be specifically limited to spaces and times provided. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 13; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-93. - Authority to move stored vehicles. 
The chief of police is authorized at his discretion and at the owner's expense to tow or cause to be moved to a public garage in the city any vehicle left in voluntary storage as provided by this chapter, following the declaration of the end of a snow emergency. Towing and storage charges incurred under the terms of this section shall be consistent with charges for a snow emergency tow. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 14; Ord. of 1-6-75, § 6; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-94. - Effect of article on other towing charges. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to change or in any way affect other provisions or establish towing rates for towing services under conditions other than emergency snow conditions as defined in this article. A tower is authorized to charge for towing or removing any vehicle under the provisions of this article during a snow emergency such fees and storage charges as is authorized for such work by the Connecticut State Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Ord. of 5-17-62, § 15; Ord. of 12-14-81; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-95. - Police chief authorized to direct towing. 
In the execution of this article, the chief of police or his designee is authorized to direct the towing or removing of vehicles by private towers on the municipal towers list, and such towers shall comply with such direction. 
(Ord. of 12-14-81; Ord. No. 1432, § 4, 12-18-06)  
Secs. 29-96—29-104. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TOW TRUCKS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1432, § 5, adopted Dec. 18, 2006 amended and restated former Art. V in it entirety. Former Art. V pertained to the same subject matter. 
 
Sec. 29-105. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "tow truck ordinance". 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95a; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-106. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  City is the City of New Haven. 
(b)  Municipal towing services means such vehicle wrecker or towing services as are performed within the City of New Haven by a tower for or by the direction of the city, or any department, agency or employee thereof. 
(c)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(d)  Tower is a person engaged in the business, or offering the services, of a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby disabled motor vehicles or motor vehicles in violation of any regulation, ordinance or statute are towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are disabled or in violation by use of a wrecker so designed for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95b; Ord. of 12-6-71; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-107. - License—Prerequisite to operation. 
No tower shall engage in business within the city or offer such service within the city without first obtaining a license from the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95c; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-108. - Same—Application. 
The chief of police or his designee shall make applications for licenses available requesting: 
(a)  The applicant's name, home address, and proposed business address; 
(b)  The location, description and hourly availability of the tow trucks owned or operated by the applicant; 
(c)  That the applicant has available space for properly accommodating and protecting all motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are disabled or in violation; 
(d)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95d; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-109. - Same—Applicant to furnish insurance policies. 
No license shall be issued to an applicant until he deposit's the following insurance policies to the chief of police or his designee: 
(a)  Garage keeper's policy. A garage keeper's legal liability policy covering fire, theft, and explosion in an amount acceptable to the board of police commissioners. 
(b)  Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy, covering the operation of applicant's business, equipment, or vehicles, for any bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall be in an amount acceptable to the board of police commissioners. 
(c)  Notice of change or cancellation. Each policy required herein must contain an endorsement providing for thirty (30) days' notice to the city in the event of any material change or cancellation. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95e; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-110. - Same—Investigation of applicant. 
After receipt of an application, the chief of police shall cause an investigation of the applicant and of his proposed operation, and transmit a copy of the application to the zoning enforcement officer for his review. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95f; Ord. of 1-6-75, § 10; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-111. - Same—Standards of issuance. 
The chief of police or his designee shall issue a license under this article when he finds: 
(a)  That the public convenience and necessity require the proposed wrecker service or abandoned motor vehicle removal service for which application has been submitted; 
(b)  That insurance policies as required by this Code have been procured; 
(c)  That the applicant and all employees are fit and proper persons to conduct or work in the proposed business; 
(d)  That all governing laws have been met. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95g; Ord. of 10-17-88; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-112. - Same—Fee. 
A license shall be issued to a successful applicant after payment to the chief of police or his designee of a license fee as required by Code for each year or portion thereof. Unless the license is revoked sooner it shall expire on April 1 of each year. The chief of police may not waive the license fee required by this section. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95h; Ord. of 4-15-85; Ord. of 2-18-92; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-113. - Duties of license. 
A tower's license shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Exhibition of sticker. The chief of police shall issue a sticker to a licensed tower for each vehicle used for towing purposes. Stickers shall be displayed as required. 
(2)  Maintenance of equipment. Towers shall keep and maintain towing equipment which is adequate to perform such towing service in a reasonably workmanlike manner. 
(3)  Compliance with rate schedule. Towers shall charge such rates as are fixed by ordinance for their services. 
(4)  Indemification of city. The tower shall agree to protect, indemnify and save harmless the city, its servants, agents and employees of and from any and all liability or claim of liability, expense, damage, causes of action, suits, claims or judgments on the part of anyone growing out of any act or omission by the said tower or of any act or omission by any employee or agent of said tower in the performance of duties and obligations. When city established procedures are followed, the tower shall not be responsible for any damage claims arising during the period from after a vehicle impound boot is applied until its removal or subsequent vehicle hook up for tow. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95j; Ord. of 12-6-71; Ord. of 2-18-92; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-114. - Renewal and revocation of license. 
The chief of police may revoke or suspend a license issued under this article, when he finds any of the following grounds, and shall consider the following conditions as prerequisites to the renewal of a license to tow: 
(1)  The license was procured by fraudulent conduct or misstatement of a material fact, or that a fact concerning the applicant was not disclosed at the time of his making application, and such fact would have constituted just cause for refusal to issue said license. 
(2)  The licensee illegally employed an unauthorized radio to obtain information as to the location of the scene of an accident or disabled vehicle. 
(3)  The licensee paid a gratuity to any third person not involved in the accident for information as to the location of the accident. 
(4)  The licensee has violated the fee schedule by overcharge. 
(5)  The licensee has violated any of the requirements of this article or any of the rules and regulations as established by the board of police commissioners or state law of such a nature as to affect the proper discharge of his duties under this article. 
(6)  The licensee, his agent or employee, acts in a manner which is prejudicial, offensive or detrimental to the best interests of the public of such nature as to affect the proper discharge of his duties under this article, including but not limited to reckless and wanton disregard for the property in his care, custody and control. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95k; Ord. of 1-6-75, § 7; Ord. of 4-15-85; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-115. - Promulgation of regulations. 
The board of police commissioners may adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for towers consistent with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-951; Ord. of 12-6-71; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-116. - Grievance procedure. 
Any tower aggrieved by the revocation, suspension or denial of application by the chief of police may appeal such decision within fifteen (15) days from notice of such decision to the board of police commissioners. 
(Ord. of 1-6-75, § 8; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-117. - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of this article shall carry with it a fine not to exceed the maximum penalty permitted by statute. 
(Ord. of 10-28-65, § 29-95o; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-118. - Municipal towers list. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall prepare annually and maintain a list, to be called the "municipal towers list," of licensed towers in the city not to exceed ten (10) in number who may perform municipal towing services. The chief of police at the time of annual review shall consider all applications for inclusion. 
(b)  Each licensed tower included in the municipal towers list must meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The chief of police or his designee shall verify that each applicant for inclusion has met the licensing requirements of this article. 
(2)  The tower shall have sufficient operational capacity to accept and respond to all calls for municipal towing services, including, but not limited to, accidents, abandoned vehicles, parking violations, street cleaning, snow removal, parking bans, and removal of vehicles illegally on private property. 
(3)  The tower shall be operational, with an on-premises employee twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
(4)  The tower shall have a minimum of three (3) radio equipped tow trucks on duty. 
(5)  The tower shall have a minimum of two (2) impound devices (boots) available. 
(6)  The tower shall have storage space available with a minimum of one hundred (100) spaces within the city. 
(7)  The tower shall have the capacity to tow vehicles with locked transmissions and steering columns and vehicles stripped of their wheels. 
(8)  The tower shall agree to distribute upon request to all payers of a tow fee, an informational sheet provided by the city. 
(9)  The tower shall not be or become delinquent in the payment of any tax, assessment, or fee due to the city. The property from which the tower operates shall not be or become delinquent in the payment of any tax, assessment, or fee due to the city. 
(c)  The chief of police may, for cause, suspend or remove any licensed tower from the municipal towers list, who is in violation of applicable rules and regulations, or any provision of this article. Suspension or removal shall take effect after due notice in writing to the tower, and a hearing before the chief of police to be held, if requested by the tower, not less than three (3) days after the date of such notice. Any denial of an application for inclusion upon such list may be appealed in the manner provided in the Code. 
(d)  The chief of police or his designee shall rotate or assign municipal towing services among the towers of the municipal towers list on a reasonably fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory basis consistent with the capacity and location of each tower, the needs of the city and the protection of the public. 
(e)  The chief of police or his designee shall at all times keep and maintain exact records of each municipal towing service rendered, including the date and nature thereof, in accordance with this article. 
(f)  The city shall by regulation establish a program in which the towing company shall be required to give a complaint form to each person whose vehicle has been towed. Such complaint form shall include a statement on the condition of the vehicle, a ranking of services provided and a space for comment. 
(g)  Licensed towers shall accept MasterCard and Visa credit cards when offered to the tower for payment of fees pursuant to this article. Such acceptance shall be subject to standard verification and authorization procedures involved in the use of such credit cards, but no additional processing fee for payment by credit card is permitted. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite for retention or inclusion on the municipal towers list. 
(Ord. of 12-6-71; Ord. of 12-14-81; Ord. of 4-15-85; Ord. of 10-17-88; Ord. of 2-18-92; Ord. of 12-11-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Sec. 29-119. - Towing and storage fees; booting fees; posting of fees required. 
(a)  The owner or person in charge of a towed vehicle shall pay towing fees to the tower, or its duly authorized representative, when the vehicle is towed as a result of its being illegally parked on a public street, illegally parked on private property, illegally parked in a fire zone, impounded for unpaid parking violation fines, abandoned, inoperable or a traffic hazard. The fees for towing or removing any vehicle under these circumstances shall be seventy-seven dollars ($77.00). No mileage fees shall be charged. Tow and storage fees relating to other circumstances shall be consistent with state regulated fees. 
(b)  Each tower may charge for each vehicle towed under any provision of this Code twenty dollars ($20.00) storage for each twenty-four (24) hours or any portion thereof that such vehicle is stored. No storage fee shall be charged for the twenty-four (24) hours of the first day of storage. After the fifth day of storage, the tower may charge twenty-four dollars ($24.00) for each twenty-four (24) hours or any portion thereof, that such vehicle is stored. 
(c)  The storage charge shall be in addition to the towing charge and any applicable penalties. Any tower who shall charge in excess of such rates shall be subject to license suspension or revocation and to penalties pursuant to this chapter. Each tower shall be required to post the rate schedule in a prominent location visible and readable to owners of motor vehicles as they are required to pay the fee. This sign shall meet the specifications of the chief of police or his designee. The sign shall also include notice that review process forms are available at that location. 
(d)  The fee for temporary removal of a vehicle without conveyance to a towers premises, and replacement of such vehicle as near as practicable in the same location within a reasonable period of time shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00). The city shall pay this fee to the tower upon presentation of invoices certified to the satisfaction of the director of the department of traffic and parking. The parking violation fine permitting the temporary removal of a vehicle under this chapter shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(e)  The fee for application and removal of a vehicle impound boot shall be fifty-five dollars ($55.00). The city shall pay this fee to the tower upon presentation of invoices certified to the satisfaction of the director of the department of traffic and parking. The boot application fee shall be in addition to any subsequent towing and storage fees. The parking violation fine permitting the application of an impound boot shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(f)  The person whose vehicle has been towed shall have the right to a tow review. The written request stating the reason for such review shall be made to the department of traffic and parking within fifteen (15) days of the alleged violation. Said review shall be conducted by an administrative officer in the department of police services or the parking enforcement administrator. If the reviewer determines that the underlying charge as outlined in the notice of violation is unfounded then the towing fee shall be refunded by the city, and the fine required for the parking violation shall be nullified. 
(g)  If the individual is not satisfied with the reviewer's decision, said person shall have a right to a hearing before a parking violations hearing officer as provided for under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-6-75, § 9; Ord. of 5-3-76; Ord. of 12-14-81; Ord. of 4-15-85; Ord. of 10-17-88, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-18-92; Ord. of 5-24-99; Ord. of 12-11-00; Ord. No. 1432, § 5, 12-18-06)  
Secs. 29-120—29-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - POCKET BIKES, MINI BIKES, DIRT BIKES, MOTORIZED BICYCLES, ETC.[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1721, § 1, adopted September 16, 2013 , amended the title of article VI to read as herein set out. Article VI was previously titled Pocketbikes, Mini-Bikes, Motorized Bicycles, Etc. 
 
Sec. 29-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Pocketbikes, mini bikes, mini cycles, mini sport bikes, dirt bikes, mini motorcycles, mini dirt bikes, chopper scooters, motor scooters, bicycles with helper motors, and any other similar vehicle (hereinafter collectively "mini cycle") shall mean any wheeled vehicle designed to transport one (1) or more persons that is powered by any type of motor, except the following: 
(1)  "Dirt bike" means a two-wheeled motorized recreational vehicle designed to travel over unimproved terrain and not designed for travel on a highway, as defined in § 14-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes; 
(2)  Any registered "motorcycle" as defined in the G.S. § 14-1(46); 
(3)  Any registered "motor vehicle" as defined in G.S. § 14-1(47); 
(4)  Any moped that meets Federal Department of Transportation guidelines for use on streets and is approved by the State of Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles for use on streets, provided, however, the moped is operated pursuant to all applicable state laws, rules, and regulations and all City of New Haven ordinances; 
(5)  Any wheelchair or similar mobility assisting device utilized by a person with a physical disability or whose ambulatory mobility has been impaired due to age or physical ailment; 
(6)  Any self-propelled snow plow, snow blower or lawn mower when used for the purpose for which it was designed and operated at a speed not to exceed four (4) miles per hour; 
(7)  Any vehicle owned or leased by the City of New Haven; and 
(8)  Any electric personal assistive mobility device (hereinafter "EPAMD") that is self-balancing, has two (2) non-tandem wheeled devices, is designed to transport only one (1) person, and has an electric propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of the device to twelve and one-half (12.5) miles per hour or less. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 1721, §§ 2, 3, 9-16-13 )  
Sec. 29-132. - Operations prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mini cycle or dirt bike and/or for any owner of a mini cycle or dirt bike to knowingly permit the operation of his/her mini cycle or dirt bike on any street or sidewalk in the City of New Haven or on any public property, including but not limited to school property, playgrounds and parks, within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride as a passenger on a mini cycle or dirt bike and/or for any owner of a mini cycle or dirt bike to knowingly permit any person to ride as a passenger on his/her mini cycle or dirt bike operated in violation of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mini cycle or dirt bike, ride as a passenger on a mini cycle or dirt bike, and/or for any owner of a mini cycle or dirt bike to knowingly permit its operation on any private property, within the city, without first obtaining the written permission of the property owner if the property is not owned by the operator, passenger, and/or owner of the mini cycle or dirt bike. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an EPAMD and/or for any owner of an EPAMD to knowingly permit the operation of his/her EPAMD on any street in the City of New Haven, provided, however, an EPAMD may be operated on any public sidewalk and/or crosswalk in the city. An operator of an EPAMD shall yield to pedestrians and any wheelchair or similar mobility assisting device as defined in section 22-119(4) above and shall comply with any applicable State of Connecticut laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 1721, § 4, 9-16-13 )  
Sec. 29-133. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who operates a mini cycle in violation of section (a) above, or is the owner of a mini cycle who knowingly permits its operation in violation of section (a) above, may be summoned to community court pursuant to G.S. § 51-181c. Upon finding of a violation, the community court judge may impose a penalty of community service, a fine up to ninety-nine dollars ($99.00). 
(b)  Any person who rides as a passenger on a mini cycle in violation of section (b) above, or is the owner of a mini cycle who knowingly permits a passenger to ride on his/her mini cycle in violation of section (b) above may be summoned to community court pursuant to G.S. § 51-181c. Upon finding of a violation, the community court judge may impose a penalty of community service, a fine up to fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  Any person who operates a mini cycle in violation of section (c) above, rides as a passenger on a mini cycle in violation of section (c) above, or is the owner of a mini cycle who knowingly permits its operation in violation of section (c) above may be summoned to community court pursuant to G.S. § 51-181c. Upon finding of a violation, the community court judge may impose a penalty of community service, a fine up to ninety-nine dollars ($99.00). 
(d)  Any person who operates an EPAMD in violation of section (d) above, or is the owner of an EPAMD who knowingly permits its operation in violation of section (d) above, may be summoned to community court pursuant to G.S. § 51-181c. Upon finding of a violation, the community court judge may impose a penalty of community service, a fine up to ninety-nine dollars ($99.00). 
(e)  A police officer who observes any person in violation of section (a), section (b), section (c), and/or section (d) above may detain such person for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article may take the pocket motorcycle, motorized scooter, minicycle or EPAMD in question into the custody of the New Haven Police Department, at the owner's expense, pending a disposition of such property by court order or otherwise by law and proof of ownership of such property, i.e., bill of sale. 
(f)  A penalty for operation of a dirt bike in violation of section 29-132 of this article may be imposed according to the provisions of Public Act 13-154 of the Connecticut General Assembly. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 5-2-05; Ord. No. 1721, § 5, 9-16-13 )  
Chapter 30 - TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 30 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
State Law reference— Sanitation of trailer camps, State Sanitary Code, Reg. 109 (June, 1959); sanitation of trailer coaches, State Sanitary Code, Reg. 126 (June, 1959). 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Purpose; definitions. 
The purpose of this chapter is to insure the protection of the health, peace and welfare of the residents of New Haven. 
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the definitions ascribed to them in this section: 
(a)  Automobile trailer or trailer coach shall be deemed to be any vehicle which is used as sleeping or living quarters, which is or may be mounted on wheels, and is or may be propelled either by its own power or by another vehicle to which it may be attached. 
(b)  Permittee shall be deemed to apply to any person, firm or corporation receiving a permit to conduct or maintain a trailer camp. 
(c)  Trailer camp shall be deemed to be any lot or parcel of land which is used or permitted to be used for the parking of an occupied trailer or trailers. 
(d)  Trailer lot shall be deemed to be that section of ground in a trailer camp used or designated for use as a location for a single automobile and trailer, or a single house car. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 1)  
Sec. 30-2. - Permits required for operators of trailer camps. 
On or after January 15, 1942, no person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain, conduct, or operate any trailer camp within the limits of the city without having: 
(a)  Made application for an operator's permit and obtained approval from the department of health. 
(b)  Obtained an operator's permit therefor, from the town clerk. 
(c)  Obtained a permit from the zoning board. 
(d)  Obtained appropriate permits from the building inspector, plumbing inspector and electrical inspector. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 2)  
Sec. 30-3. - Trailer camp permit—Application to department of health. 
Application to conduct or maintain a trailer camp shall be made to the department of health on a blank form furnished for that purpose by the department. The applicant shall file with this application proof of ownership of the premises or of a lease or written permission from the owner thereof, together with a complete plan drawn to scale, showing the proposed camp, the location of the trailer lots, and such other details as are hereinafter more fully described. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 2a)  
Sec. 30-4. - Same—Issuance by town clerk, duration, fees, posting. 
(a)  After approval of the application for a trailer camp permit by the board of health, the permit shall be obtained from the town clerk and shall be for the calendar year, or any part thereof, ending December 31 of each calendar year. 
(b)  The permittee shall pay to the town clerk an annual fee as set forth in section 17-20(31) for a permit to operate a trailer camp. 
(c)  The permit which may be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises at which any trailer camp is operated. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 2(b)—(d); Ord. No. 1304, Pt. I(k)(11), 12-17-01)  
Sec. 30-5. - Camp to conform to zoning provisions; proximity to certain property regulated. 
No trailer or trailer camp shall be permitted except as allowed by zoning ordinances and regulations, nor may any part of the premises intended for use as a part of such camp be within fifty (50) yards of any residence, church, school or public library. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 2(e); Ord. of 3-3-58)  
Sec. 30-6. - Parking of trailers in camps. 
No trailer at any camp shall be: 
(a)  Parked within one hundred (100) feet of the travelled portion of any public highway. 
(b)  Parked on any plot less than fifty (50) feet wide and five thousand (5,000) square feet in area. 
(c)  Parked within fifteen (15) feet of any other trailer. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3(a); Ord. of 3-3-58)  
Sec. 30-7. - Arrangement, maintenance, grading, drainage of lots and roadways. 
All trailer lots shall be grouped in blocks abutting roads or driveways of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width, giving easy access to and from such lots. Such roadways or driveways shall be properly maintained by permittees so as to prevent ruts, depressions and flying dust. All trailer lots and abutting roads or driveways shall be kept free from heavy or dense growth of brush or woods and from any poisonous or obnoxious weeds, and so graded as to insure rapid drainage. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, §§ 3(b), 3(i))  
Sec. 30-8. - Water supply to lots. 
An adequate supply of potable water from a source approved by the department of health shall be provided at each individual lot from faucets only. Any hose used for distributing water shall, when not in use, be stored in a manner to protect it against contamination and at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3(c))  
Sec. 30-9. - Water closets, lavatories, shower in trailer camps. 
(a)  Toilet rooms, water closets. Every trailer camp shall have separate and adequately lighted and ventilated toilet rooms for each sex, within a distance of not more than two hundred (200) feet of any part of said camp, but not within twenty (20) feet of a trailer, with the following minimum sanitary facilities, supplied with running water, provided for each. Water closet accommodation shall be provided in the ratio of at least one water closet for every fifteen (15) females, or less, and at least one water closet for every twenty-five (25) males, or less; in addition, one urinal shall be supplied for each male toilet so provided. Said water closets shall be distinctly marked "men" and "women," and the location of the water closets plainly indicated by signs. There shall be provided in every toilet room, or within ten (10) feet of the entrance thereof, proper facilities for washing hands, in the ratio of at least one lavatory or sink for every two (2) or less water closets and urinals. Separate facilities shall be provided for each sex. No drinking water faucets or outlets shall be placed in any toilet room or water closet compartment. 
(b)  Showers. One shower shall be provided for every six (6) trailer lots or fraction thereof up to fifty (50), and one shower for each twelve (12) trailer lots over fifty (50). 
(c)  Sanitary maintenance. Toilet and wash rooms shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the permittee. 
(d)  Floors. The floors of all water closets or compartments containing bathing facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a waterproof condition by usign cement, concrete, tile or other type of waterproofing material. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, §§ 3(d), 3(e))  
Sec. 30-10. - Types of toilets permitted in trailers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit to be used or operated any toilet installed or maintained in any trailer, except a flue type chemical toilet, or toilet of other type approved by the department of health, while said trailer is located or camped within the confines of any trailer camp. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3(f))  
Sec. 30-11. - Waste disposal methods, facilities. 
All excreta and liquid waste shall be collected in proper receptacles and emptied into suitable sewer or cesspool connected fixtures located at or in toilet buildings, completely partitioned for privacy, ventilated and equipped with facility for rinsing containers. Connections to sewers or sewage disposal systems shall be trapped to prevent dissemination of odors. Spilling or draining of waste water upon the superficial area of any trailer camp is hereby prohibited. The permittee, or employees under his control shall furnish such services as may be necessary to maintain sanitary conditions at all times. The sewage disposal system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved by the department of health and shall be altered or extended or the operation modified whenever required by the department of health. No private sewage disposal system shall be developed if a public sewer is available. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3 (g))  
Sec. 30-12. - Garbage, rubbish disposal. 
Metal containers with tight fitting covers appropriately labelled shall be provided by the permittee for garbage and rubbish. There shall be provided at least one garbage container for every four (4) trailers or fractional part thereof and at least one rubbish container for every two (2) trailers or fractional part thereof. All containers for garbage and rubbish shall be emptied each day and refuse removed from the premises and disposed of in a sanitary manner approved by the department of health. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3 (h))  
Sec. 30-13. - Registration of arrivals, departures; inspection of register by police, health department. 
The permittee shall keep a book register upon which the owner or person in control of every automobile and trailer, or house car, upon arrival shall register the name and address of each person using same, the date of arrival, the state license plate number of the automobile and trailer, or if a house car, the state license plate number thereon, together with the name of the state issuing such license. The permittee at each trailer camp shall each day be responsible for entering the departure of trailers and guests in the book register and for keeping such register in a legible form so as to indicate at all times the trailer count and population at the camp to the satisfaction of the police and health departments. Said register shall be available at all times for inspection by representatives of the police and health departments. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3 (j))  
Sec. 30-14. - Number of trailers in camp, occupants per trailer regulated. 
No person, firm or corporation permitted to operate a trailer camp shall allow the parking of trailers in excess of the number specified in the application and permit under which the trailer camp is operated until space and sanitary facilities approved by the department of health are provided. The permittee shall not admit trailers to trailer camps or permit the parking of trailers if the population per trailer exceeds four (4), unless written approval of the department of health has been secured. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3(k))  
Sec. 30-15. - Duty of camp operator to report trailers to assessors. 
Each person licensed to operate a trailer camp shall, between the first and last of June of each year, file with the assessors of the city a statement under oath giving the license number of trailers and motor vehicles parked and registered at said trailer camp on the first day of June of that year. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3(l))  
Sec. 30-16. - Duty of camp operator to post copy of chapter. 
Each permittee operating a trailer camp shall cause a legible copy of this chapter to be posted and kept posted at all times in a conspicuous place at such trailer camp. 
(Ord. of 4-6-42, § 3(m))  
Chapter 30½ - TRANSIT DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 30½ was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
Editor's note— Ord. enacted March 20, 1973, approved by the mayor on the same date, and effective March 24, 1973, did not expressly amend the Code; hence codification as Ch. 30½, §§ 30½-1—30½-6, was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 30½-1. - Created. 
A transit district hereby known as the Greater New Haven Transit District is hereby established pursuant to the authority provided in Chapter 103a of the General Statutes, as amended, for the formation of such districts. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, § 1)  
Sec. 30½-2. - Joining by other municipalities. 
Any town or city within the New Haven Region may join the Greater New Haven Transit District upon application to said transit district and approval of such application by a majority vote of the board of directors of said transit district. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, § 2)  
Sec. 30½-3. - Boundaries; contract with nonmembers. 
The boundaries of the district shall be coterminous with the boundaries of the constituent municipalities comprising the district. Provided, however, the transit district may provide service to towns which do not belong to the transit district by contract approved by the board of directors of the transit district. 
(Ord. of 3-10-73, § 3)  
Sec. 30½-4. - Powers. 
Except as otherwise limited by this ordinance, the Greater New Haven Transit District shall have all the powers provided in Chapter 103a, as amended, for transit districts established thereunder, including the power to assume the powers of the public utilities commission of the State of Connecticut over any transit system operating within the district, to establish, operate and maintain a new transit system within the district or to acquire the property and franchises of any company or companies operating a transit system within the district. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, § 4)  
Sec. 30½-5. - Board of directors. 
The affairs of the district shall be managed by a board of directors chosen from among the electors of the constituent municipalities. The membership of the board of directors shall be constituted as set forth in Chapter 103a, as amended, or such other general or special act regarding representation on the board of directors of a transit district. The persons to serve as New Haven's representatives on the board of directors of the district shall be appointed by the mayor and shall be approved by majority vote of the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, § 5)  
Sec. 30½-6. - Withdrawal of municipality. 
In the event that a municipality shall vote to withdraw from the district, the board of directors of the district, including the members chosen from withdrawing city or town, shall determine the share of the district's expenses and obligations remaining due from the withdrawing city or town, including repayment of indebtedness on bonds or notes of the district, if any, theretofore authorized to be issued by the district. The withdrawing municipality shall pay or secure such amount to the district at a time of its withdrawal. 
(Ord. of 3-20-73, § 6)  
Chapter 30¾ - WASTE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1407, adopted March 6, 2006, amended and restated provisions contained mostly in Art. II of former Ch. 16 of the 1962 Code, reprinted in 1985, and created a new chapter which has been included as Ch. 30¾ in this replacement volume. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30¾-1. - Solid waste to be enclosed or removed. 
No person shall place or leave any solid waste, bulky waste or mixed solid waste in which insects may breed upon any premises or curb in the city, unless such waste is enclosed in a receptacle that is secure and acceptable to the director of the department of public works or his/her designee. The receptacle must be closely covered so as to prevent insects and vermin at all times, except when the waste is being placed in or removed from it. Solid waste must not be kept upon any premises in the city for more than seven (7) days, and not placed on the curb longer than twelve (12) hours before collection. For the purposes of this chapter, solid waste shall mean any material that is discarded that needs to be handled in a safe environmental way. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute an offense with a penalty up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per day that the violation continues. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-26; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 10; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-2. - Garbage collections prohibited except under city contract; collections by children. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-220a(d) as amended from time to time, any collector or hauler of solid waste generated in the city shall register with the department of public works or its designee. Additionally, such collectors must disclose the name of any other municipality and the disposal site outside the city in which he/she/it hauls such solid waste to the appropriate city authority. 
(b)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-220a(e) as amended from time to time, the door of any private vehicle used to haul solid waste shall be clearly marked with the hauler's business name and address. 
(c)  No person shall commercially collect garbage from house to house without a license or permit that has been issued by the proper city authority. 
(d)  No parent or guardian shall allow any child under his/her care, custody or control, who is under the age of fourteen (14) years, to commercially collect garbage from house to house. 
(e)  Every person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code of 1928, §§ 561—563; Code of 1985, § 16-11; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-3. - Containers, vehicles used in transporting garbage. 
Every person engaged in the business of carting offal, bones, grease, fat or any putrid or offensive matter shall use methods of containment and disposal that comply with directives from the city's health department and the department of public works. 
(Code of 1928, § 564; Code of 1985, § 16-12; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-4. - Disposal areas for litter. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Litter means any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste material, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar, can, top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction material which has not been deposited in a litter receptacle. It includes Silly String, which is an aerosol can from which string-shaped foam-like material may be sprayed; and Smoke Bag or Instant Smoke, which is a plastic bag or tube-like container holding material which when exposed to air produces a quantity of smoke-like emission. 
Public land means a state park, state forest, city park or any other publicly-owned land that is open to the public for active or passive recreation. 
(b)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-250 as amended from time to time, no person shall throw, scatter, spill or place or cause to be blown, scattered, spilled, thrown or placed, or otherwise dispose of any litter upon any of the following places: 
(1)  Any public property in the state; 
(2)  Any public land in the state or city; 
(3)  Any private property in this state not owned by such person; or 
(4)  In the waters of this state, including, but not limited to, any public highway, public park, beach, campground, forest land, recreational area, mobile manufactured home park, highway, road, street or alley. 
(c)  The above prohibition shall not apply under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the state or the city designates such place for the disposal of garbage and refuse, and such person is authorized to use such property for such purpose; or 
(2)  Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of said private or public property or waters. 
(d)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-250 as amended from time to time, any person who violates any provision of subsection (b) of this section shall be deemed to have committed an offense, and shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(e)  When an arrest is made in the city, one-half (¾) of any fine collected pursuant to this section shall be payable to the state, and the other half (¾) shall be payable to the city. If the arrest was made by a conservation officer, special conservation officer or patrolman appointed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under authority of Conn. General Statutes section 26-5 as amended from time to time, one-half (¾) of such fine shall be payable to the Department of Environmental Protection instead of the city. 
(f)  Whenever any person is convicted of violating subsection (b)(2) above, the court shall impose the fine authorized by subsection (d) above, and impose a surcharge in an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of such fine. If the arrest was made in the city, the surcharge shall be payable to it. If the arrest was made by a conservation officer, special conservation officer or patrolman appointed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under authority of state statutes section 26-5 as amended from time to time, such surcharge shall be payable to the Department of Environmental Protection. 
(g)  When any such material or substances are thrown, blown, scattered or spilled from a vehicle, the operator thereof shall be deemed prima facie to have committed such offense. 
(Code of 1928, § 578; Ord. of 4-4-83, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-83; Code of 1985, § 16-13; Ord. of 10-17-88, §§ 4—6; Ord. of 1-5-98, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-5. - Public litter receptacles. 
(a)  Public litter receptacles shall not be used for the disposal of solid waste incidental to the conduct of a residence or business. Such receptacles shall be reserved for the depositing of small quantities of litter by passersby. 
(b)  Public litter receptacles shall be used for the general public in areas where pedestrian traffic dictates. Location of said public litter facilities shall be at the discretion of the director of the department of public works. Public litter facilities shall not be constructed for residential or business trash use. The director of the department of public works shall have discretion to remove said receptacles within the public right of way if they are being used for waste that is generated by adjacent property owners, or used for illegal purposes, including but not limited to the disposal of previously defined non-recyclable waste products. 
(c)  No person shall damage or set fire to the contents of any public litter receptacle. Further, no unauthorized person shall move any public litter receptacle, or open or remove its contents. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per day for each noncompliance. Each incident of violation shall be construed as a separate offense. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-20; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 9; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-6. - Disposal of garbage, solid waste; unauthorized person. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-226d as amended from time to time, any unauthorized person who disposes of garbage and solid waste in a place that is not designated by the state or city for such purposes shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each incident of violation shall be construed as a separate offense. 
(b)  Any fine collected by the city pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the city's general fund, or in any of its specially designated funds. 
(Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-7. - Dumping prohibited; non-collectors. 
(a)  For purposes of this chapter, "dump" means to discard (A) more than one (1) cubic foot in volume of litter at one time, or (B) furniture, garbage bags or contents thereof or other similar materials. Material which has been placed at a location with an intent to leave it there indefinitely, or material which has not been removed from a location within forty-five (45) days, is deemed discarded. "Dump" also means to discard automobiles or automobile parts, large appliances, tires, bulky waste, hazardous waste, as defined in Conn. General Statutes section 22a-115 as amended from time to time, or any other similar material. 
(b)  No person shall dump any material upon any public property in the state or city, or upon private property in this state or city not owned by such person except when: 
(1)  Such property is designated by the state or the city for dumping, or such property is a licensed facility for such purpose; and 
(2)  Such person is authorized to use such property. 
(c)  Any person, other than a collector, who: (1) dumps more than one (1) cubic foot in volume of solid waste at one time in a solid waste or refuse collection container without the authorization of its owner, or (2) dumps any material into a recycling collection container used to collect another type of material for purposes of disposal by a collector, shall be guilty of an offense, which is punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each occurrence shall be deemed a separate violation. It shall not be a defense under this subsection that the dumping occurred with the permission of the property owner. 
(d)  Any fine collected by the city pursuant to this section shall be deposited into the city's general fund, or in any of its specially designated funds. 
(e)  Any municipal police officer may issue a summons for the commission of an offense for any violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-8. - Dumping prohibited; collectors. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "collector" means any person who holds himself/herself out for hire to collect solid waste from residential, business, commercial or other establishments. 
(b)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-220a(f) as amended from time to time, any collector who dumps more than one (1) cubic foot in volume of solid waste at one time in an area that the city does not designate for such purpose pursuant to the provisions of this section, or who knowingly mixes other solid waste with items designated for recycling pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-241b, or pursuant to this chapter, as either is amended from time to time, shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each occurrence shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(c)  The city or the Attorney General, at the request of the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, may bring an action under this section. All such actions shall have precedence in the order of trial as provided in Conn. General Statutes section 52-191 as amended from time to time. Any such action by the Attorney General shall be brought in the Superior Court for the Judicial District of Hartford. 
(Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-9. - Dumping; removal; penalties. 
(a)  Upon investigation, the mayor may proceed to require that a person who has unlawfully dumped solid waste remove it to an authorized facility. Proper notice and hearing procedures shall comply with those as outlined in Conn. General Statutes section 22a-250 (f)(1) and (2) as amended from time to time. The person may appeal from a mayor's order in accordance with the provisions of Conn. General Statutes section 8-8 as amended from time to time. 
(b)  If a person who violated Conn. General Statutes section 22a-250, as amended from time to time, does not respond to the notice of action as noted in subsection (a) above, and does not remove the solid waste within thirty (30) days of the order issued by the mayor, the city may remove such waste to an authorized solid waste facility. 
(c)  No property owner shall be ordered to remove dumped material by the mayor pursuant to subsection (e) or (f) of said statute, unless (1) the mayor finds that the property owner has dumped such material, or knowingly allowed another person to dump such material, in violation of subsection (c) or (d) of said statute; or (2) the mayor has determined that there is no reasonable opportunity to compel the responsible party to remove the material, or pay the removal costs. 
(d)  Violation of Conn. General Statutes section 22a-250, as amended from time to time, may lead to fine(s) up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each day such violation continues. Additionally, the property owner who is damaged by the unlawful dumping may pursue restitution relief against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-10. - Open burning. 
Open burning is prohibited in the city, unless otherwise allowed by the department of fire services. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, sec. 13; Code of 1985, sec. 16-14; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-11. - Disposal of refuse from cleaning animals, fish, fowl. 
(a)  No person shall dress or clean any fish, bird, poultry or other animal on public property, including but not limited to a bridge, wharf, railroad, street or public square. No person shall leave any animal or vegetable substance liable to putrefy in any public place without burying or otherwise treating it so that no stench, contagion or contamination of the air can result. A person convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of an offense, and punished by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per occurrence. Each violation will be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner of an animal that is found dead in the city shall arrange for its burial or cremation within state and local laws and regulatory practices. Any person violating this section shall be held liable for an offense, and subject to a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day in which the violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-12. - Solid waste collection regulations. 
The director of the department of public works shall be responsible for the collection of solid waste and recyclable items from residential buildings having no more than six (6) dwelling units subject to the following regulations. This section shall not apply to condominiums, nonprofit organizations or other agency deemed by the department of public works to be excluded from this coverage. 
(a)  Demolition material within the solid waste stream prohibited. Each property owner or contractor that produces solid waste resulting from building or excavation operations shall remove such waste from the original production site, and dispose of it at an authorized disposal area at his/her own or his/her contractor's expense. For the purposes of this section "demolition material" includes, but is not limited to, sand, stone, mortar, plaster, brick, tile, conduit, gypsum-blocks, lumber, trees, tree stumps and plasterboard. 
(b)  Dangerous substances prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall place any waste for curbside collection that exhibits a high level of ignitability, such as cartridges, shells, dynamite, or other ammunition which is regulated by the State Fire Marshal's Office. 
(2)  No person shall place any waste for curbside collection that exhibits a high level of corrosiveness, toxicity or reactivity, which are regulated by the State Department of Consumer Protection, including but not limited to, gasoline, benzene, kerosene, turpentine, paint, radioactive material, medical devices and other waste. 
(c)  Household hazardous waste. Certain hazardous waste shall be taken to an authorized and regulated disposal center as prescribed by the director of the department of public works. Such materials will be those hazardous to plants, animals and/or humans including, but not limited to, kitchen and bathroom cleaners, garden pesticides, fluorescent bulbs, mercury containing items, swimming pool chemicals, batteries and photographic chemicals. 
(d)  Residential solid waste subject to collection. On each collection day the city will collect mixed solid waste from city owned containers, or authorized bags weighing less than seventy-five (75) pounds each. 
(e)  Types of containers allowed. Residential solid waste that is to be collected shall be placed in containers owned and provided by the city, or those meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  Medium to heavy weight plastic or fiberglass, twenty (20) to thirty-two (32) gallon capacity, tight fitting cover; or 
Heavy duty plastic bags, two (2) to three (3) mil strength, twenty (20) to thirty-two (32) gallon capacity, securely tied. 
(2)  Yard waste, including but not limited to shrubs, sticks, branches and brush, that is collected, but not placed in containers (when permissible under this section), shall be tied in one (1) foot by one (1) foot bundles, and shall not exceed three (3) feet in length, and four (4) inches in diameter. 
(3)  The containers allowed for collection shall be subject to modification resulting from city program developments. 
(f)  Cleanliness, location of containers. Containers must be clean and in sufficiently good condition as to not pose a hazard to the general public and collection personnel. When ready for collection, the containers are to be placed on the sidewalk next to the curb adjacent to the owner's property. They shall not be so placed earlier than twelve (12) hours prior to the next scheduled collection. The containers are to be removed from the sidewalk within twelve (12) hours of collection. Containers shall not be placed in a manner as to interfere with the public right of way. 
(g)  Weight, size of containers. The combined weight of any container and its contents, or the weight of any single bundle of residential solid waste, must not exceed seventy-five (75) pounds. Further, the size and shape of the bundle or container shall be such that one person is able to pick it up and dump it into the trash hopper, unless said container is provided by the city, and is mechanically lifted for disposal. 
(h)  Loose rubbish prohibited. No person shall place any residential solid waste or its container(s) in such a way as to be carried by any wind into the street or onto another person's property. 
(i)  Noncollection. Residential solid waste collectors shall report each case in which no collection was made to the director of the department of public works. The report shall state the reason for noncollection, and a copy of it shall be given to the resident. The following will be considered valid reasons for noncollection: 
(1)  Abnormal amounts; 
(2)  Cans and containers in an inaccessible place; 
(3)  Frozen containers; 
(4)  Containers too large to handle; 
(5)  Construction debris in containers; 
(6)  Excessive liquids in containers; 
(7)  Broken containers; 
(8)  Containers containing material liable to injure the collector; 
(9)  Bulky items and containers; 
(10)  Containers weighing more than seventy-five (75) pounds; 
(11)  Containers containing recyclables, hazardous waste, medical waste or other inappropriate items; 
(12)  Broken, rusted or otherwise unsafe containers; and 
(13)  Metal containers. 
(j)  Establishment of collection schedules. Residential solid waste collections will be made on a regular schedule prescribed by the department of public works. Changes in the time of collection will be announced before taking effect. 
(k)  Responsibilities for articles near containers. The city reserves the right to assume that all articles left with or near residential solid waste containers are left for collection. 
(l)  Bulk solid waste. The director of the department of public works may establish rules and regulations regarding collection for residential solid waste, such as bulk trash, and appliances that exceed the size and weight limits as set forth above. Every effort shall be made to collect such items as soon as possible. City residents are entitled to two (2) bulk assignments per calendar year. The resident must remove uncollected items from the public right of way and properly dispose of them. No person shall place bulk trash at a curb without having received an authorized appointment with the department of public works. 
If applicable, fees shall be set as established and approved by the board of aldermen. Violators shall be liable for costs incurred by the department of public works or its designee in the removal of such unauthorized items. 
(m)  Complaints. All complaints will be addressed to the director of the department of public works, or his/her designee for immediate attention. 
(n)  Penalty. Every person who violates this section, or rules and regulations established under it, shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Health Reg. of 3-27-51; Ord. of 3-5-79; Ord. of 4-4-83, § 2; Code of 1985, § 16-17.1; Ord. of 6-1-87, sects. 1-3; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 1; Ord. of 10-17-88, §§ 7, 8; Ord. of 5-28-91; Ord. of 1-4-93; Ord. of 2-21-95; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-13. - Recycling. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Cardboard shall mean corrugated boxes and similar corrugated and kraft paper materials, which have been minimally contaminated by food or other material. 
(2)  Contamination shall mean the inclusion of any recyclable material or solid waste with a designated recyclable item, which negatively impacts the ability to process, market or recycle the designated recyclable, or which renders designated items as non-recyclable. 
(3)  Designated recyclable shall mean an item designated by the City of New Haven or State of Connecticut for recycling. 
(4)  Dry-cell battery shall mean a device used for generating electric current through a chemical reaction, including, but not limited to, nickel-cadmium batteries, carbon batteries and alkaline batteries. 
(5)  Electronics or electronic device shall mean a device, or component thereof that contains one (1) or more circuit board(s) or a cathode ray tube, and is used primarily for data transfer or storage, communication, or entertainment purposes. 
(6)  Glass food container shall mean a glass bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
(7)  H.D.P.E. plastic container shall mean a high-density polyethylene bottle or jar of any size or shape used to package food, household laundry products, or crankcase oil. 
(8)  Intermediate processing center (IPC) shall mean a facility which can recycle an item or items and market or deliver the resulting material product(s) for reuse. Public and/or private entities may own such facilities, and offer service on a state, regional, municipal or submunicipal level. 
(9)  Lawn clippings shall mean grass or weed clippings resulting from the mowing of lawns. 
(10)  Leaves shall mean tree foliage. 
(11)  Make arrangements/provisions for shall mean to ensure the institution of a program to separate, collect and recycle designated recyclables, or to participate in a municipal program if the director of the department of public works deems the property eligible for participation. 
(12)  Market shall mean to sell or deliver a recyclable item to a customer, who will reuse it or dispose of it for reuse in a material product. 
(13)  Metal food container shall mean an aluminum, bi-metal, steel, tin-plated steel or other metallic can, plate or tray of any size or shape used to package food and beverage products suitable for human or animal consumption. 
(14)  Newspaper shall mean used or discarded newsprint, which is minimally contaminated by food or other material. 
(15)  Office paper shall mean used or discarded high-grade white paper and Manila paper, including, but not limited to, paper utilized for file folders, tab cards, writing, typing, printing, computer printing, and photocopying, which is suitable for recycling, and which is minimally contaminated. 
(16)  Person shall mean any individual, organization, company, corporation, trust, partnership, foundation, group, society, association, or establishment, or any combination of them. 
(17)  P.E.T. plastic food container shall mean a polyethylene terephthalate container of any size or shape used to package beverages. 
(18)  Recycling shall mean the process of separating, sorting, cleansing, treating, diverting and reconstituting an item or items, or other discarded material, from the solid waste stream for the purposes of processing it, or causing it to be processed, into a material product, including the production of compost, in order to provide for disposition of the item(s) in a manner, other than incineration or landfilling, which will best protect the environment. 
(19)  Recycling facility shall mean land and its appurtenances, and structures where recycling is conducted, including, but not limited to, an intermediate processing center, as defined by Conn. General Statutes section 22a-260 as amended from time to time. 
(20)  Scrap metal shall mean used or discarded items, which consist predominately of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, chromium, tin, nickel or alloys thereof, including, but not limited to, white goods and metal food containers. 
(21)  Scrap tires shall mean discarded rubber or synthetic rubber tires used by or manufactured for vehicles including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses and trailers. 
(22)  Storage battery shall mean lead acid batteries or other batteries used in motor vehicles such as automobiles, airplanes, boats, recreational vehicles, tractors and like applications. 
(23)  Waste oil shall mean crankcase oil that has been utilized in internal combustion engines. 
(24)  Yard waste shall mean brush and the boughs of trees. 
(b)  Separation of materials. There is hereby established a program for the separation of items including, but not limited to, newspapers, glass food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, leaves and yard waste, plastic food and beverage containers, cardboard, office paper, scrap metal, scrap tires, storage batteries, waste oil and leaves from solid waste. Provisions for the separation of the designated recyclable items shall be made by January 1, 1991. New Haven residents may bring cardboard, newspapers, glass food and beverage containers, scrap metal, scrap tires, and metal food and beverage containers to the city's residential recycling center at the transfer station, and listed by the director of the department of public works. 
(c)  Curbside collection of designated recyclables. 
(1)  All persons entitled to solid waste collection from residential buildings as set out in the immediately preceding section of this chapter shall place the following items for collection in a manner specified by the director of the department of public works: 
(i)  Newspaper; 
(ii)  Cardboard; 
(iii)  Office paper; 
(iv)  Glass food and beverage containers, which shall be rinsed clean of residue; 
(v)  Metal food and beverage containers, which shall be rinsed clean of residue; 
(vi)  Plastic food and beverage containers, which shall be rinsed clean of residue; and 
(vii)  Scrap tires. 
(2)  Items are not to be placed on the curb for collection earlier than twelve (12) hours before the next scheduled collection. The containers are to be removed from the curbside area within twelve (12) hours of collection. Containers shall not be located as to interfere with the public right of way. 
(3)  No person shall place any unauthorized items requiring special handling including, but not limited to, hazardous or other waste, demolition material, electronics or used electronic devices, and medical waste including syringes, containers of oxygen or other products for curbside collection. 
For purposes of this chapter, a waste is hazardous if it is known to be harmful to human health and the environment when improperly disposed of, treated, stored, transported, handled or otherwise managed. Words that signal hazards include toxic, flammable, ignitable, corrosive, caution, warning, danger, poison, volatile, combustible, explosive and harmful. 
(4)  The director of the department of public works is hereby authorized to issue additional reasonable regulations for voluntary and mandatory curbside separation of other materials suitable for recycling. This may include, but not be limited to, items defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(5)  No person shall place any waste for curbside collection that exhibits a high level of ignitability, such as cartridges, shells, dynamite, or other ammunition which is regulated by the State Fire Marshal's Office. 
(6)  No person shall place any waste for curbside collection that exhibits a high level of corrosiveness, toxicity or reactivity which are regulated by the State Department of Consumer Protection, including but not limited to, gasoline, benzene, kerosene, turpentine, paint, radioactive material and medical devices and other waste. 
(d)  Unauthorized collection of designated recyclable materials. The following entities have exclusive authorization to collect designated recyclables in New Haven: the department of public works, vendors under contract with New Haven to provide this service, and private collectors licensed by the city. All organizations and other persons collecting designated recyclables within the city must be registered and licensed by the city in a similar manner as private collectors of solid waste. All designated recyclable material shall become the property of the city, or other authorized collector once it is placed at the curb or elsewhere for collection. It shall be a violation of this section for any unauthorized person to collect or pick up, or cause any designated recyclable or recycling container to be collected or picked up. (See subsection (c)(3), (5) and (6) above for list of unauthorized items.) Each unauthorized collection or pickup of at least one (1) container from at least one (1) residence, in violation hereof, shall constitute a separate and distinct violation punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Scrap metal for residents entitled to municipal collection. Except for metal food containers, scrap metal shall be separated from all other refuse collection items at the curb. Residents entitled to municipal collection service shall contact the department of public works for the collection of these materials. Alternatively, residents can drop off such items at the residential recycling center. 
(f)  Scrap tires for residents entitled to municipal collection. Scrap tires shall be separated from all other refuse collection items at the curb. Residents entitled to municipal collection service shall contact the department of public works for the collection of these materials. Alternatively, residents can drop off such items at the residential recycling center. 
(g)  Leaves. Leaves shall be placed in paper leaf bags, and separated from other refuse collection at the curb. Alternatively, residents can dispose of such items at the residential recycling center. 
(h)  Corrugated cardboard for residents entitled to municipal collection. Residents entitled to municipal collection service shall separate corrugated cardboard according to requirements of the city's cardboard collection program. Alternatively, residents can dispose of such items at the residential recycling center. 
(i)  Waste oil and storage batteries for residents. Waste oil and storage batteries shall not be mixed with other designated recyclables or residential solid waste. Residents shall bring waste oil and storage batteries to facilities that accept them, or to such locations as may be designated by the director of the department of public works. 
(j)  Recycling for residents not entitled to municipal collection. The owner of each residential building not entitled to city solid waste collection must comply with all federal, state and local recycling laws, and shall arrange for the separation, collection and recycling of the following designated recyclables in a manner that will prevent contamination or minimize their breakage: newspaper, glass food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, plastic food and beverage containers, scrap metal, scrap tires, leaves, storage batteries and waste oil. Additionally, the owner of such residential buildings will communicate his/her mandatory recycling program to all occupants, and identify and address any sources of contamination. The occupants of such buildings shall comply with all such arrangements. 
(k)  Intermediate processing center. When the director of the department of public works so designates, all collectors of mandated recyclables, including but not limited to, cardboard, newspaper, office paper, glass food and beverage containers, plastic food and beverage containers, leaves and metal food and beverage containers from residential properties shall bring such designated recyclables to the state licensed intermediate recycling center, or any other entity selected by the appropriate city authority for sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting waste or other discarded material for the purpose of using the altered form as required by state statutes. If the director of the department of public works provides advanced written approval, processing or sale may occur elsewhere. Collectors of designated recyclables must arrange for their processing, marketing and recycling until such items are designated for processing at the intermediate processing center. 
(l)  Nonresidential recycling. Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes sections 22a-220a and 22a-241b as each is amended from time to time, the owners of nonresidential buildings including, but not limited to, places of business, industry, offices, public and private schools, not-for-profit companies and shelters shall make arrangements for the separation, collection and recycling of the following items in a manner that will prevent contamination, or minimize their breakage: corrugated cardboard, glass food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, plastic food and beverage containers, newspaper, office paper, scrap metal, scrap tires, leaves, storage batteries and waste oil. Additionally, the owner will communicate his/her mandatory recycling program to all occupants, and identify and address any sources of contamination, and upon request, to report to the director of the department of public works or his/her designee. The occupants of such buildings shall comply with all such programs. 
(m)  Reporting of recyclable materials collected. 
(1)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-220 as amended from time to time, each collector of recyclable materials licensed by the city shall provide quarterly reports to the director of the department of public works about the amount of each recyclable item as listed in this section, and any other materials collected, processed or marketed for the purpose of recycling, and solid waste that has been delivered to a recycling facility pursuant to regulations adopted by the director of the department of public works. Such items include corrugated cardboard, glass food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspaper, office paper, mixed grade paper, plastic food and beverage containers, scrap metal, scrap tires, leaves, storage batteries and waste oil. 
(2)  If a recycling facility receives any of the following items generated from within New Haven for processing or sale, the facility's owner or operator shall provide a quarterly report for each one by its amount of weight or other method, and any other information required by the city, or the Commissioner of the State Department of Environmental Protection: cardboard, glass food and beverage containers, metal food and beverage containers, newspaper, leaves, storage batteries, waste oil, plastic food and beverage containers, scrap metal, scrap tires, office paper, newly designated recyclables, and any other materials collected, processed or marketed for the purpose of recycling or composting. Such information shall be provided for residential and nonresidential properties. 
Such reports shall be filed in a timely manner with the city, and if so required, with the Commissioner of the State Department of Environmental Protection. 
(n)  Notice of violations. 
(1)  Any collector, who reasonably believes that a person from whom he/she/it collects solid waste has violated the separation requirements of this section, shall not collect the same, and contact the director of the department of public works to report the violation. If the collector collects such waste, fines and penalties shall be issued and imposed against him/her/it. Additionally, collectors shall assist the director of the department of public works in identifying persons that unlawfully mixed solid waste with recyclables, which were later delivered to a resources recovery facility, transfer station, landfill or other solid waste facility. All collectors shall comply with state and city laws and regulations. Failure to do so shall subject them to penalties and fines up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(2)  The director of the department of public works shall develop warning notices, and notices of violation forms, in which to impose penalties on violators. He/she shall issue warning notices and forms for violations directly to property owners that are in violation of this section. Alternatively, collectors shall issue such notices at the request of the director of the department of public works. Said director shall be responsible for imposing such penalties. 
(o)  Violations at solid waste facilities. When the operator of the city's solid waste facilities reasonably believes that loads of solid waste that were substantially mixed with recyclables have been delivered to a facility, he/she shall promptly notify such belief to the vehicle's driver, and the director of the department of public works. The operator may base this belief on a visual inspection of such load. Collectors shall notify all persons from whom solid waste was collected to form such load, and may issue a warning notice as specified in subsection (n)(1), (n)(2) and other sections. 
(p)  Penalties. The director of the department of public works or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this section. In accordance with Conn. General Statutes sections 22a-220a and 22a-226d as each is amended from time to time, and unless otherwise provided, any person, firm or corporation that violates this section, or other related rules and regulations shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(1)  Any resident or occupant of a nonresidential building who fails to source-separate designated recyclables from other solid waste shall be issued a written warning for a first offense. A fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code shall be imposed for each subsequent violation. 
(2)  The owner of any commercial or nonresidential establishment that fails to provide for separation of recyclables from other solid waste shall be issued a written warning for a first offense; a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code shall be imposed for a second and subsequent offenses. 
(3)  Any collector who knowingly mixes designated recyclable items with other solid waste shall be liable for a civil penalty up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code. 
(q)  Regulations. The director of the department of public works is authorized to issue reasonable regulations as needed to support this section in areas including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Establishing specifications for preparation, separation and collection of designated recyclables; 
(2)  Providing for curbside collection container replacements; 
(3)  Defining and adding new designated recyclables; 
(4)  Establishing locations for drop-offs of waste oil, storage batteries and corrugated cardboard; 
(5)  Establishing specifications for a corrugated cardboard collection program; 
(6)  Establishing collection specifications for leaves, yard waste and lawn clippings; 
(7)  Establishing reporting requirements including those for warning notices and notices of violation; and 
(8)  Establishing penalties for the failure to provide for the separation of designated recyclables, failure to comply with separation requirements, knowingly mixing designated recyclables; and otherwise failing to comply with state and local mandated requirements. 
Proposed regulations enacted affecting non-municipal collectors shall not become effective until a thirty (30) day comment period has expired. 
(r)  Severability. Subsections (a) through (q) of this section are to be construed as independent, separate and distinct. Notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, if any subsection or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remaining portions and subsections and their applications shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby declared that this section would have been passed independently of any invalid provision. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-17.2; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 2; Ord. of 12-17-90, § 1; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-14. - Mandatory leaf collection program. 
There is hereby established an ordinance providing for the following: 
(1)  Mandatory separation of leaves from refuse; 
(2)  Placement of leaves into authorized paper bags or barrels by city residents; and 
(3)  The separate collection of leaves curbside by the department of public works. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Barrel means any clean non-metal solid waste container with a thirty-two (32) gallon capacity, weighing no more than forty-five (45) pounds full, which are provided by the city. 
(2)  Leaf collection season means the period of time in which the director of the department of public works schedules leaf collection. 
(3)  Leaves mean foliage and deposition from deciduous and coniferous trees. 
(4)  Paper leaf bag means a sack having a thirty (30) gallon capacity, and two-ply fifty (50) pound wet-strength with decomposing glue, environmentally safe inks, and reinforced self-supporting square bottom closure. 
(5)  Yard waste means hedge trimmings or branches. 
(b)  Separation of leaves from solid waste and placement at the curb for removal. 
(1)  In accordance with Conn. General Statutes section 22a-241 as amended from time to time, leaves may not be disposed of in a landfill or incinerator. Leaves collected by persons, firms or corporations shall be processed for the purpose of composting in accordance with this section and the regulations. 
(2)  During the declared leaf collection season, city residents shall place all leaves into paper leaf bags or barrels as they are defined in this section. 
These paper leaf bags or barrels shall be placed at the curb on collection days specified by the director of the department of public works. Persons placing leaves at the curb that are not contained in said receptacles, or who placed them at the curb after the scheduled collection days, shall be in violation of this section. 
(3)  No other yard waste or other material shall be placed in paper leaf bags or barrels. 
(4)  Tape, staples and/or string shall not be used to close paper leaf bags. 
(5)  Leaves shall not be placed in plastic bags or barrels other than those described herein. 
(6)  Paper leaf bags and barrels of leaves shall be placed at the curb separate from any residential solid waste or bulk trash, and shall not obstruct any fire hydrant, sidewalk, driveway or street. 
(7)  No person or property owner shall rake, place, blow or cause leaves to be raked, placed or blown into any street within the city from private lands, property or sidewalk. 
(8)  Residents may bring leaves and small brush to specially designated recycling sites as long as they conform to the regulations specified by the department of public works. 
(c)  Leaves collected by commercial landscapers and other grounds maintenance personnel. 
(1)  Commercial landscape maintenance firms must be registered and permitted by the department of public works. These firms may bring leaves and small brush from New Haven residences to specially designed recycling sites as long as they conform to the regulations specified by the department of public works. 
(2)  Leaves collected by commercial landscapers and other grounds maintenance personnel for nonresidential properties shall be transported to a yard waste compost facility approved by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection. A list of such facilities in the New Haven area will be available from the director of the department of public works. 
(d)  Regulations. The director of the department of public works may establish regulations pertaining to the matters of this section from time to time. 
(e)  Penalties. Every person who violates any provision of this section, including regulations established hereunder, shall be fined up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for every such violation. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Reporting. This mandatory leaf collection program shall be evaluated every two (2) years. A report shall be made to the board of aldermen regarding the program's effectiveness, cost and efficiency. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-17.3; Ord. of 6-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 9-20-93; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-15. - Solid waste disposal facility regulated; duties of the director of the department of public works. 
(a)  Disposal site. Solid waste that is to be disposed of within the city limits shall only be done at such sites that are designated by the director of the department of public works, and subject to applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. The director of the department of public works may regulate the types of solid waste disposed of at the city disposal facility, including, but not limited to, recyclable material and bulky waste, and may designate other areas for its disposal in accordance with federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(b)  Hours. The director of the department of public works shall have discretion to set the actual hours of operation Monday through Friday, and as needed on Saturdays, and shall publish them. 
(c)  Days prohibited. Solid waste shall not be dumped on Sundays. 
(d)  Salvage removal. No individual company or corporation shall be allowed to salvage material from the solid waste disposal facility without the written permission of the director of the department of public works. He/she shall have discretion in rendering such permission. 
(e)  Duties of director of the department of public works. The director of the department of public works shall direct the operation of the solid waste disposal facility in conformance with contracts entered into by the city, and with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(f)  User license permit and charge. No person, firm or corporation other than the City of New Haven shall dispose of any solid waste at the city's solid waste disposal facility without registering and obtaining a license to do so from the department of public works. In addition, all users shall obtain a permit from the department of public works for each vehicle used for such solid waste disposal. The director of the department of public works shall use his/her discretion in granting licenses and permits. Said director shall consider the applicant's record of compliance with this article, and any relevant state and federal laws and regulations in making this evaluation. The fee for such licenses and permits shall be in accordance with this Code as amended from time to time. Such license and permit shall have a one (1) year term, and shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. The controller shall cause a cost of service study to be undertaken at least annually to establish the true costs of providing solid waste disposal services, and the establishment of a per unit fee sufficient to cover those costs for the city and the city's customers. City customers shall be governmental, quasi-governmental, private and other organizations that deliver or cause appropriate waste to be delivered to the solid waste disposal facility that the city bills in order to qualify for the solid waste disposal services. The director of the department of public works must approve of these customers before they can participate in this service. The board of aldermen must approve of any changes in the per unit fee for the city and city customers. Once such approval is given, changes will take effect thirty (30) days after the controller publishes notice of them in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The controller, in consultation with the director of the department of public works, shall have the option to require city customers to pay cash for services, or to allow customers to pay periodically. In the latter case, the controller may require customers to post a security deposit in a specified form and in an amount equivalent to between two (2) months and six (6) months of the city customer's average monthly disposal at the solid waste disposal facility. 
The total cost will be based on the average of charges imposed on the customer for the last six (6) months. Interest at the rate of one and one-half (1¾) percent per month, or any portion thereof, shall be imposed on the city customer for all such disposal charges not paid within thirty (30) days of the first billing date. Interest charges take effect thirty (30) days from the first billing date for said services. 
If the city does not receive payment within thirty (30) days of the first billing date, the customer shall be in violation of this subsection, and therefore subject to possible suspension or revocation of his/her/its license as set forth in subsection (g) herein. The controller, in consultation with the director of the department of public works, shall issue regulations concerning methods of payment and provisions for return of security deposits, and make all determinations concerning disputed billings. If the customer fails to comply with such determinations, he/she/it shall be in violation of this subsection, and therefore subject to the provisions of subsection (g). The board of aldermen's approval is needed to waive interest charges levied and accrued as provided for in this section. 
(1)  Contracts with other municipalities. The mayor, acting on behalf of the city, and consistent with any contractual obligations, may negotiate and execute agreements with other municipalities for solid waste disposal services at the New Haven transfer station. Such agreements shall not exceed one (1) year's duration. 
When the mayor negotiates such an agreement, he/she shall consider identified and predictable costs to the city of providing the services being contracted for, and he/she shall establish service fees which may reasonably be expected to cover such costs in full. The service fees established by the city in such agreements may vary from those set from time to time by the board of aldermen pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Transfer station enterprise fund established. 
(i)  The transfer station enterprise fund ("the fund") is established to account for all revenues and expenses associated with usage of the New Haven transfer station ("the facility") by private haulers, other municipalities, other governmental entities and not-for-profit businesses which pay the city for solid waste disposal services at the facility. 
(ii)  The mayor shall submit the annual budget for the fund as a component of the annual city budget submission required by this Code, and shall become effective upon the board of aldermen's approval. The fund's budget shall include estimates of the accrued unexpended balance which may be available from prior years' operations, revenues which may be earned, and expenditures which may be incurred during the fiscal year for which said budget is proposed. The director of the department of public works may adjust expenses to meet actual conditions at the facility, provided that expenditures incurred may not exceed the sum of revenues earned during the fiscal year plus unexpended balances available from prior years' operations. Personnel expenses incurred in the general fund, which are associated with the operation of the facility, and properly allocable to activities specified in subsection (a) hereinabove, shall be allocated at least annually to the fund. Any unexpended balance in the fund at the end of the fiscal year shall remain in the fund, and be carried forward as allowed by Conn. General Statutes section 7-148(2)(k) as amended from time to time. 
(iii)  The director of the department of public works shall prepare a quarterly report with the assistance of the controller or his/her designee, and submit it to the board of aldermen before the third Monday of October, January, April and July. The report shall state revenues earned and expenditures incurred through the end of the most recent quarter, project revenues and expenditures through the end of the fiscal year, and compare those to the budget approved by the board. 
(iv)  Sums appropriated by the board of aldermen for the facility's operation and/or maintenance may be used to supplement expenditures from the fund, but such sums shall not be added to the fund unless the board has appropriated them. 
(3)  Contracts for transfer station operations, maintenance, management, hauling and other services. 
(i)  The mayor, acting on behalf of the city, may negotiate contracts for private operation, maintenance, management, hauling and other services pertaining to the transfer station subject to the board of aldermen's approval. 
(ii)  If the transfer station is open on a holiday that the city observes, a city transfer station operator must be present, and the private transfer station contractor must pay any overtime and benefits owed to the operator for work performed during that holiday. 
(iii)  If a contractor requests that the site be open beyond the city's regular hours, he/she/it shall reimburse the city for all additional operational costs associated with the proper handling and disposal of wastes. 
(g)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person or entity in violation of subsection (a), (b), (c), (d) or (f) of this section shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code 
(2)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 7-152d as amended from time to time, any person or entity that illegally disposes of solid waste at the city's solid waste disposal facility shall be liable for a civil penalty up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for first, second and subsequent violations. These penalties may be added to those resulting from violations of other federal, state and local laws and regulations. Any person who is assessed a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection may appeal such assessment to the Superior Court in the manner provided in Conn. General Statutes sections 7-152b (g) as amended from time to time. 
(3)  The director of the department of public works shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a license to dispose of solid waste at the city's solid waste disposal facility from any person or entity if he/she/it, or his/her/its employee(s) violates subsection (a), (b), (c), (d) or (f) of this section within the scope of his/her employment. 
(h)  Regulations. The director of the department of public works may from time to time issue regulations concerning this section as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 4-10-61; Ord. of 12-1-69; Ord. of 3-5-79; Ord. of 4-15-85; Code of 1985, § 16-18; Ord. of 10-17-88, § 1; Ord. of 12-17-90, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-93; Ord. of 6-5-95; Ord. of 12-6-99; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-16. - Site cleanliness plans; dumpster regulations. 
(a)  Site cleanliness plans. The director of the department of public works may require a site cleanliness plan for any premises in the city. 
(1)  The person responsible for any premises subject to a site cleanliness plan shall file it in writing with the director of the department of public works on a form approved by him/her. The plan shall contain the address and specifications regarding the site on which solid waste collection for the premises will take place. The plan shall indicate the location of solid waste containers in relation to adjacent structures, and contain a regular weekly schedule, by days and hours, of solid waste collection. A similar schedule shall be provided for cleaning and maintaining the site of the solid waste containers, and any immediately adjacent sidewalk or public way from litter, rubbish and solid waste. A dumpster shall be used as the solid waste container unless it is impractical. 
(2)  If the director of the department of public works determines that the site maintenance is adequate to keep the site free from litter, he/she shall approve the plan. The director may consult with the director of the department of public health and the director of the building division of the Livable City Initiative in making this determination. 
(b)  Dumpsters: 
(1)  No dumpster may be placed or installed on any site in the city's right of way unless the person responsible for it has obtained a permit for it from the director of the department of public works or his/her designee. Such permit may be issued upon the payment of a fee, if any, as authorized, established and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen. Additionally, the dumpster must bear a number issued by the director of the department of public works or his/her designee in conjunction with the permit. No permit for a dumpster shall be issued unless the applicant provides the following written information on a form approved by the director of the department of public works or his/her designee: 
(i)  The address and a plan of the site on which the dumpster will be located, showing the location of the dumpster in relation to any structure on the site and on adjacent sites; 
(ii)  The site owner's name, address and telephone number; 
(iii)  The name, address and telephone number of the responsible person if the owner does not manage the site; 
(iv)  The name, address and telephone number of the person purchasing the dumpster service; 
(v)  The name, address and telephone number of the company which provides the dumpster; and 
(vi)  The name, address and telephone number of the company which empties the dumpster, if the provider does not empty it. 
(2)  If the director of the department of public works or his/her designee determines that the above information is accurate, he/she shall issue a permit for a dumpster on the site upon payment of a fee, if any, as established, authorized and amended from time to time by the board of aldermen. The permit shall be conditioned upon the compliance with the activities specified in such cleanliness plan. Nonperformance of any of the activities specified in the site cleanliness plan shall be a violation of the permit and of this section. 
(3)  All dumpsters, including, but not limited to, those transporting debris or solid waste within the city, must be covered at all times. 
(c)  Regulations. The director of the department of public works or his/her designee may establish regulations pertaining to the matters of this section from time to time. 
(d)  Penalties: 
(1)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per day for each noncompliance. 
(2)  The director of the department of public works has sole discretion in determining whether a violation is punishable by revoking the approval of the site cleanliness plan, and/or any permits and licenses issued under this section. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-19; Ord. of 10-17-88; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-17. - Use of polystyrene packaging products regulated. 
(a)  The following restrictions shall apply to certain packaging materials in the City of New Haven. 
(1)  No vendor, commercial or retail user located and doing business within the city shall sell, give or provide eating utensils or food containers to any consumers within the city if such utensils or containers are composed of polystyrene. 
(2)  Any vendor, commercial or retail user may apply for exemption from this restriction if the establishment demonstrates to the mayor's designee that it is actively engaged in a comprehensive effort to recycle the polystyrene packaging materials which it generates. Such comprehensive efforts must include the following: 
(i)  Documented recycling of more than fifty (50) percent (by weight or volume) of the polystyrene materials generated as waste by the establishment on its premises; 
(ii)  A written recycling plan that contains a copy of a contract or agreement with the hauler transporting the recycled material to a legitimate facility; 
(iii)  A recycling plan on the premises showing that the establishment is in full compliance with federal, state and local recycling laws and regulations, including a written description of the recycling program for mandated items; and 
(iv)  The city may request additional documentation if necessary. 
(3)  Establishments wishing to use polystyrene packaging may apply in writing for the exemption to the designated city agency. Vendors or users must agree to provide the city agency responsible with all necessary documentation, and to allow city representatives access to the premises for verification. 
(4)  Retail food establishments will submit applications to the city's health department. All other retail establishments will submit applications to the city's department of public works. 
(b)  The directors of the departments of health and public works shall have the authority to issue reasonable regulations as needed to effect the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  This section's polystyrene packaging regulations shall not apply to the following items: 
(1)  Any flexible transparent covering for raw meat, poultry, fish, hard cheese, cold cuts, fruit and vegetable produce, baked goods or bread; 
(2)  Any polystyrene packaging which is used for display, storage or transportation of uncooked cut fresh meat, poultry or fish unless otherwise determined by the city's health director; and 
(3)  Any paper or other cellulose-based packaging that is coated with polyethylene plastic on only one (1) side. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The city's health director or his/her designee(s), the director of the department of public works or his/her designee(s), or a sanitarian or his/her designee(s) employed by either department may enter the establishment of any vendor, commercial or retail user in the city where there is just cause to suspect the use of polystyrene packaging products prohibited by this section, and abate or cause such use to be abated. 
(2)  For the purposes of abating the use of such prohibited packaging, the city's health director or any entity serving as such shall have the same power and authority granted pursuant to Conn. General Statutes sections 19a-206(b) and (c) as amended from time to time. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each day such violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. of 1-2-90, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-91, § 1; Ord. of 2-21-95; Code of 1985, § 16-21; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-18. - Plastic bags and paper bags at retail establishments. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-255e as amended from time to time, each retail establishment offering plastic bags to customers for purchased goods shall offer them paper bags, and inform them that a choice is available. This section shall not be construed to require retail establishments to use plastic bags. 
(1)  The director of the department of public works or his/her designee shall prepare and promulgate appropriate signage for retailers informing them of this section. 
(2)  Retail establishments operating under this section are required to conspicuously display said signage in a location that is clearly visible to customers before packaging or transporting their purchases from the retail establishment. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The director of the department of public works shall appoint such agents as are necessary for enforcement of this section. 
(2)  Failure to comply with this section shall result in a fine up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for each day that such violation continues. 
(Code of 1985, § 16-22; Ord. of 2-21-95; Ord. No. 1407, 3-6-06)  
Sec. 30¾-19. - Designation of areas for all solid waste disposal. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 22a-220a, as amended from time to time, the city is authorized to designate an area, or areas, where all solid waste generated within the boundaries of the city shall be disposed and such area, or areas, so designated shall be the exclusive designated areas for disposal of such solid waste. 
(b)  The city hereby designates that all solid waste generated by residential, business, commercial or other establishments within the boundaries of the city shall be disposed of at the New Haven transfer station or such other area, or areas, as may be designated by the city. 
(c)  The director of the department of public works may designate a solid waste disposal area, or areas, for a specific type or classification of solid waste and may designate more than one area for the same type or classification of waste. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to amend or revoke such designation of solid waste disposal area, or areas as it determines is in the best interests of the city. 
(e)  In accordance with Conn. General Statutes section 22a-220a(b), this section 30¾-19 shall become effective following a sixty-day notice period, public hearing, and publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, such publication to provide the solid waste disposal area, or areas, and the effective date. 
(f)  Solid waste disposal areas so designated shall be subject to the requirements of all applicable provisions of Chapter 30¾ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, as may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  All ordinances, resolutions, regulations, rules or other documents inconsistent with the provisions of this section 30-¾ are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. 
(h)  Failure to comply with this section 30¾-19 shall constitute an offense with a penalty up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code per occurrence. Each occurrence shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1590, 4-28-09)  
Secs. 30¾-20—30¾-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1557, adopted April 16, 2007, repealed former Art. II, §§ 30¾-41—30¾-50 in its entirety, which pertained to refuse collection and derived from Ord. No. 1423, adopted July 6, 2006. The provisions of subsequent Ord. No. 1566, adopted April 22, 2008, have been included herein as a new Art. II at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 30¾-41. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The New Haven Solid Waste and Recycling Authority (the "authority") is created as a municipal resource recovery authority pursuant to CGS Sections 7-273aa to 7-273oo, inclusive. The authority is a public body politic and corporate of the state, and is a political subdivision of the state established and created for the performance of the essential public and governmental function of furthering the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of New Haven, Connecticut (the "city") by exercising supervision and control over the administration of solid waste in the city, including but not limited to the existing New Haven transfer station and recycling facility which currently exists in the city. 
(b)  Mission statement for the municipal solid waste and recycling authority. The municipal solid waste and recycling authority is an agency dedicated to achieving the most environmentally sound solid waste management and resource conservation program for the people of New Haven and the surrounding communities. Within this context, the agency is committed to achieving an increased diversion goal, with progressive benchmarks, and promoting sustainable consumption and disposal patterns. 
(1)  To achieve this goal, the agency will operate under the following hierarchy in order of priority: 
a.  Source reduction (avoiding the creation of waste). 
b.  Recycling and composting. 
c.  Environmentally safe transformation or land disposal. 
(2)  In achieving this goal, the agency will: 
a.  Provide strategic planning, research, education and technical assistance to the public, businesses and local governments. 
b.  Initiate innovative programs and facilities to maximize waste prevention, recycling and economic development opportunities. 
c.  Serve as a pro-active public policy advocate for long term solutions to our challenges. 
d.  Partner with organizations with compatible goals. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § I, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-42. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, each of the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
Asset transfer agreement shall mean an agreement by and between the city and the authority which shall set forth the terms and conditions of the disposition by the city to the authority by sale or lease of the solid waste assets. 
Authority shall mean the New Haven Solid Waste and Recycling Authority established pursuant to this article. 
Bylaws shall mean the rules and regulations that, subject to statutory law and the articles of incorporation, govern the business and conduct of the affairs of the authority. 
Cause shall mean (a) conviction of a felony (other than a felony resulting from a traffic violation); (b) commission of an act of material fraud or embezzlement against the Authority; or (c) with respect to a director, willful failure to comply with the obligations set forth in the bylaws relating to duality of interest. 
CGS shall mean the General Statutes of Connecticut, Revision of 1958, as amended. 
City shall mean the City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
Effective date shall mean the date upon which the ordinance from which this article derived becomes effective. 
Mayor shall mean the mayor of the City of New Haven. 
Solid waste assets shall mean such real and personal property utilized for solid waste and recycling, located at 256 Middletown Avenue, New Haven CT 06513, and commonly referred to as the "transfer station," such Solid waste assets to be further defined under the asset transfer agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § II, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-43. - Creation and powers. 
The city hereby adopts the provisions of CGS Chapter 103b and creates the board of directors of the authority as its municipal resource recovery authority. The authority shall have all the powers set forth in CGS Chapter 103b and the powers and duties of a municipal authority pursuant to CGS Chapters 446d and 446e. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § III, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-44. - Articles of incorporation of the authority. 
(a)  Name, address, authority for creation. The authority is created as a municipal resource recovery authority pursuant to CGS Sections 7-273aa to 7-273oo, inclusive, and shall be known as the "New Haven Solid Waste and Recycling Authority" with its principal office at 34 Middletown Avenue, New Haven, Connecticut 06513. 
(b)  Initial directors. names, addresses, terms of office. The names, addresses and terms of office of the initial directors of the authority are set forth on Exhibit A attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § IV, 4-22-08) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A is not set out herein but is available at the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 30¾-45. - Board of directors. 
The business of the authority shall be managed by or under the direction of the board of directors which may exercise all such powers of the authority and do all such lawful acts and things as are allowed by the CGS and the bylaws. 
(1)  Number and qualification of directors. The authority shall have a board of directors consisting of seven directors. All directors shall be resident electors of New Haven. Two of who shall reside in the ward in which the transfer station is located or the wards downstream from the transfer station. 
(2)  Compensation. The directors shall serve without compensation. 
(3)  Method of appointment and removal. 
a.  Six directors shall be appointed by the mayor. One director shall be appointed by the board of aldermen of the city and shall be a member of the board of aldermen. Upon termination or vacancy of a directorship appointed by the mayor, the mayor shall appoint a subsequent director. Upon termination or vacancy of a directorship appointed by the board of aldermen of the city, the board of aldermen of the city shall appoint a subsequent director. Beginning December 31, 2009 all subsequent mayoral appointments shall require approval of the board of aldermen. 
b.  The board of directors may remove a director only for cause. A director may be removed only at a meeting of the board called for the purpose of removing the director, and the meeting notice must state that the purpose or one of the purposes, of the meeting is the removal of the director. A director may be removed only upon the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the board. 
c.  The terms of directors shall be so arranged such that less than one-half of such terms of directors shall expire within any one calendar year. 
(4)  Term of office. 
a.  Except for the initial terms of the initial directors, the term of office of directors shall be for three years, commencing on January 1 of the first year of the term and expiring on December 31 of the third year of the term. 
b.  The initial term of office of each of the initial directors of the authority shall commence on the effective date and shall expire on December 31, 2009, December 31, 2010 or December 31, 2011, as set forth on Exhibit A attached hereto. Upon the expiration of each initial term of office for each of the initial directors, a new term of office of three (3) years shall commence for each subsequent director appointed. 
(5)  The formation of the board of directors shall comply with all other applicable state and local laws, as may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § V, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-46. - Authorization of director of public works. 
The director of public works of the city is hereby appointed and authorized to serve as the executive director, or such other title as may be given to the chief executive, of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § VI, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-47. - Disposition and transfer of assets. 
The sale or lease of the solid waste assets to the authority is hereby approved, and the mayor and the controller are hereby empowered, authorized and directed to negotiate, execute and deliver, on behalf of the city, the asset transfer agreement and to approve all terms and conditions for the transfer of the solid waste assets by sale or lease, and any and all other agreements, documents and instruments related thereto, and to perform any and all acts necessary or appropriate to effectuate the disposition and transfer of the solid waste assets by sale or lease to the authority, all as shall be determined to be in the best interests of the city. Prior to the execution of the asset transfer agreement and the transfer of the solid waste assets to the authority, (i) the proposed transfer of the solid waste assets shall have been approved by the city plan commission of the city, and (ii) all notice and public hearing requirements shall have been complied with, including, without limitation CGS Section 7-163e. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § VII, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-48. - Financing. 
(a)  The issuance of not exceeding $10,500,000.00 of bonds by the authority is hereby approved (the "bonds"). The proceeds of the bonds shall be used by the authority for the purchase or lease of the solid waste assets and for the development and improvement of the solid waste assets (the "project"), including any and all costs of the project authorized to be paid under the provisions of CGS Section 7-273aa(a)(5). The bonds shall be secured by and payable from (i) its revenues generally, (ii) a pledge of revenues to be derived from the operation of the solid waste assets, (iii) a mortgage covering all or any part of the solid waste assets, (iv) a pledge of any lease of the solid waste assets or of any long-term agreements with the city for the disposal of solid waste and recyclables or (v) by any other revenues, receipts, funds or moneys of the authority, as determined by the authority. The authority may pledge and agree with the owners of the bonds and persons who may enter into contracts with the authority related to the issuance of the bonds that it will not limit or alter the rights thereby vested in such bond owners, or any contracting party, until the bonds, together with interest thereon, are fully met and discharged and such contracts are fully performed. The authority is further authorized and empowered to determine the form of the bonds, including provisions as to registration thereof, their date, the dates of principal and interest payments, the rate or rates of interest payable thereon, the manner of issuance and sale and by whom the bonds shall be signed and countersigned and all other details and particulars thereof. The bonds may bear interest includable in gross income for federal tax purposes if determined by the authority to be in the public interest. 
(b)  The mayor and the controller of the city are expressly empowered and authorized to enter into long-term contracts or agreements with the authority for the disposal of solid waste and recyclables and to make payments of fees or charges therefor based on a percentage of actual or projected tonnage or such other formula as such contract or agreement shall provide. Any such contract or agreement may require the continuation of such payments by the city whether or not the agreed services are being provided, but only until all of the bonds have been paid or provided for, and the inclusion of such a requirement in any agreement or contract entered into pursuant to this article is hereby approved in accordance with the provisions of CGS Section 7-273ee(d). Any such contracts or agreements entered into by the city under the authority of this section are deemed approved and shall be valid, binding and enforceable against the city and may be pledged as additional security for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds. 
(b)  The authority shall dedicate funds from its revenue to advance and promote activities by the authority or to engage the public that would: result in the diversion of solid waste through but not limited to public outreach campaigns, school based recycling education programs or recycling incentive programs; activities and community efforts to protect the Quinnipiac River and the wetlands adjacent to the transfer station. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § VIII, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-49. - Other ordinances and repealer. 
(a)  Sections 30¾-1 through 30¾-18 and Article XVI of Chapter 17 (sections 17-121—17-135) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven (the "Code") and any other ordinances in the Code that pertain to solid waste and recycling shall, for the purposes of this section 30¾-149 be referred to as the "solid waste ordinances." The authority is hereby expressly empowered and authorized to administer and/or enforce the solid waste ordinances to the extent necessary to effectuate this article and to the extent of the authority's powers as set forth in this article, and provided that there shall at all relevant times be a furtherance of the purpose for which the authority has been created. Nothing herein gives the authority sole and exclusive control over the administration and/or enforcement of all of the solid waste ordinances. To the extent that the authority adopts regulations or rules that conflict with the solid waste ordinances, the solid waste ordinances shall govern. 
(b)  This article shall supersede and replace ordinances of the city in existence to the extent that they are inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § IX, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-50. - Flow control. 
The city hereby agrees to adopt and maintain an ordinance, to the extent lawful pursuant to the CGS and all other applicable law, for the purpose of designating an area or areas where all solid waste generated within the boundaries of the city shall be disposed. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § X, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-51. - Dissolution. 
The city retains the right to dissolve the authority. Upon dissolution, the city agrees to assume, or satisfy, the liabilities and outstanding obligations of the authority, including without limitation, the bonds and all of the authority's interest in all assets of the authority shall be transferred to and vest in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § XI, 4-22-08)  
Sec. 30¾-52. - Reauthorization. 
(a)  The authority shall report, in writing and in person, its operational results, practices and policies to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven on an annual basis. 
(b)  Commencing with the third anniversary of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives, and on a triennial basis thereafter the board of aldermen shall review the operational results of the authority for the preceding three-year period in addition to the authority's practices and policies to determine if the authority's actions and results remain in the best interest of the City of New Haven and its taxpayers. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § XIV, 4-22-08)  
Secs. 30¾-53—30¾-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITING WASTE ASSOCIATED WITH NATURAL GAS AND OIL EXTRACTION 
 
Sec. 30¾-71. - Purpose. 
The prohibition of waste associated with the drilling and extraction of natural gas and oil is hereby declared necessary for the protection of the health, safety, welfare and property of the residents of the City of New Haven pursuant to the provisions of C.G.S. Section 7-148 that pertain in any way to the protection of health, safety, welfare and property, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1834 , 3-19-18)  
Sec. 30¾-72. - Definitions for the purposes of this article. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings given here, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context: 
Application shall mean the physical act of placing or spreading natural gas waste or oil waste on any road or real property located within the City of New Haven. 
Hydraulic fracturing shall mean the fracturing of underground rock formations, including shale and non-shale formations, by manmade fluid-driven techniques for the purpose of stimulating oil, natural gas, or other subsurface hydrocarbon production. 
Natural gas extraction activities shall mean all geologic or geophysical activities related to the exploration for or extraction of natural gas, including, but not limited to, core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing. 
Natural gas waste shall mean: 
(a)  Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a result of natural gas extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine, chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or other contaminants; 
(b)  Leachate from solid wastes associated with natural gas extraction activities; 
(c)  Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with the underground storage of natural gas; 
(d)  Any waste that is generated as a result of or in association with liquefied petroleum gas well storage operations; and 
(e)  Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment, processing, or modification of any of the above wastes. 
Oil extraction activities shall mean all geologic or geophysical activities related to the exploration for or extraction of oil, including, but not limited, to core and rotary drilling and hydraulic fracturing. 
Oil waste shall mean: 
(a)  Any liquid or solid waste or its constituents that is generated as a result of oil extraction activities, which may consist of water, brine, chemicals, naturally occurring radioactive materials, heavy metals, or other contaminants; 
(b)  Leachate from solid wastes associated with oil extraction activities; and 
(c)  Any products or byproducts resulting from the treatment, processing, or modification of any of the above wastes. 
(Ord. No. 1834 , 3-19-18)  
Sec. 30¾-73. - Prohibitions. 
The application of natural gas waste or oil waste, whether or not such waste has received beneficial use determination or other approval for use by the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection ("DEEP") or any other regulatory body, on any road or real property located within the City of New Haven for any purpose is prohibited. 
The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any wastewater treatment facility within or operated by the City of New Haven is prohibited. 
The introduction of natural gas waste or oil waste into any solid waste management facility within or operated by the City of New Haven is prohibited. 
The storage, disposal, sale, acquisition, transfer, handling, treatment and/or processing of natural gas waste or oil waste is prohibited within the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1834 , 3-19-18)  
Sec. 30¾-74. - Bids and contracts. 
Provision to be included in bids and contracts related to the construction or maintenance of publicly owned and/or maintained roads or real property within the City of New Haven: 
All bids and contracts related to the retention of services to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within the City of New Haven shall include a provision stating that no materials containing natural gas or oil waste shall be utilized in providing such a service. 
All bids and contracts related to the purchase or acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within the City of New Haven shall include a provision stating that no materials containing natural gas or oil waste shall be provided to the City of New Haven. 
The following statement, which shall be a sworn statement under penalty of perjury, shall be included in all bids related to the purchase or acquisition of materials to be used to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within the City of New Haven and all bids related to the retention of services to construct or maintain any publicly owned and/or maintained road or real property within the City of New Haven: "We ___________ hereby submit a bid for materials, equipment and/or labor for the City of New Haven. The bid is for bid documents titled ___________. We hereby certify under penalty of perjury that no natural gas waste or oil waste will be used by the undersigned bidder or any contractor, sub-contractor, agent or vendor agent in connection with the bid; nor will the undersigned bidder or any sub-contractor, agent or vendor agent thereof apply any natural gas waste or oil waste to any road or real property within the City of New Haven as a result of the submittal of this bid if selected." 
(Ord. No. 1834 , 3-19-18)  
Sec. 30¾-75. - Penalties. 
This article shall apply to any and all actions occurring on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. In response to a violation of this article, the City of New Haven is empowered to: 
(a)  Issue "cease and desist" orders demanding abatement of the violation, 
(b)  Seek any appropriate legal relief, including immediate injunctive relief, as a result of any violation of this article; 
(c)  File a complaint with any other proper authority; and 
(d)  Require remediation of any damage done to any land, road, building, aquifer, well, watercourse, air quality or other asset, be it public or private, within the City of New Haven. The City of New Haven may recoup from the offending person(s), jointly and severally, all costs, including experts, consultants and reasonable attorney's fees, that it incurs as a result of having to prosecute or remediate any infraction of this article. 
For any violation of this article, the City of New Haven may also impose fines in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day, or such other amount as is allowed by law, and seek any other remedies allowable under the law. 
(Ord. No. 1834 , 3-19-18)  
Sec. 30¾-76. - Enforcement. 
The City of New Haven's Department of Public Works is hereby empowered and authorized to, if appropriate, issue orders and other directives under this article and refer matters in connection therewith to the City of New Haven's Office of the Corporation Counsel. City of New Haven employees, officers and officials are not required to personally carry out testing of waste products to determine chemical contents, as this work may be done via contacting the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection or the appropriate analytical laboratory or laboratories. If appropriate, the City of New Haven's Department of Public Works may request that the State of Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection pursue civil penalties allowable under the law. 
(Ord. No. 1834 , 3-19-18)  
Chapter 31 - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1405, adopted January 3, 2006, amended and restated provisions contained in of former Ch. 31 in its entirety. The legislative history notes in parentheses following the sections of this chapter include the section number formerly used in the 1985 reprinting, as amended. 
 
Sec. 31-1. - Sealer of weight and measures, created. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 43-6 as amended from time to time, the mayor shall appoint a sealer of weights and measures for New Haven. The sealer of weights and measures shall perform the same duties and have the same powers within the city as the State Commissioner of Weights and Measures, except those powers and duties exempted and reserved to the State Commissioner by regulations promulgated under the provisions of Conn. General Statutes section 43-3 as amended from time to time. 
(b)  When the mayor fails to appoint a sealer of weights and measures, or when an appointed sealer fails or neglects to perform his/her duties, the State Commissioner of Weights and Measures may direct his/her inspectors to perform the duties of the municipal sealer. Under such circumstances, and upon notification by the Commissioner of Weights and Measures, the city shall reimburse the state for the cost of such services rendered. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-2. - Mayor to procure a complete set of standards. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 43-4 as amended from time to time, the mayor shall procure at the city's expense, and keep at all times, a complete set of weights, measures and other apparatus as directed by the Commissioner of Weights and Measures. All such instruments shall have been tried and accurately proven by said Commissioner, and sealed and certified by him/her, and thereafter deposited with and preserved as public standards for the city by the sealer. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-3. - Sealer of weight and measures, powers. 
Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 43-7 as amended from time to time, the sealer of weights and measures shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To arrest, without warrant, any violator of the laws relating to weights and measures; 
(2)  To seize, without warrant, for use as evidence, any false or unsealed weight, measure or weighing or measuring device, or package or amount of any commodity, found to be used, retained, offered or exposed for sale or sold in violation of law; 
(3)  To issue stop use, hold and removal orders with respect to any such weights and measures commercially used; 
(4)  To issue stop sale, hold and removal orders with respect to the weight or measure of any such packaged commodities or bulk commodities kept, offered or exposed for sale; 
(5)  To apply a condemned tag to any false weight, measure or weighing or measuring device; and 
(6)  To apply a condemned tag to any weighing or measuring instrument or device to which he/she has attached a seal or tag which has been tampered with, marked, defaced, removed, forged or counterfeited. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-4. - Police to assist sealer; report of violation by sealer to prosecutor. 
Every police officer shall assist the sealer of weights and measures when necessary, and report any violation of this chapter within his/her knowledge to such sealer. The sealer of weights and measures shall report all such violations to the prosecutor of the Superior Court for the Judicial District of New Haven. 
(Code of 1928, § 1004; Code of 1985, § 31-1; Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-5. - Printing, distribution of laws concerning weights and measures. 
The sealer of weights and measures shall have printed and distribute copies of state statutes, city ordinances and charter provisions concerning weights and measures to all persons requesting them. 
(Code of 1928, § 1006; Code of 1985, § 31-2; Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-6. - Annual report. 
The sealer shall report the number of scales, weights or measures inspected by him/her, and the condition and disposition of such instruments to the city's health director at the end of each fiscal year. Said director shall transmit such information in an annual report to the mayor. 
(Code of 1928, § 1001; Code of 1985, § 31-3; Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-7. - Inspection of weights and measures. 
Any person having scales, weights or measures that are used in buying or selling goods or merchandise may take them to the office of the sealer of weights and measures to have them inspected and stamped by the sealer. Alternatively, such person may request that such an inspection be conducted at his/her place of business. 
(Code of 1928, § 997; Code of 1985, § 31-4; Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-8. - Register to be kept. 
The city's sealer of weights and measures shall keep a register of the name of each person for whom he/she has inspected any weight or measure, including the kind and size of each weight or measure inspected, and the result of such inspection. He/she shall note which, if any, weights and measures were approved, and which, if any, were condemned. This register shall be kept in the sealer's office, and shall be open to public inspection during the sealer's office hours. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-9. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
(a)  Capacity shall mean measure of capacity as rated by the manufacturer. 
(b)  Commercial weighing and measuring equipment shall mean weights, measures and measuring devices commercially used or employed in establishing the size, quantity, extent, area or measurement of quantities, things, produce or articles for distribution or consumption, purchased, offered or submitted for sale, hire or award, or in computing any basic charge or payment for services rendered on the basis of weight or measure. 
(c)  Crane scale shall mean a weighing device having a nominal capacity of five thousand (5,000) pounds or more, and designed to weigh loads which are freely suspended from an overhead, track-mounted crane. 
(d)  Hopper scale shall mean a weighing device designed for bulk commodities, and whose load-receiving element is a tank box or hopper mounted on a weighing element. 
(e)  Load-rack dispenser shall mean a measuring device affixed to a loading platform at which a vehicle tank is filled. 
(f)  Motor fuel dispenser shall mean a device designed for the measurement and delivery of liquids used as fuel for internal combustion engines. 
(g)  Scale shall mean any weighing device used in commercial trade, and not otherwise covered by this chapter. 
(h)  Vehicle tank dispenser shall mean a measuring device which is affixed to a vehicle-mounted tank. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-10. - Annual license required. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes sections 43-1 through 43-9, as each is amended from time to time, it shall be unlawful to operate any commercial weighing and measuring equipment within the city unless the sealer of weights and measures licenses it. The license shall be valid for one (1) year from its issuance date. 
(b)  The sealer of weights and measures shall not issue a weighing and measuring device license unless: 
(1)  The sealer has inspected and approved such device within six (6) months of the application date; 
(2)  Each applicant furnishes such information relative to the application for a weighing and measuring device license as the sealer requires; and 
(3)  Each applicant pays an annual license fee as listed in the Licenses and Permits Chapter of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-11. - Exemption. 
Any city-owned weighing and measuring device is hereby exempted from the licensing and fee provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Sec. 31-12. - Penalties. 
(a)  Pursuant to Conn. General Statutes section 43-16q (d) as amended from time to time, the Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Protection will conduct a hearing in accordance with Chapter 54, Uniform Administrative Procedure Act, and may impose a civil penalty up to the maximum amount authorized by state statutes or this Code for the first and subsequent offenses. Each violation with respect to each such unit, certificate, device or scale shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The penalty for a violation of any provision of this section shall be a fine up to the maximum authorized by state statutes or this Code per device. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate violation. The penalty established herein shall be in addition to any penalties established by state statutes and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1405, 1-3-06)  
Chapter 32 - ENFORCEMENT BY CIVIL OFFICERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 32 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Authorized; citations. 
(a)  Pursuant to Connecticut General Statutes section 7-148(c)(10), as amended by Public Act 88-221, the City of New Haven may enforce the violation of the ordinances [Code sections] designated in section 32-2 hereof by the issuance of a citation. Each citation shall be issued by a designated municipal officer or employee, who shall issue a written warning providing notice of the specific violation before issuing the citation. Such citation may be appealed through the citation hearing procedure established in section 32-3 hereof. 
(b)  Each municipal officer or employee who is designated to issue a citation under this chapter shall be so designated by the director of public works. 
(Ord. of 10-17-88, § 1)  
Sec. 32-2. - Code sections to be enforced.[2] 
The following sections of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, Connecticut, are hereby designated for enforcement pursuant to the provisions of section 32-1 et seq. 
Section 9-1. 
Section 9-2(a). 
Sections 16-13 [Section 31¼-4] through 16-15. 
Sections 16-17 through 16-17.3 [Section 31¼-12 through Section 31¼-14. 
Section 16-19 [Section 31¼-16]. 
Section 16-20 [Section 31¼-5. 
Section 16-26 [Section 31¼-1]. 
Section 18-1. 
Section 18-10. 
Section 18-20. 
Section 18-25 and 18-26. 
Section 18-40. 
Sections 27-8 and 27-9 [Sections 27-31, 27-32]. 
Sections 27-11 and 27-12 [Sections 27-33, 27-32]. 
Section 27-14.1 [Sections 27-35 through 27-42]. 
Sections 27-18 [Section 27-44] and 27-19. 
Section 27-29. 
(Ord. of 10-17-88, § 1) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Some of the sections listed below were renumbered and reenacted by the 2006 selective chapter review project. The editor has provided new corresponding section numbers in brackets where possible. 
 
Sec. 32-3. - Citation hearing procedures. 
The following citation hearing procedures are adopted for all ordinances designated by the City of New Haven pursuant to Public Act 88-221 and enforced by citation. 
(a)  The mayor of the City of New Haven shall appoint one or more citation hearing officers, other than police officers or employees or persons who issue citations, to conduct the hearings authorized by this section. 
(b)  At any time within twelve (12) months from the expiration of the final period for the uncontested payment of fines, penalties, costs or fees for any citation issued under any ordinance adopted pursuant to section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended by section one of Public Act 88-221, for an alleged violation thereof, the City of New Haven shall send notice to the property owner. Such notice shall inform the owner and other person cited: 
(1)  Of the fines, penalties, costs or fees due; 
(2)  That he may contest his liability before a citation hearing officer by delivering in person or by mail written notice within ten (10) days of the date thereof; 
(3)  That if he does not demand such a hearing, an assessment and judgement shall be entered against him; and 
(4)  That such judgment may issue without further notice. 
(c)  Waiver of hearing; failure to demand hearing. 
(1)  If the person who is sent notice pursuant to subsection (b) of this section wishes to admit liability for any alleged violation, he may, without requesting a hearing, pay the full amount of fines, penalties, costs or fees admitted to, in person or by mail, to an official designated by the City of New Haven. Such payment shall be inadmissible in any proceeding, civil or criminal, to establish the conduct of such person or other person making the payment. 
(2)  Any person who does not deliver or mail written demand for a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of the first notice provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be deemed to have admitted liability, and the designated municipal official shall certify such person's failure to respond to the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall thereupon enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees provided for by the applicable ordinances and shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Hearing procedure. Any person who requests a hearing shall be given written notice of the date, time and place for the hearing. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of notice, provided the hearing officer shall grant upon good cause shown any reasonable request by any interested party postponement or continuance. An original or certified copy of the initial notice of violation issued by the issuing official or policeman shall be filed and retained by the city, and shall be deemed to be a business record within the scope of section 52-180 of the general statutes and evidence of the facts contained therein. The presence of the issuing official or policeman shall be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing to contest his liability shall appear at the hearing and may present evidence on his behalf. A designated municipal official, other than the hearing officer, may present evidence on behalf of the city. If such person fails to appear, the hearing officer may enter an assessment by default against him upon finding of proper notice and liability under the applicable statutes or ordinances. The hearing officer may accept from such person copies of police reports, investigatory and citation reports, and other official documents by mail and may determine thereby that the appearance of such person is unnecessary. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in the order and form and with such methods of proof as he deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation. The hearing officer shall announce his decisions at the end of the hearing. If he determines that the person is not liable, he shall dismiss the matter and enter his determination in writing accordingly. If he determines that the person is liable for the violation, he shall forthwith enter and assess the fines, penalties, costs or fees against such person as provided by the applicable ordinances of the city. 
(e)  If such assessment is not paid on the date of its entry, the hearing officer shall send by first class mail a notice of the assessment to the person found liable and shall file, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months after such mailing, a certified copy of the notice of assessment with the clerk of the superior court for New Haven together with an entry fee. The certified copy of the notice of assessment shall constitute a record of assessment. Within such twelve-month period, assessments against the same person may be accrued and filed as one record of assessment. The clerk shall enter judgment in the amount of such record against such person in favor of the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of the general statutes, the hearing officer's assessment, when so entered as a judgment, shall have the effect of a civil money judgment and a levy of execution on such judgment may issue without further notice to such person. 
(f)  A person against whom an assessment has been entered pursuant to this section is entitled to judicial review by way of appeal. An appeal shall be instituted within thirty (30) days of the mailing of notice of such assessment by filing a petition to reopen assessment, together with an entry fee in an amount equal to the entry fee for a small claims case pursuant to section 52-259 of the General Statutes, in the superior court for the geographical area in which New Haven is located, which shall entitle such person to a hearing in accordance with the rules of the judges of the superior court. 
(Ord. of 10-17-88, § 1)  
Sec. 32-4. - Certain acts deemed nuisances; abatement. 
The acts, conditions or harms prohibited by the ordinances [Code sections] designated in section 32-2 are deemed nuisances. The acts, conditions or harms prohibited by such ordinances [Code sections] shall be specifically deemed nuisances for the purpose of section 18-21 of the Code of Ordinances. The director of public works or his designees may do all things necessary and proper to abate such nuisances, which abatement shall be at the expense of the owner or owners of the premises on which such nuisance exists. 
(Ord. of 10-17-88, § 1)  
Sec. 32-4.1. - Special variations as to this chapter for enforcement of sections 16-13 and 16-13.1. 
For the purpose of enforcing sections 16-13 and 16-13.1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, all written warnings and citations shall be issued by any police officer or by any other employee or person who is authorized by the mayor. For the purpose of enforcing sections 16-13 and 16-13.1 of the Code of Ordinances of the city, any references to "property owner" or "owner and other person cited" in section 32-3(b) shall be deemed to mean "person who is cited". 
(Ord. of 5-20-98)  
Sec. 32-5. - Regulations. 
The director of public works may from time to time issue regulations concerning the matters of this Chapter 32. 
(Ord. of 10-17-88, § 1)  
Chapter 33 - WHALLEY AVENUE SPECIAL SERVICES DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted by the board of aldermen July 5, 1983, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Ch. 33, §§ 33-1—33-9, to read as herein set forth. Such ordinance was approved at referendum held Aug. 23, 1983. 
Ch. 33 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a Whalley Avenue Special Services District (hereinafter the "district") as a body politic and corporate, in accordance with the powers vested in the City of New Haven, hereinafter the "city", under Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83)  
Sec. 33-2. - Referendum. 
(a)  This chapter shall not take effect, unless, within sixty (60) days of the adoption of this chapter by the board of aldermen, a referendum shall be held and approved. 
(b)  The referendum shall be held among all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district on the question of whether this chapter shall take effect. 
(c)  The referendum shall be approved if a majority of all such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, voting one vote per property, respond affirmatively, and if such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, the assessments of which constitute more than one-half of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district, shall respond affirmatively. 
(d)  The referendum shall be conducted by mail for a period of three (3) weeks ending at 5:00 p.m. on the seventh (7th) Tuesday following after the adoption of this chapter. The referendum shall be supervised by the city-town clerk of the City of New Haven. 
The referendum shall comply, to the extent applicable and practicable, with Chapter 145 (Absentee Voting) and Chapter 152 (Referenda) of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), except as Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision, and the terms of this chapter may otherwise permit or direct. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83)  
Sec. 33-3. - Board of commissioners. 
(a)  The business of the district shall be conducted by a board of commissioners. The board may designate a general manager of the district to act as its agent in the conduct of the business of the board. 
(b)  The board shall consist of thirteen (13) members elected from among the holders of record of real property interests in the district and from among the tenants of real property in the district. 
(c)  Election of members of the board shall be conducted at the annual February meeting of the board, except for the initial election, which shall be held within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter at a public meeting. Each elector shall be a holder of record of taxable interest in real property interests in the district. Election shall be by voice vote, unless secret ballot is requested by at least five (5) electors. The thirteen (13) candidates with the greatest plurality among the votes cast shall be elected as members of the board. At the initial election, the seven (7) candidates with the greatest plurality shall be elected to serve for a two-year term. The six (6) candidates with the next greatest plurality shall be elected to serve a one-year term. All succeeding elections shall be for service of a two-year term. No member shall serve more than three (3) terms. Members shall serve until a successor has been elected and sworn. The board may fill the unexpired term of a member who cannot serve out his allotted term of office. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83)  
Sec. 33-4. - Real property levy. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall, at its first meeting following the initial election of members of the board, and thereafter at the annual February meeting and following the election of members of the board, meet for the purpose of recommending to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven the imposition of a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district. Except at the first meeting of the board, the board shall not recommend such levy in an amount exceeding ten (10) percent of the levy for the previous year except upon prior approval by a majority of all holders of record of taxable interests in the property, voting one (1) vote per property. 
(b)  The board of commissioners at such meeting may recommend to the board of aldermen a levy on each taxable interest in real property in the district which shall be the total recommended levy divided by the total assessed value of the property within the district. 
(c)  When the board of commissioners shall, in a timely manner, recommend to the board of aldermen a levy upon the taxable interest in real property within the district, pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of section 33-4 of this chapter and to subsection (e) of Section 7-339n of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision, it shall be the obligation of the board of aldermen to impose such levy as a municipal levy. Such levy shall be in addition to the regular municipal levy, and it shall be the obligation of the City of New Haven to collect such levy for the benefit of the district. The city shall transfer to the district only such funds as shall be collected. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83; Ord. No. 1616, 3-15-10)  
Sec. 33-5. - Powers. 
The district shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; 
(2)  To acquire, hold and convey any estate, real or personal; 
(3)  To contract; 
(4)  To borrow money, provided that any obligation incurred for this purpose shall be discharged not more than one year after it was incurred, and the district may pledge any revenues to be received pursuant to Section 7-339r of the Connecticut General Statutes, 1958 Revision, and to section 33-4 of this chapter against any such obligation; 
(5)  To recommend to the board of aldermen the imposition of a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, the revenue from which may be used in carrying out any of the powers of the district; 
(6)  To contract, own, operate and maintain public improvements; and 
(7)  To provide, within the district, some or all of the other services which the City of New Haven is authorized to provide within the district; except that the district may not provide elementary or secondary public education services nor may the district provide services now being provided within the district by any multitown body or authority. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83)  
Sec. 33-6. - Agreements. 
(a)  The district and the city may within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter enter into a contract setting forth the services to be provided by the city to the district pursuant to sections 33-2 and 33-4 of this chapter, and the compensation for such services. 
(b)  The city may enter into a contract with the district in which the city is excused, upon approval of the board of aldermen, from providing within the district some or all of the services which the district is authorized to provide pursuant to section 33-5, subsection (7), and in which the district agrees to provide all such services from which the city has been excused. Any such contract is pursuant to section 7-339(t)(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The district agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liabilities or debts which are a direct result of the establishment of the district or its operation. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83; Ord. of 7-7-97)  
Sec. 33-7. - Properties included within the district. 
The following properties, listed in this section by map/block/parcel number as shown on the maps of the tax assessor of the city shall be included within the district. If any owner-occupant of a one-, two-, or three-family home communicates in writing to the city/town clerk of the City of New Haven their desire to be excluded from the district, the boundaries of the district shall automatically be deemed to exclude the property owned by such owner. 
295/0282/00800 
295/0282/01000 
295/0282/01100 
295/0282/01200 
295/0282/01300 
295/0282/01400 
295/0282/01500 
295/0282/01900 
295/0282/02000 
295/0282/02100 
295/0282/02200 
295/0301/00100 
295/0301/03000 
295/0301/03300 
295/0301/03400 
295/0301/03500 
295/0301/03600 
295/0301/03700 
295/0301/03800 
295/0301/03900 
295/0301/04000 
295/0301/04100 
295/0301/04200 
295/0301/04400 
296/0284/00200 
296/0284/00300 
296/0284/00400 
296/0284/00500 
296/0285/00100 
296/0285/00200 
296/0285/00300 
296/0302/00600 
296/0302/00800 
296/0302/00900 
296/0302/01000 
296/0302/01100 
296/0302/01200 
296/0302/01300 
296/0302/01400 
296/0302/01500 
296/0302/01600 
296/0302/01700 
296/0302/01800 
296/0302/01900 
296/0302/02000 
319/0280/00100 
319/0280/00200 
319/0280/00300 
319/0280/00400 
319/0280/00500 
319/0280/00600 
319/0281/00100 
319/0281/00101 
319/0281/00300 
319/0281/00400 
319/0281/00500 
319/0281/00700 
319/0281/00800 
319/0281/00900 
319/0281/01000 
319/0281/01100 
319/0281/01200 
320/0298/00100 
320/0298/06200 
320/0298/06400 
320/0300/00100 
320/0300/03700 
320/0300/03800 
320/0300/03900 
332/0295/00100 
332/0295/06200 
332/0295/06300 
332/0295/06400 
332/0295/06500 
332/0296/00100 
332/0296/02800 
332/0296/03000 
332/0296/03100 
332/0296/03200 
332/0297/00100 
332/0297/02800 
332/0297/02900 
333/0294/00100 
333/0294/05100 
333/0294/05200 
333/0294/05500 
333/0294/05600 
333/0294/05800 
335/0277/00100 
335/0277/00200 
335/0277/00400 
335/0278/00100 
335/0278/00200 
335/0278/00300 
335/0278/00400 
335/0278/00500 
335/0278/00800 
335/0279/00100 
335/0279/00200 
335/0279/00300 
335/0279/00400 
335/0279/00500 
335/1130/00100 
335/1130/00200 
335/1130/00300 
335/1130/00400 
335/1130/00500 
335/1130/00700 
352/1128/00100 
352/1128/00200 
352/1128/00300 
352/1129/00100 
352/1129/00200 
352/1129/00300 
352/1129/00400 
352/1129/00500 
353/1146/00601 
353/1146/00700 
353/1146/00800 
353/1146/00900 
353/1146/01200 
 
(Ord. of 7-5-83; Ord. of 5-17-84; Ord. of 4-15-85; Ord. No. 1340, 11-17-03; Ord. No. 1349, 11-17-03)  
Sec. 33-8. - Adding properties to the district. 
A parcel of real property shall be included in the district among the properties already within the district if: 
(1)  All holders of record of taxable interest in said parcel shall submit written request to the board of commissioners that said parcel be included in the district; and 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall approve inclusion of said parcel in the district; and 
(3)  The board of aldermen shall amend this chapter to include said parcel in the district. Such amendments shall be submitted to the board of aldermen during the months of March and September. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83)  
Sec. 33-9. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Holder of record of taxable interest in real property. The owner, in part or in whole, of a parcel of real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records. For the purpose of the referendum on whether this chapter shall take effect, the holder of record of taxable interest in real property shall be determined as of 5:00 p.m. on the day this chapter is adopted by the board of aldermen. 
Assessment, assessed value. Seventy (70) percent of the market value of a parcel of real property as shown on the real property field card for said parcel on file at the office of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven. 
Taxable interest in real property. Ownership, in part or in whole, of a parcel of real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records. For the purpose of the referendum on whether this ordinance shall take effect, taxable interest in real property shall be determined as of 5:00 p.m. on the day this chapter is adopted [July 5, 1983,] by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 7-5-83)  
Chapter 34 - NINTH SQUARE SPECIAL SERVICES DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 18, 1985, §§ 1—14, amended the Code by adding provisions establishing a Ninth Square Special Services District, designated as Ch. 34. Sections thereof have been designated as §§ 34-1—34-14. Such provisions were approved by referendum of Apr. 30, 1985. 
Ch. 34 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a Ninth Square Special Services District (hereinafter the "district") as a body politic and corporate, in accordance with the powers vested in the City of New Haven (hereinafter the "city") under Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision). 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 1)  
Sec. 34-2. - Referendum. 
(a)  This chapter shall not take effect, unless, within sixty (60) days of the enactment of this chapter by the board of aldermen, a referendum shall be held and approved. 
(b)  The referendum shall be held among all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district on the question of whether this chapter shall take effect. The city-town clerk of the city shall determine the identity of such holders in the city's land records and shall give notice of the referendum to such holders. 
(c)  The referendum shall be approved if a majority of all such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, voting one (1) vote per property, respond affirmatively and if such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, the assessments of which constitute more than one-half of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district, shall respond affirmatively. 
(d)  The referendum shall be conducted by mail for a period of three (3) weeks ending at 5:00 p.m. on the fifth (5th) Tuesday following after the enactment of this chapter. The city-town clerk of the City of New Haven shall supervise the referendum and shall certify the results of the referendum. The referendum shall comply, to the extent applicable and practicable, with Chapter 145 (Absentee Voting) and Chapter 152 (Referenda) of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), except as Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision) and the terms of this chapter may otherwise permit or direct. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 2)  
Sec. 34-3. - Board of commissioners. 
(a)  The business of the district shall be conducted by the board of commissioners. The board may designate such agents as it deems necessary to act on its behalf in the conduct of the business of the board. In particular the board may designate a president of the district as its agent. 
(b)  The board shall consist of ten (10) members, nine (9) of whom shall be voting members elected in accordance with subsections 34-3(c) hereof. The tenth member shall be the president of the district, who shall be a nonvoting member of the board. 
(c)  Election of the voting members of the board shall be conducted at the annual October meeting of the board, except for the initial election, which shall be held fifteen (15) days after the effective date of this chapter at a public meeting. Six (6) of the voting members, known as "Class A" commissioners, shall be and be elected by individuals, partnerships and partners thereof, corporations or stockholder thereof, or trustees and beneficiaries of trusts who are holders of record of interests in real property in the district. Three (3) of the voting members, known as "Class B" commissioners, shall be and be elected by individuals, partnerships and partners thereof, corporations or stockholder thereof, or trustees or beneficiaries of trusts operating a trade or business, or leasing real estate or residing in the district and not qualifying as a "Class A" commissioner. At least one (1) of the "Class B" commissioners shall be a resident of the district. 
At the initial election, two (2) "Class A" commissioners and one (1) "Class B" commissioner shall be elected for three-year terms; two (2) "Class A" commissioners and one (1) "Class B" commissioner shall be elected for two-year terms; and two (2) "Class A" commissioners and one (1) "Class B" commissioner shall be elected for one-year terms. Thereafter, except in the case of filling vacancies, two (2) "Class A" commissioners and one (1) "Class B" commissioner shall be elected for three-year terms at annual meetings of the board. 
Vacancies on the board of commissioners created by resignation or death shall be filled by the board of commissioners, with the provision that "Class A" commissioners be chosen to fill "Class A" seats on the board, and "Class B" commissioners be chosen to fill "Class B" seats on the board. 
(d)  The city-town clerk of the city shall give notice of at least ten (10) days of the first organizational meeting of the board to elect commissioners. Such notice shall be by mail to all holders of record of interests in real property in the district and by publication in a newspaper having circulation in the district. Any individual, group or organization may propose one (1) or more candidates qualifying under subsection (c) hereof for the board of commissioners to the city-town clerk of the city who shall preside over and conduct balloting at the meeting for the initial election of commissioners. Thereafter, any notices for whatever purpose, shall become the responsibility of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 3)  
Sec. 34-4. - Real property levy. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall, at its first meeting following the initial election of members of the board, and thereafter at the annual meeting and following the election of members of the board, meet for the purpose of recommending to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven the imposition of a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district. 
(b)  The board of commissioners at such meeting may recommend to the board of aldermen a levy on each taxable interest in real property in the district, which for each taxable interest shall be the total recommended levy multiplied by a factor equal to the assessed value of the particular property divided by the total assessed value of taxable property in the district. Special assessments to be levied on behalf of the district shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) percent of the assessed value of properties of the district appearing on the City of New Haven grand list, unless upon prior approval by a majority of all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district. 
(c)  When the board of commissioners shall, in a timely manner, recommend to the board of aldermen a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of section 34-4 of this chapter and to subsection (e) of Section 7-339n of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), it shall be the obligation of the board of aldermen to impose such levy as a municipal levy. Such levy shall be in addition to the regular municipal levy, and it shall be the obligation of the City of New Haven to collect such levy for the benefit of the district. The city shall transfer to the district only such funds as shall be collected. 
(d)  All moneys, including but not limited to levies or any income, proceeds or fees issuing from the provision of services by the district or other business conducted by the district received by the board or by the city on behalf of the district shall be paid into the general fund of the city where an account shall be maintained of such moneys for the benefit of the district. Any provision of the city's general statutes, special acts or charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the treasurer of the city shall disburse such moneys in accordance with an annual budget adopted by the board. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 4)  
Sec. 34-5. - Powers. 
(a)  The district shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; 
(2)  To acquire, hold and convey any estate, real or personal; 
(3)  To contract; 
(4)  To borrow money, provided any obligation incurred for this purpose shall be discharged not more than one (1) year after it was incurred, and such district may pledge any revenues it shall receive against any such obligation; 
(5)  To recommend to the board of aldermen of the city the imposition of levies upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, the revenues from which may be used in carrying out any powers of the district; 
(6)  To construct, own, operate, and maintain public improvements; 
(7)  To provide, within the boundaries of the district, some or all of the services which the city is authorized to provide therein, other than elementary or secondary public education services, and other than services which are being provided in any portion of the district by any multitown body or authority; 
(8)  Construct, acquire, or obtain leasehold interests in motor vehicle parking facilities, within the district or within any block immediately adjacent to the district, subject to the requirements of section 34-5(b) below; 
(9)  To operate a motor vehicle parking facility within the district or within any block immediately adjacent to the district, subject to the requirements of section 34-5(b) below; 
(10)  To lease (as landlord) or sublease to other parties motor vehicle parking facilities subject to the requirements of section 34-5(b) below; 
(11)  To enter into, fund and perform agreements which reduce the costs of motor vehicle parking to residents of the district and to employees of, retail customers of, and others doing business with, businesses located in the district. 
(b)  No parking facility open to the public shall be constructed, acquired, leased, subleased, or operated by the district, without prior approval of the board of aldermen, which shall request the opinion of the city plan commission and the New Haven Parking Authority before giving such approval. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 5)  
Sec. 34-6. - Agreements. 
(a)  The district and the city shall within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter enter into a contract setting forth the services to be provided by the city to the district pursuant to section 34-4 of this chapter, and the compensation for such services. 
(b)  The city may enter into a contract with the district in which the city is excused from providing within the district some or all of the services which the district is authorized to provide pursuant to section 34-5 of this chapter and in which the district agrees to provide all such services from which the city has been excused. The city may agree, in any such contract, to make an annual grant to the district, in a fixed amount or based upon a formula in the contract, for the purpose of compensating the district for the services from which the city is excused and for which the district is to become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to Section 7-339(t)(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The city and the district may also enter into contracts in which the district is given the right to elect to purchase from the city some or all of the services for which the district has become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to Section 7-339(t)(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any contract between the city and the district pursuant to this section 34-6(b) shall be first approved by the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 6)  
Sec. 34-7. - Properties included within the district. 
The following properties, listed by map/block/parcel number as shown on the maps of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven, shall be included within the district: 
224/258/100 
224/258/200 
224/258/300 
224/258/1100 
224/258/1800 
224/258/1900 
224/258/2000 
224/258/2100 
224/258/2200 
225/540/100 
225/540/200 
225/540/300 
225/540/301 
225/540/302 
225/541/100 
225/541/200 
225/541/300 
225/541/400 
225/541/500 
225/541/600 
225/541/700 
225/541/701 
225/541/1000 
225/548/100 
225/548/200 
225/548/300 
225/548/400 
225/548/500 
225/548/600 
225/548/700 
225/548/800 
225/548/801 
225/548/900 
225/548/1000 
225/548/1001 
225/548/1600 
239/206/400 
240/223/100 
240/223/200 
240/223/201 
240/223/300 
240/223/400 
240/223/401 
240/223/500 
240/223/600 
240/223/700 
240/223/800 
240/223/900 
240/223/902 
240/223/905 
240/223/1000 
240/223/1100 
240/223/1200 
240/224/100 
240/224/200 
240/224/300 
240/224/400 
240/224/500 
240/224/600 
240/224/700 
240/224/800 
240/224/900 
240/224/1000 
240/224/1100 
240/224/1104 
240/224/1200 
240/224/1200 
240/224/1300 
240/224/1400 
240/224/1500 
240/224/1601 
240/224/1700 
240/224/1800 
240/235/100 
240/235/200 
240/235/300 
240/235/400 
240/235/500 
240/235/600 
240/235/700 
240/235/800 
240/235/900 
240/235/1001-1007 
240/235/1100 
240/235/1200 
240/235/1300 
240/235/1400 
240/235/1500 
240/235(1)/100 
240/235(1)/101 
240/235(1)/200 
240/235(1)/500 
240/235(1)/600 
240/235(1)/700 
240/235(1)/800 
240/236/100 
240/236/200 
240/236/300 
240/236/400 
240/236/500 
240/236/600 
240/236/700 
240/236/800 
240/236/900 
240/236/1000 
240/236/1200 
240/236/1300 
240/236/1400 
240/236/1500 
240/236/1600 
240/236/1700 
240/236/1800 
240/236/1900 
240/236/2000 
240/236/2100 
240/236/2200 
240/236/2300 
240/236/2400 
240/236/2500 
240/236/2601 
240/236/2800 
240/255/100 
240/255/200 
240/255/900 
240/255/1000 
240/255/1100 
240/255/1200 
240/255/1300 
240/255/1400 
240/255/1500 
240/255/1700 
240/255/1800 
240/255/1800 
240/255/1900 
240/255/2000 
240/256/100 
240/256/200 
240/256/300 
240/256/500 
240/256/600 
240/256/700 
240/256/702 
240/256/703 
240/256/800 
240/256/1700 
240/256/1701 
240/256/1800 
240/256/1900 
240/256/2000 
240/256/2001 
240/256/2100 
240/256/2200 
240/256/2300 
240/256/2400 
240/256/2500 
240/256/2600 
240/256/2700 
240/256/2800 
240/256/2900 
240/256/3000 
240/256/3100 
240/256/3200 
240/256/3300 
 
Together with and including all properties, streets and municipal property lying within the following boundaries: 
South: by the center line of George Street; and by the property bounded by the center line of George Street which extends 183.09 feet from the sidewalk along George Street and 143.36 from the sidewalk along Church Street; 
West: by the center line of Church Street and the center line of Orange Street; 
North: by land now or formerly of the United States Government and along the rear property lines of properties on the north side of Court Street between Orange and State Street and the center line of Court Street from the center line of State Street easterly to the land now or formerly of the New Haven Railroad; 
East: by the land along State Street now or formerly of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 7)  
Sec. 34-8. - Adding properties to the district. 
A parcel of real property shall be included in the district among the properties already within the district if: 
(1)  The owner(s) of such parcel shall notify the board of commissioners in writing of their intention to join the district, in a request which must be signed by the property owner(s) constituting a majority interest in said property, or a representative of such owner(s) authorized to sign such a request; and 
(2)  The board of commissioners of the district shall approve the inclusion of said parcel in the district; and 
(3)  The board of aldermen shall amend this chapter to include said parcel in the district. Such amendments shall be submitted to the board of aldermen during the months of March and/or September. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 8)  
Sec. 34-9. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Holder of record of interest in real property. The owner, in part or in whole, of an interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records. For the purpose of the election of the board of commissioners, at the organizational meeting only, under section 34-3 hereof, holders of record of an interest in real property shall be determined by the city-town clerk as of 5:00 p.m. on the eleventh day preceding said first organizational meeting to elect commissioners. Thereafter, any notices for whatever purpose, shall become the responsibility of the board of commissioners. 
Assessment, assessed value. Seventy (70) percent of the market value of a parcel of real property as shown on the real property field card for said parcel on file at the office of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven. 
Holder of taxable interest in real property. The owner, in part or in whole, of an interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records which such interest is assessed for taxation on the last completed grand list of the city. For the purpose of the referendum on whether this chapter shall take effect, taxable interest in real property shall be determined by the city clerk as of 5:00 p.m. on the day this chapter is adopted by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 9)  
Sec. 34-10. - Property of district. 
All interests in real property and all interests in personal property held by the district are not subject to the city property tax to the extent that the use of such property by the district is for a "public purpose" pursuant to Section 12-81(4) of the Connecticut General Statutes; except that real property on the tax rolls either as of the time of the enactment of this chapter or as of the time of the transfer of the property to the district and parking facilities within or without the district shall be subject to the city property tax unless prospectively abated by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 10)  
Sec. 34-11. - Dissolution. 
(a)  At any time after the district has been established, the district may be dissolved by the enactment of an ordinance repealing the chapter establishing this district or by the holding of a referendum by the board of commissioners among all the holders of record of taxable interests in real property within the district on the question of whether the district shall be dissolved, provided a majority of such holders shall respond affirmatively or provided the holders of taxable interests in real property the assessments of which shall constitute more than one-half of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district shall respond affirmatively. The board of commissioners shall determine the manner in which the referendum to dissolve shall be held. Any such referendum may be conducted by mail. 
(b)  If the district is dissolved pursuant to section 34-11(a) of this chapter, the board of commissioners shall proceed to wind up the affairs of the district as to the end of the then current fiscal year of the district. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have liabilities, whether fixed or contingent, the board of aldermen of the city shall have the authority to impose, in addition to the regular municipal levy, a levy on the real property within the district, in the same manner as is provided for the determination of the levy by the board of commissioners of the district pursuant to section 34-4(b) of this chapter, for as many years as such liabilities shall remain outstanding, and such levy shall be calculated to produce enough revenues to satisfy and release such liabilities as they become due, and such revenues shall be deposited into the general fund of the city and shall be disbursed by the city, at the discretion of the mayor, solely for the purposes stated herein. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have assets which remain following the winding up of the affairs of the district, such assets shall be transferred to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 11)  
Sec. 34-12. - Annual report. 
Annually on January 15th or the next business day thereafter, the board of commissioners of the district shall submit to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 2½-18 of this Code an annual report of the operation and activities of the district. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 12; Ord. of 7-6-93)  
Sec. 34-13. - Insurance. 
The district shall, to the extent reasonably available, maintain at its own expense for itself and the City of New Haven as additional insured, public liability insurance covering personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance company approved by the state insurance commissioner. To the extent of such insurance coverage, the district agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liabilities, obligations, claims, actions, judgments, damages, or debts which are a direct result of the establishment of the district or its operation. A certificate evidencing such insurance shall be filed with the controller of the City of New Haven, and such insurance shall not be cancelled or modified without the express written consent of the city. The insurer may not terminate or refuse to renew the policy until thirty (30) days' notice has been given to the city. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 13)  
Sec. 34-14. - Conflicts, severability. 
(a)  The Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, except as amended herein, remains in full force and effect. Any provisions of the Code inconsistent herewith, to the extent of such inconsistencies and no further, are hereby repealed. 
(b)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-18-85, § 14)  
Chapter 35 - CHAPEL WEST SPECIAL SERVICES DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 15, 1986, §§ 1—15, amended the Code by adding provisions establishing a Chapel West Special Services District, designated as Ch. 35. Sections thereof have been designated as §§ 35-1—35-15. The city has advised that the provisions were approved by referendum. 
Ch. 35 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a Chapel West Special Services District (hereinafter the "district") as a body politic and corporate, in accordance with the powers vested in the City of New Haven (hereinafter the "city") under Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision). 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 1)  
Sec. 35-2. - Referendum. 
(a)  This chapter shall not take effect unless, within sixty (60) days of the enactment of this chapter by the board of aldermen, a referendum shall be held and approved. 
(b)  The referendum shall be held among all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district on the question of whether this chapter shall take effect. The city/town clerk of the city shall determine the identity of such holders in the city's land records and shall give notice of the referendum to such holders. 
(c)  The referendum shall be approved if a majority of all such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, voting one vote per property, respond affirmatively and if such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, the assessments of which constitute more than one-half of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district, shall respond affirmatively. 
(d)  The referendum shall be conducted by mail for a period of three (3) weeks ending at 5:00 p.m. on the fifth (5th) Tuesday following after the enactment of this chapter. The city/town clerk of the City of New Haven shall supervise the referendum and shall certify the results of the referendum. The referendum shall comply, to the extent applicable and practicable, with Chapter 145 (Absentee Voting) and Chapter 152 (Referenda) of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), except as Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision) and the terms of this chapter may otherwise permit or direct. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 2)  
Sec. 35-3. - Board of commissioners. 
(a)  The business of the district shall be conducted by the board of commissioners. The board may designate such agents as it deems necessary to act on its behalf in the conduct of the business of the board. In particular the board may designate a district manager of the district as its agent. 
(b)  The board shall consist of nine (9) members elected in accordance with subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  Election of the nine (9) members of the board shall be conducted at the annual February meeting of the board, except for the initial election, which shall be held within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter at a public meeting. Each voter shall be holder of record of taxable interest in real property interest in the district. Six (6) of the members, known as "Class A" commissioners, shall be individuals, partnerships and partners thereof, corporations or stockholders thereof, or trustees and beneficiaries of trusts who are holders of record of interests in real property in the district. Three (3) of the members, known as "Class B" commissioners, shall be individuals, partnerships and partners thereof, corporations or stockholders thereof, or trustees or beneficiaries of trusts operating a trade or business, or leasing real estate or residing in the district and not qualifying as a "Class A" commissioner. 
At the initial election, two Class A commissioners and one Class B commissioner shall be elected for three-year terms; two (2) Class A commissioners and one Class B commissioner shall be elected for two-year terms, and two (2) Class A commissioners and one Class B commissioner shall be elected for one-year terms. Thereafter, except in the case of filling vacancies, two (2) Class A commissioners and one Class B commissioner shall be elected for three-year terms at annual meetings of the board. 
Vacancies on the board of commissioners created by resignation or death shall be filled by the board of commissioners, with the provision that Class A commissioners be chosen to fill Class A seats on the board, and Class B commissioners be chosen to fill Class B seats on the board. 
(d)  The city/town clerk of the city shall give notice of at least ten (10) days of the first organizational meeting of the board to elect commissioners. Such notice shall be by mail to all holders of record of interests in real property in the district and by publication in a newspaper having circulation in the district. Any qualified voter may propose one or more candidates qualifying under subsection 35-3(c) hereof for the board of commissioners to the city/town clerk of the city who shall preside over and conduct balloting at the meeting for the initial election of commissioners. Thereafter, any notices for whatever purpose, shall become the responsibility of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 3)  
Sec. 35-4. - Real property levy. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall, at its first meeting following the initial election of members of the board, and thereafter at the annual meeting and following the election of members of the board, meet for the purpose of recommending to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven the imposition of a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district. 
For those levies and budgets subsequent to the initial levy and budget resultant from this section, the said levy shall be based on an estimated annual budget for the provision of services within the district, which budget shall be approved by a majority of the board, who shall hold a duly noticed public hearing within the district on said proposed budget at least thirty (30) days prior to transmitting said recommended tax levy to the board of alderman, which transmission shall be at least sixty (60) days before the budget takes effect. 
(b)  The board of commissioners at such meeting may recommend to the board of aldermen a levy on each taxable interest in real property in the district, which for each taxable interest shall be the total recommended levy multiplied by a factor equal to the assessed value of the particular property divided by the total assessed value of taxable property in the district. Special assessments to be levied on behalf of the district shall not exceed three-quarters of one percent (.75%) of the assessed value of properties of the district appearing on the City of New Haven Grand List, unless upon prior approval by a majority of all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district. 
Upon revaluation of the property in the district, the figure "three-quarters of one percent (.75%)" in the foregoing sentence shall be reduced to that number yielding the equivalent amount of revenue on the revalued grand list. 
(c)  When the board of commissioners shall, in a timely manner, recommend to the board of aldermen a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of section 35-4 of this chapter and to subsection (e) of section 7-339n of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), it shall be the obligation of the board of alderman to impose such levy as a municipal levy. Such levy shall be in addition to the regular municipal levy, and it shall be the obligation of the City of New Haven to collect such levy for the benefit of the district. The city shall transfer to the district only such funds as shall be collected. 
(d)  All moneys, including but not limited to levies or any income, proceeds or fees issuing from the provision of services by the district of other business conducted by the district received by the board or by the city on behalf of the district shall be paid into the general fund of the city where an account shall be maintained of such moneys for the benefit of the district. Any provisions of the city's general statutes, special acts or charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the treasurer of the city shall disburse such moneys in accordance with an annual budget adopted by the board. A quarterly financial report, based on the fiscal year July through June, of all district revenues and expenditures shall be submitted to the controller of the City of New Haven within thirty (30) days of the end of each fiscal quarter. 
(e)  Pursuant to Section 12-20c C.G.S, the city shall pay into the fund established by section 35-4(d) of this chapter that portion of the payment from the state in lieu of special services district taxes which would have been received except for the exemption provided to an institution of higher learning or general hospital facility under the provisions of Section 12-81 C.G.S. for all properties which join the Chapel West Special Services District after September 30, 2006, or existing district properties which become exempt from taxation after September 30, 2006. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 4; Ord. No. 1435, 1-16-07)  
Sec. 35-5. - Powers. 
(a)  The district shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; 
(2)  To acquire, hold and convey any estate, real or personal; 
(3)  To contract; 
(4)  To borrow money, provided any obligation incurred for this purpose shall be discharged not more than one year after it was incurred, and such district may pledge any revenues it shall receive against any such obligation; 
(5)  To recommend to the board of aldermen of the city the imposition of levies upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, the revenues from which may be used in carrying out any powers of the district; 
(6)  To construct, own, operate, and maintain public improvements; 
(7)  To provide, within the boundaries of the district, some or all of the services which the city is authorized to provide therein, other than elementary or secondary public education services, and other than services which are being provided in any portion of the district by any multi-town body or authority; 
(8)  To construct, acquire, or obtain leasehold interests in motor vehicle parking facilities, within the district or within any block immediately adjacent to the district, subject to the requirements of section 35-5(b), below; 
(9)  To operate a motor vehicle parking facility within the district or within any block immediately adjacent to the district, subject to the requirements of section 35-5(b), below; 
(10)  To lease (as landlord) or sublease to other parties motor vehicle parking facilities subject to the requirements of section 35-5(b), below; 
(11)  To enter into, fund and perform agreements which reduce the costs of motor vehicle parking to residents of the district and to employees of, retail customers of, and others doing business with, businesses located in the district. 
(b)  No parking facility open to the public shall be constructed, acquired, leased, subleased, or operated by the district, without prior approval of the board of aldermen, which shall request the opinion of the city plan commission and the New Haven Parking Authority before giving such approval. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 5)  
Sec. 35-6. - Agreements. 
(a)  The district and the city may within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this chapter enter into a contract setting forth the services to be provided by the city to the district pursuant to section 35-4 of this chapter, and the compensation for such services. 
(b)  The city may enter into a contract with the district in which the city is excused from providing within the district some or all of the services which the district is authorized to provide pursuant to section 35-5 of this chapter and in which the district agrees to provide all such services from which the city has been excused. The city may agree, in any such contract, to make an annual grant to the district, in a fixed amount or based upon a formula in the contract, for the purpose of compensating the district for the services from which the city is excused and for which the district is to become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to section 7-339(t)(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The city and the district may also enter into contracts in which the district is given the right to elect to purchase from the city some or all of the services for which the district has become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to section 7-339(t)(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any contract between the city and the district pursuant to this section 35-6(b) shall be first approved by the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 6; Ord. of 7-7-97)  
Sec. 35-7. - Properties included within the district. 
The following properties, listed by map/block/parcel number as shown on the maps of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven, shall be included within the district: 
279-0217-00100 
279-0217-00200 
279-0217-00300 
279-0217-00500 
279-0217-02200 
279-0217-02200 
279-0217-02300 
279-0217-02300 
279-0217-02400 
279-0217-02500 
279-0217-02600 
280-0229-00100 
280-0229-00300 
280-0229-00400 
280-0229-00500 
280-0229-00600 
280-0229-00700 
280-0229-00800 
280-0229-00900 
280-0229-00901 
280-0229-01000 
280-0229-01001 
280-0229-01100 
280-0229-01200 
280-0229-01300 
280-0229-01400 
280-0229-01500 
280-0229-01600 
280-0229-01800 
280-0229-01900 
280-0229-02000 
280-0229-02100 
280-0230-00300 
280-0230-00400 
280-0230-00500 
280-0230-00700 
280-0230-00800 
280-0230-00900 
280-0230-01000 
280-0230-01100 
280-0230-01200 
280-0230-01300 
280-0230-01500 
280-0230-02400 
280-0230-02500 
280-0230-02600 
280-0230-02601 
280-0230-02800 
280-0249-00100 
280-0249-00200 
280-0249-00201 
280-0249-00300 
280-0249-00400 
280-0249-00500 
280-0249-00501 
280-0249-00600 
280-0249-00700 
280-0249-00800 
280-0249-00900 
280-0249-01000 
280-0249-01001 
280-0249-01100 
280-0249-01200 
280-0249-01600 
280-0249-01700 
280-0249-01800 
280-0249-01801 
280-0249-02000 
280-0249-02100 
280-0249-02200 
280-0249-02300 
280-0249-02400 
280-0249-02500 
280-0249-02501 
280-0249-02502 
280-0249-02600 
280-0249-02601 
280-0249-02701 
280-0249-02800 
280-0250-00100 
280-0250-00200 
280-0250-00300 
280-0250-00301 
280-0250-00400 
280-0250-00500 
280-0250-00600 
280-0250-00601 
280-0250-00602 
280-0250-00603 
280-0250-00604 
280-0250-01500 
280-0250-01600 
280-0250-01800 
280-0250-01900 
280-0250-02000 
280-0250-02100 
280-0250-02200 
280-0250-02210 
280-0250-02300 
280-0250-02400 
280-0250-02500 
280-0250-02600 
280-0250-02700 
280-0250-02800 
280-0250-02803 
280-0270-00100 
280-0270-00200 
280-0270-00300 
280-0270-00400 
280-0270-00500 
280-0270-00600 
280-0270-00700 
280-0270-00800 
280-0270-00900 
280-0270-01000 
280-0270-01100 
280-0270-01600 
280-0270-02300 
280-0270-02400 
280-0270-02500 
280-0271-00100 
280-0271-00200 
280-0271-00300 
280-0271-00500 
280-0271-00800 
280-0271-00900 
280-0271-02100 
297-0215-00500 
297-0215-00600 
297-0215-00700 
297-0215-00800 
297-0215-00900 
297-0215-01000 
297-0215-01200 
297-0215-01202 
297-0216-00101 
297-0216-00200 
297-0216-00500 
297-0216-00800 
297-0216-00900 
297-0216-01000 
297-0216-01100 
297-0216-01200 
297-0216-01300 
297-0216-01400 
297-0216-01500 
297-0246-00100 
297-0246-00300 
297-0246-00400 
297-0246-00500 
297-0247-00100 
297-0247-01500 
297-0247-01700 
297-0247-01800 
297-0248-00300 
297-0248-00400 
297-0248-01500 
297-0248-00100 
297-0248-01300 
297-0248-01400 
297-0248-01700 
297-0248-01800 
297-0248-01900 
297-0248-02000 
297-0248-02100 
297-0248-02200 
297-0269-01800 
297-0269-02000 
297-0269-02100 
297-0269-02200 
297-0269-02300 
297-0269-02400 
297-0269-02500 
315-1293-00100 
315-1293-00200 
315-1293-00300 
315-1293-00400 
315-1293-00500 
315-1293-00600 
315-1293-00700 
315-1293-00800 
315-1293-00900 
315-1293-00901 
315-1293-01000 
315-1293-01100 
315-1293-01200 
315-1293-01300 
315-1293-01400 
315-1293-01500 
315-1293-01600 
315-1293-01700 
315-1293-01800 
316-0243-00100 
316-0243-00300 
316-0243-00400 
316-0243-00600 
316-0243-02500 
316-0243-02600 
316-0243-02700 
316-0243-02800 
316-0244-00100 
316-0244-03000 
316-0244-03100 
316-0244-03200 
316-0244-03300 
316-0244-03400 
316-0244-03500 
316-0245-00100 
316-0245-02800 
316-0245-02900 
316-0245-03000 
316-0245-03100 
316-0245-03200 
317-0213-00100 
317-0213-00101 
317-0213-00200 
317-0213-00201 
318-0242-00100 
318-0242-02500 
318-0242-02600 
318-0242-02700 
318-0242-02800 
318-0242-02900 
318-0242-03000 
 
If any owner-occupant of a one, two, or three family home communicates in writing to the city/town clerk of the City of New Haven his desire to be excluded from the district, the boundaries of the district shall automatically be deemed to exclude the property owned by such owner. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 7; Ord. of 6-1-87, § 2; Ord. No. 1435, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 1630, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1718, 9-3-13 )  
Sec. 35-8. - Adding properties to the district. 
A parcel of real property shall be included in the district among the properties already within the district if: 
(1)  The owner(s) of such parcel shall notify the board of commissioners in writing of their intention to join the district, in a request which must be signed by the property owner(s) constituting a majority interest in said property, or a representative of such owner(s) authorized to sign such a request; and 
(2)  The board of commissioners of the district shall approve the inclusion of said parcel in the district; and 
(3)  The board of aldermen shall amend this chapter to include said parcel in the district. Such amendments shall be submitted to the board of aldermen during the months of March and/or September. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 8)  
Sec. 35-9. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
(a)  Holder of record of interest in real property: The owner, in part or in whole, of an interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records. For the purpose of the election of the board of commissioners, at the organizational meeting only, under section 35-3 hereof, holders of record of an interest in real property shall be determined by the city/town clerk as of 5:00 p.m. on the eleventh day preceding said first organizational meeting to elect commissioners. Thereafter, any notices, for whatever purpose, shall become the responsibility of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Assessment, assessed value: Seventy (70) percent of the market value of a parcel of real property as shown on the real property field card for said parcel on file at the office of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven. 
(c)  Holder of taxable interest in real property: The owner, in part or in whole, of an interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records which such interest is assessed for taxation on the last completed grand-list of the city. For the purpose of the referendum on whether this chapter shall take effect, taxable interest in real property shall be determined by the city clerk as of 5:00 p.m. on the day this chapter is adopted by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 9)  
Sec. 35-10. - Property of district. 
All interests in real property and all interests in personal property held by the district are not subject to the city property tax to the extent that the use of such property by the district is for a "public purpose" pursuant to section 12-81(4) of the Connecticut General Statutes; except that real property on the tax rolls either as of the time of the enactment of this chapter or as of the time of the transfer of the property to the district and parking facilities within or without the district shall be subject to the city property tax unless prospectively abated by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 10)  
Sec. 35-11. - Dissolution. 
(a)  At any time after the district has been established, the district may be dissolved by the enactment of an ordinance repealing the ordinance establishing this district or by the holding of a referendum by the board of commissioners among all the holders of record of taxable interests in real property within the district on the question of whether the district shall be dissolved, provided a majority of such holders shall respond affirmatively or provided the holders of taxable interests in real property the assessments of which shall constitute more than one-half of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district shall respond affirmatively. The board of commissioners shall determine the manner in which the referendum to dissolve shall be held. Any such referendum may be conducted by mail. 
(b)  If the district is dissolved pursuant to section 35-11(a) of this chapter, the board of commissioners shall proceed to wind up the affairs of the district as to the end of the then current fiscal year of the district. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have liabilities, whether fixed or contingent, the board of aldermen of the city shall have the authority to impose, in addition to the regular municipal levy, a levy on the real property within the district, in the same manner as is provided for the determination of the levy by the board of commissioners of the district pursuant to section 35-4(b) of this chapter, for as many years as such liabilities shall remain outstanding, and such levy shall be calculated to produce enough revenues to satisfy and release such liabilities as they become due, and such revenues shall be deposited into the general fund of the city and shall be disbursed by the city, at the discretion of the mayor, solely for the purposes stated herein. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have liabilities, whether fixed or contingent, the board of aldermen of the city shall have the authority to impose, in addition to the regular municipal levy, a levy on the real property within the district, in the same manner as is provided for the determination of the levy by the board of commissioners of the district pursuant to section 35-4(b) of this chapter, for as many years as such liabilities shall remain outstanding, and such levy shall be calculated to produce enough revenues to satisfy and release such liabilities as they become due, and such revenues shall be deposited into the general fund of the city and shall be disbursed by the city, at the discretion of the mayor, solely for the purposes stated herein. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have assets which remain following the winding up of the affairs of the district, such assets shall be transferred to the city. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 11)  
Sec. 35-12. - Annual report. 
Annually on January 15th or the next business day thereafter, the board of commissioners of the district shall submit to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven an annual report of the operation and activities of the district. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 12; Ord. of 7-6-93; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 14)  
Sec. 35-13. - Annual audit. 
The board of commissioners of the district shall have an independent financial audit conducted of the district's annual financial affairs by a certified public accountant on or before the thirtieth day of September. A copy of the audit shall be forwarded to the controller of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 13)  
Sec. 35-14. - Insurance. 
The district shall, to the extent reasonably available, maintain at its own expense for itself and the City of New Haven as additional insured, public liability insurance covering personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance company approved by the state insurance commissioner. To the extent of such insurance coverage, the district agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liabilities, obligations, claims, actions, judgements, damages, or debts which are a direct result of the establishment of the district or its operation. A certificate evidencing such insurance shall be filed with the controller of the City of New Haven, and such insurance shall not be cancelled or modified without the express written consent of the city. The insurer may not terminate or refuse to renew the policy until thirty (30) days' notice has been given to the city. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 14)  
Sec. 35-15. - Conflicts, severability. 
(a)  The Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, except as amended herein, remains in full force and effect. Any provisions of the Code inconsistent herewith, to the extent of such inconsistencies and no further, are hereby repealed. 
(b)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-15-86, § 15)  
Chapter 36 - TOWN GREEN SPECIAL SERVICES DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ch. 36 was not affected by the selected chapter review and re-enanctment project begun in 2006 and derives unchanged from the Code of 1962, reprinted in 1985, as amended. 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a Town Green Special Services District (hereinafter the "district") as a body politic and corporate, in accordance with the powers vested in the City of New Haven (hereinafter the "city") under Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision). 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-2. - Referendum. 
(a)  This chapter shall not take effect unless, within sixty (60) days of the enactment of this chapter by the board of aldermen, a referendum shall be held and approved. 
(b)  The referendum shall be held among all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district on the question of whether this chapter shall take effect. The city/town clerk of the city shall determine the identity of such holders in the city's land records and shall give notice of the referendum to such holders. 
(c)  The referendum shall be approved if a majority of all such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, voting one vote per property, respond affirmatively and if such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, the assessments of which constitute more than one-half (½) of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district, shall respond affirmatively. 
(d)  The referendum shall be conducted by mail for a period of two (2) weeks ending at 5:00 p.m. on the third (3rd) Tuesday following after the enactment of this chapter. The city clerk of the City of New Haven shall supervise the referendum and shall certify the results of the referendum. The referendum shall comply, to the extent applicable and practicable, with Chapter 145 (Absentee Voting) and Chapter 152 (Referenda) of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), except as Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision) and the terms of this chapter may otherwise permit or direct. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-3. - Board of commissioners. 
(a)  The business of the district shall be conducted by a board of commissioners (hereafter the "board") consisting of not less than fifteen (15) members elected as provided in the following subsections. The board may designate such agents, including a district manager, as it deems necessary and advisable to act on its behalf in the conduct of the business of the board. The board shall be comprised as follows: 
(1)  Class A commissioners: Six (6) members representing separate holders of taxable interests in real property in the district not qualifying as Class B commissioners. 
(2)  Class B commissioners: Five (5) members representing separate holders of taxable interests in real property in the district which are among the twenty (20) largest such holders, by assessed value, in the district. 
(3)  Class C commissioners: Four (4) members not qualifying as Class A or B commissioners who reside in the district or operate a trade or business or lease real estate in the district or who represent a business entity or trust which operates a trade or business or leases real estate in the district. 
(4)  Class D commissioners: Each governmental or non-governmental organization which contributes and/or pays in the aggregate at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to the district for its next following fiscal year may designate a representative of the organization to serve ex officio with a vote. 
No member of one (1) class maybe a member of another class. 
(b)  In order to elect an interim board to serve until the first annual meeting of the district in the February following the effective date of this chapter, the city clerk shall give at least ten (10) days notice of the first organizational meeting of the district. Such notice stating the time and place of and business to be conducted at the meeting shall be by mail, effective upon mailing, to all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district and by publication in a newspaper having circulation in the district. Any holder of record of taxable interest in real property in the district may propose one or more candidates qualifying for Class A or Class B commissioner to the city clerk who shall preside over and conduct balloting at the meeting to elect the board of commissioners. The election of each commissioner of the board at the first organizational meeting shall be determined by plurality of the qualified voters present and voting. Class A and Class B commissioners shall be nominated at large. Class C commissioners shall be elected by the Class A and Class B commissioners at their first meeting of the board following their election. Each Class D commissioner shall take office upon represented organization's commitment called for in the foregoing subsection 36-3(a)(4). After the notice for the organizational meeting, any notices, for whatever purpose, shall become the responsibility of the board, except as provided in section 36-12. 
(c)  The first annual meeting of the district in the February following the effective date of this ordinance shall be held for the purpose of electing commissioners and shall be upon at least twenty (20) days notice by mail, effective upon mailing, to all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district and by publication in a newspaper having circulation in the district. The notice shall contain a slate of Class A and Class B commissioners proposed by the interim board, together with the term of office of each as set forth in subsection 36-3(d), allocated as evenly as possible among each class. Any holder of record of taxable interest in real property in the district may propose one or more alternate candidates for the class and for the term of the candidate or candidates proposed by the board. The election of each candidate for commissioner shall be determined by a plurality of the qualified voters present and voting. 
(d)  Each Class A and Class B commissioner shall be elected for a term of three (3) years and shall hold office until a qualified successor is elected; provided that, in accordance with the notice in subsection 36-3(c) for the first annual meeting of the district, each commissioner elected as proposed by the interim board or as an alternate proposed by a holder of record shall be chosen for a term of one (1), two (2) or three (3) years as determined by the interim board to enable two (2) of the six (6) Class A commissioners to be elected annually and two (2) of the five (5) Class B commissioners to be elected in each of two (2) years and the other in the third year of the rotation. Each Class C commissioner shall be elected by the board for a term of three (3) years and shall hold office until a qualified successor is elected; provided that at the first board meeting following the first annual meeting of the district, each such commissioner shall be chosen for a term of one (1), two (2) or three (3) years as determined by the board to enable one of the four (4) Class C commissioners to be elected in each of two (2) years and the other two (2) in the third year of the rotation. Each Class D commissioner shall serve in the discretion of the designating organization until changed by such organization or until such time when its commitment set forth in subsection 36-3(a)(4) is not renewed for the fiscal year in question. Except as provided in subsection 36-3(f), upon completion of two consecutive full terms by a Class A, B or C commissioner, such person shall not be eligible for re-election until one (1) year has elapsed; and for purposes of determining eligibility for re-election such a commissioner who has served more than one (1) year of a three-year term shall be deemed to have served a full term. 
(e)  The interim board and each board thereafter may revise the initial at large allocation of Class A commissioners such that at the next election two (2) of the six (6) Class A commissioners be elected from each of the three (3) specified subareas into which it divides the district for this purpose, and may from time to time vary the composition of the subareas, or may eliminate them, as the board determines. 
(f)  (1)  The resignation of any commissioner from the board shall be in writing addressed to the board at its address. If no effective date is stated, the resignation shall be effective upon receipt. Acceptance of the resignation shall not be necessary to make it effective. 
(2)  Any Class A, B or C commissioner may be removed for any reason or for no reason at a meeting called for the purpose upon vote of two-thirds of the commissioners then in office, provided that the commissioner in question shall not be counted either in determining the number of commissioners or two-thirds ( 2/3 ) thereof. Notice of the proposed removal shall be given to the commissioner in question at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting at which the matter will be voted upon by the board. 
(3)  Vacancies in the board of commissioners for any reason shall be filled by the board for the unexpired terms, provided that Class A commissioners be chosen to fill Class A seats, Class B commissioners be chosen to fill Class B seats and Class C commissioners be chosen to fill Class C seats on the board. 
(g)  (1)  A majority of the number of commissioners of all classes then serving in office shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the board. The act of a majority of the commissioners present at a meeting at which a quorum is present at the time shall be the act of the board of commissioners unless a greater number is required by this ordinance. 
(2)  The board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman who shall be members of the board and such other officers of the board as the board shall determine. 
(3)  The board may appoint such committees as it may determine, including an executive committee of not less than seven (7) commissioners with representation of each of the Class A, B and C commissioners and at least one of the Class D commissioners. The executive committee may act for the board in between its meeting only when the executive committee determines (a) that action is required on a matter prior to the next meeting of the board and (b) that if such action is not taken, the district will be disadvantaged. Other committees may include persons who are not commissioners, but each such committee shall be chaired by a commissioner. 
(4)  The fiscal year of the district shall commence on July 1 in each year. 
(5)  The board may adopt and subsequently modify bylaws or rules to carry out the provisions of this chapter, as it may determine. 
(6)  No commissioner shall receive any compensation for service as such, but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred on behalf of the district as determined and approved by the board. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-4. - Real property levy. 
(a)  The board shall, at its first meeting following the initial election of members of the board, and thereafter at the annual meeting and following the election of members of the board, meet for the purpose of recommending to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven the imposition of a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district. 
For those levies and budgets subsequent to the initial levy and budget resultant from this section, the said levy shall be based on an estimated annual budget for the provision of services within the district, which budget shall be approved by a majority of the board, who shall hold a duly noticed public hearing within the district on said proposed budget at least thirty (30) days prior to transmitting said recommended tax levy to the board of aldermen, which transmission shall be at least sixty (60) days before the budget takes effect. 
(b)  The board at such meeting may recommend to the board of aldermen a levy on each taxable interest in real property in the district, which for each taxable interest shall be the total recommended levy multiplied by a factor equal to the assessed value of the particular property divided by the total assessed value of taxable property in the district. Special assessments to be levied on behalf of the district shall not exceed three-quarters of one percent (0.75%) of the assessed value of properties of the district appearing on the City of New Haven grand list, unless upon prior approval by a majority of all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district. Upon revaluation of the property in the district, the figure "three-quarters of one percent (0.75%)" in the foregoing sentence shall be reduced or increased to that number yielding the equivalent amount of revenue on the revalued grand list. 
(c)  When the board shall, in a timely manner, recommend to the board of aldermen a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of section 36-4 of this chapter and to subsection (e) of Section 7-339n of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), it shall be the obligation of the board of aldermen to impose such levy as a municipal levy. Such levy shall be in addition to the regular municipal levy, and it shall be the obligation of the City of New Haven to collect such levy for the benefit of the district. The city shall transfer to the district only such funds as shall be collected. 
(d)  All moneys, including but not limited to levies or any income, proceeds or fees issuing from the provision of services by the district or other business conducted by the district received by the board or by the city on behalf of the district shall be paid into the general fund of the city where an account shall be maintained of such moneys for the benefit of the district. Any provisions of the city's general statutes, special acts or charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the treasurer of the city shall disburse such moneys in accordance with an annual budget adopted by the board. A quarterly financial report, based on the fiscal year July through June, of all district revenues and expenditures shall be submitted to the controller of the City of New Haven within thirty (30) days of the end of each fiscal quarter. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-5. - Powers. 
(a)  The district shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; 
(2)  To acquire, hold and convey any estate, real or personal; 
(3)  To contract; any contract or order for expenditure to the extent required by State statute or by City Charter which is greater than five thousand dollars, or such amount as may from time to time be provided under Section 7-399q of the Connecticut General Statutes, shall be awarded to the lowest responsible qualified bidder only after public invitation to bid which shall be advertised in a newspaper having circulation in such special services district; 
(4)  To borrow money, provided any obligation incurred for this purpose shall be discharged not more than one (1) year after it was incurred, and such district may pledge any revenues it shall receive against any such obligation; 
(5)  To recommend to the board of aldermen of the city the imposition of levies upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, the revenues from which may be used in carrying out any powers of the district; 
(6)  To construct, own, operate, and maintain public improvements; 
(7)  To provide, within the boundaries of the district, some or all of the services which the city is authorized to provide therein, other than elementary or secondary public education services, and other than services which are being provided in any portion of the district by any multi-town body or authority; 
(8)  To construct, acquire, or obtain leasehold interests in motor vehicle parking facilities, within the district or within any block immediately adjacent to the district, subject to the requirements of section 36-5(b), below; 
(9)  To operate a motor vehicle parking facility within the district or within any block immediately adjacent to the district, subject to the requirements of section 36-5(b), below; 
(10)  To lease (as landlord) or sublease to other parties motor vehicle parking facilities subject to the requirements of section 36-5(b), below; 
(11)  To enter into, fund and perform agreements which reduce the costs of motor vehicle parking to residents of the district and to employees of, retail customers of, and others doing business with, business located in the district. 
(b)  No parking facility open to the public shall be constructed, acquired, leased, subleased, or operated by the district, without prior approval of the board of aldermen, which shall request the opinion of the city plan commission and the New Haven Parking Authority before giving such approval. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-6. - Agreements. 
(a)  The district and the city may within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this chapter enter into a contract setting forth the services to be provided by the city to the district pursuant to section 36-4 of this chapter, and the compensation for such services. 
(b)  The city may enter into a contract with the district in which the city is excused from providing within the district some or all of the services which the district is authorized to provide pursuant to section 36-5 of this chapter and in which the district agrees to provide all such services from which the city has been excused. The city may agree, in any such contract, to make an annual grant to the district, in a fixed amount or based upon a formula in the contract, for the purpose of compensating the district for the services from which the city is excused and for which the district is to become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to section 7-339(t)(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The city and the district may also enter into contracts in which the district is given the right to elect to purchase from the city some or all of the services for which the district has become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to section 7-339(t)(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any contract between the city and the district pursuant to this section 36-6(b) shall be first approved by the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96; Ord. of 7-7-97)  
Sec. 36-7. - Properties included within the district. 
The properties to be included in the district are listed by map/block/parcel number as shown on the maps of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven and enumerated in Attachment A. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-8. - Adding properties to the district. 
A parcel of real property shall be included in the district among the properties already within the district if: 
(1)  The owner(s) of such parcel shall notify the board in writing of their intention to join the district, in a request which must be signed by the property owner(s) constituting a majority interest in said property, or a representative of such owner(s) authorized to sign such a request; and 
(2)  The board of the district shall approve the inclusion of said parcel in the district; and 
(3)  The board of aldermen shall amend this chapter to include said parcel in the district. Such amendments shall be submitted to the board of aldermen during the months of March and/or September. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-9. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
(a)  Holder of record of interest in real property: The owner, in part or in whole, of an interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records. For the purpose of the election of the board, at the organizational meeting only, under section 36-3 hereof, holders of record of an interest in real property shall be determined by the city/town clerk as of 5:00 p.m. on the eleventh (11) day preceding said first organizational meeting to elect commissioners. Any tenant on common or joint tenant shall have a vote equal to its proportional share of the property's ownership, and its owners shall not have more than one (1) vote in aggregate. 
(b)  Assessment, assessed value: Seventy (70) percent of the market value of a parcel of real property as shown on the real property field card for said parcel on file at the office of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven. 
(c)  Holder of taxable interest in real property: The owner, in part or in whole, of an interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records which such interest is assessed for taxation on the last completed grand list of the city. For the purpose of the referendum on whether this chapter shall take effect, taxable interest in real property shall be determined by the city clerk as of 5:00 p.m. on the day this chapter is adopted by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-10. - Property of district. 
All interests in real property and all interests in personal property held by the district are not subject to the city property tax to the extent that the use of such property by the district is for a "public purpose" pursuant to section 12-81(4) of the Connecticut General Statutes; except that real property on the tax rolls either as of the time of the enactment of this chapter or as of the time of the transfer of the property to the district and parking facilities within or without the district shall be subject to the city property tax unless prospectively abated by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-11. - Dissolution. 
(a)  At any time after the district has been established, the district may be dissolved by the enactment of an ordinance repealing the ordinance establishing this district or by the holding of a referendum by the board among all the holders of record of taxable interests in real property within the district on the question of whether the district shall be dissolved, provided a majority of such holders shall respond affirmatively or provided the holders of taxable interests in real property the assessments of which shall constitute more than one-half (½) of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district shall respond affirmatively. The board shall determine the manner in which the referendum to dissolve shall be held. Any such referendum may be conducted by mail. 
(b)  If the district is dissolved pursuant to section 3611(a) and (c) of this chapter, the board shall proceed to wind up the affairs of the district as to the end of the then current fiscal year of the district. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have liabilities, whether fixed or contingent, the board of aldermen of the city shall have the authority to impose, in addition to the regular municipal levy, a levy on the real property within the district, in the same manner as is provided for the determination of the levy by the board of the district pursuant to section 36-4(b) of this chapter, for as many years as such liabilities shall remain outstanding, and such levy shall be calculated to produce enough revenues to satisfy and release such liabilities as they become due, and such revenue shall be deposited into the general fund of the city and shall be disbursed by the city, at the discretion of the mayor, solely for the purposes stated herein. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have assets which remain following the winding up of the affairs of the district, such assets shall be transferred to the city. 
(c)  Not later than forty-two (42) months immediately following the district commencement of the first fiscal year of the district the city/town clerk shall hold in the manner prescribed in section 36-11(a), hold a referendum among all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district on the question of whether the district shall be dissolved. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-12. - Annual report. 
Annually on January 15th or the next business day thereafter, the board of commissioners of the district shall submit to the board of aldermen an annual report of the operation and activities of the district. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96; Ord. of 9-23-98, § 15)  
Sec. 36-13. - Annual audit. 
The board of the district shall have an independent financial audit of the district's annual financial affairs conducted by a certified public accountant on or before the thirtieth day of September. A copy of the audit shall be forwarded to the controller of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-14. - Insurance and indemnity. 
(a)  The district shall, to the extent reasonably available, maintain at its own expense for itself and for the city as additional insured, public liability insurance covering personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance company approved by the state insurance commissioner. To the extent of such insurance coverage, the district agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liabilities, obligations, claims, actions, judgments, damages, or debts which are a direct result of the establishment of the district or its operation. A certificate evidencing such insurance shall be filed with the controller of the city, and such insurance shall not be canceled or modified without the express written consent of the city, acting by its controller. The insurer may not terminate or refuse to renew the policy until thirty (30) days' notice has been given to the city. 
(b)  The commissioners, officers, agents and employees of the board shall be entitled to indemnification against judgments, fines, penalties, amounts paid in settlement and expenses including attorney's fees, in accordance with the standards and provisions of and to the extent that such indemnification is authorized by Section 33-454a of the Connecticut General Statutes, as such statute is presently worded or as its wording may be amended from time to time. The board may purchase insurance providing indemnification in such amounts and with such coverage as the board may from time to time determine, the right of all indemnification provided for shall be in addition to and not exclusive of all other rights to which any commissioner, officer, agent or employee may be entitled, and such right of indemnification shall inure to the benefit of the heirs and personal representatives of such indemnified person. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-15. - Conflicts, severability. 
(a)  The Code of General Ordinances of the city, except as amended herein, remains in full force and effect. Any provisions of the Code inconsistent herewith, to the extent of such inconsistencies and no further, are hereby repealed. 
(b)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-3-96)  
Sec. 36-16. - Ninth Square Special Services District. 
The Ninth Square Special Services District has by referendum among all the holders of record of taxable interests in real property within the Ninth Square Special Services District voted to dissolve the Ninth Square Special Services District on or before June 30, 1997. 
All parcels of real property which comprise the Ninth Square Special Services District have been included in the Town Green Special Services District. 
It is anticipated that the City of New Haven will issue the first levy on taxable real property for the Town Green Special Services District effective January 1, 1997. In the event of the issuance of such levy, the City of New Haven, in order to avoid duplicative taxation, shall not issue a levy on the taxable real property for the Ninth Square Special Services District, any other provisions of this Code of General Ordinances notwithstanding. 
 Taxable 
Map-Block-Parcel 
210-0313-00100 
210-0313-00300 
223-0334-00401 
223-0334-01600 
223-0334-01601 
223-0334-01700 
223-0334-01800 
223-0334-01900 
223-0335-00100 
223-0335-00200 
223-0335-00300 
223-0335-00400 
223-0335-00500 
223-0335-00600 
223-0335-00601 
223-0335-00605 
223-0335-00607 
223-0335-00608 
223-0335-00609 
223-0335-00700 
223-0335-00702 
223-0335-00801 
223-0335-00802 
223-0335-00803 
223-0335-00804 
223-0335-00900 
223-0335-01200 
223-0335-01300 
223-0335-01600 
223-0335-01602 
223-0382-00100 
224-0258-00100 
224-0258-00200 
224-0258-00400 
224-0258-00700 
224-0258-00900 
224-0258-01000 
224-0258-01101 
224-0258-01102 
224-0258-01401 
224-0258-01800 
224-0258-01900 
224-0258-02000 
224-0258-02100 
224-0258-02200 
224-0292-00101 
224-0292-00102 
224-0292-00103 
224-0292-00104 
224-0292-00105 
224-0292-00106 
224-0292-00107 
224-0292-00108 
224-0292-00109 
224-0292-00110 
224-0292-00200 
224-0292-00400 
224-0292-00500 
224-0292-00600 
224-0292-00700 
224-0292-00800 
224-0292-01000 
224-0292-01100 
224-0292-01300 
224-0292-01400 
224-0292-01500 
224-0292-01600 
224-0292-01700 
224-0292-01800 
224-0292-01900 
224-0292-02000 
224-0292-02100 
224-0292-02200 
224-0292-02300 
224-0292-02400 
224-0558-00101 
225-0540-00100 
225-0541-00100 
239-0206-00100 
239-0206-00300 
240-0223-00100 
240-0223-00101 
240-0223-00200 
240-0223-00201 
240-0223-00300 
240-0223-00400 
240-0223-00500 
240-0223-00600 
240-0223-00700 
240-0223-00800 
240-0223-00900 
240-0223-00902 
240-0223-00905 
240-0223-01000 
240-0223-01100 
240-0223-01200 
240-0224-00200 
240-0224-00300 
240-0224-00401 
240-0224-00402 
240-0224-00403 
240-0224-00404 
240-0224-00405 
240-0224-00406 
240-0224-00407 
240-0224-00408 
240-0224-00409 
240-0224-00410 
240-0224-00411 
240-0224-00412 
240-0224-00413 
240-0224-00414 
240-0224-00415 
240-0224-00416 
240-0224-00417 
240-0224-00418 
240-0224-00419 
240-0224-00420 
240-0224-00421 
240-0224-00422 
240-0224-00423 
240-0224-00600 
240-0224-00700 
240-0224-00900 
240-0224-01000 
240-0224-01100 
240-0224-01104 
240-0224-01200 
240-0224-01300 
240-0224-01400 
240-0224-01500 
240-0224-01700 
240-0224-01800 
240-0235-00100 
240-0235-00200 
240-0235-00300 
240-0235-00400 
240-0235-00500 
240-0235-00600 
240-0235-00700 
240-0235-00800 
240-0235-00900 
240-0235-01000 
240-0235-01100 
240-0235-01300 
240-0235-01400 
240-0235-01500 
240-0236-00100 
240-0236-00200 
240-0236-00300 
240-0236-00305 
240-0236-00400 
240-0236-00500 
240-0236-00600 
240-0236-00700 
240-0236-00800 
240-0236-00900 
240-0236-01000 
240-0236-01200 
240-0236-01300 
240-0236-01400 
240-0236-01500 
240-0236-01600 
240-0236-01700 
240-0236-01800 
240-0236-01900 
240-0236-02000 
240-0236-02100 
240-0236-02200 
240-0236-02201 
240-0236-02300 
240-0236-02400 
240-0236-02501 
240-0236-02600 
240-0236-02601 
240-0255-00100 
240-0255-00200 
240-0255-00900 
240-0255-01100 
240-0255-01200 
240-0255-01300 
240-0255-01400 
240-0255-01500 
240-0255-01600 
240-0255-01700 
240-0255-01800 
240-0255-01900 
240-0255-02000 
240-0256-00101 
240-0256-00200 
240-0256-00500 
240-0256-00600 
240-0256-00700 
240-0256-00702 
240-0256-00800 
240-0256-01700 
240-0256-01701 
240-2351-00100 
240-2351-00200 
240-2351-00700 
241-0204-00100 
241-0204-00200 
241-0204-00300 
241-0204-00400 
241-0204-00500 
241-0205-00101 
241-0205-00200 
241-0221-00100 
241-0221-00300 
241-0221-00400 
241-0221-00500 
241-0221-00600 
241-0221-00801 
241-0221-00802 
241-0221-00803 
241-0221-00804 
241-0221-00805 
241-0221-00806 
241-0221-00807 
241-0221-00808 
241-0221-00809 
241-0221-00810 
241-0221-00811 
241-0221-00900 
241-0221-01000 
241-0221-01100 
241-0221-01201 
241-0221-01202 
241-0221-01203 
241-0221-01204 
241-0221-01205 
241-0221-01206 
241-0221-01207 
241-0221-01208 
241-0221-01209 
241-0221-01210 
241-0221-01211 
241-0221-01212 
241-0221-01213 
241-0221-01214 
241-0221-01215 
241-0221-01216 
241-0221-01217 
241-0221-01218 
241-0221-01219 
241-0221-01220 
241-0221-01221 
241-0221-01222 
241-0221-01223 
241-0221-01224 
241-0221-01225 
241-0221-01226 
241-0221-01227 
241-0221-01228 
241-0221-01229 
241-0221-01230 
241-0221-01231 
241-0221-01232 
241-0221-01233 
241-0221-01234 
241-0221-01235 
241-0221-01236 
241-0221-01237 
241-0221-01238 
241-0221-01239 
241-0221-01240 
241-0221-01241 
241-0221-01242 
241-0221-01243 
241-0221-01244 
241-0221-01245 
241-0221-01500 
241-0221-01501 
241-0221-01600 
241-0221-01700 
241-0222-00200 
241-0233-00101 
241-0233-00400 
241-0233-00401 
241-0233-00500 
241-0233-00600 
241-0233-00700 
241-0233-01000 
241-0233-01100 
241-0233-01200 
241-0233-01300 
241-0233-01400 
241-0233-01600 
241-0233-01700 
241-0234-00100 
241-0234-00200 
241-0234-00300 
241-0234-00301 
241-0234-00401 
241-0234-00500 
242-0257-00100 
242-0257-00101 
242-0257-00500 
242-0257-01400 
242-0257-01502 
242-0257-01503 
243-0289-01500 
243-0289-01700 
243-0290-00400 
243-0291-00100 
243-0291-00102 
243-0291-00300 
243-0291-00400 
243-0291-00401 
243-0291-00500 
243-0291-00600 
243-0291-00700 
243-0291-00800 
243-0291-00900 
243-0291-01000 
243-0291-01100 
243-0291-01200 
243-0311-00200 
243-0311-00201 
243-0311-00300 
243-0312-00300 
243-0312-00901 
243-0312-00902 
243-0312-00903 
261-0231-00100 
261-0231-00200 
261-0231-00400 
261-0231-00401 
261-0231-01500 
261-0231-01600 
261-0231-01700 
261-0231-01800 
261-0231-01900 
261-0232-00100 
261-0232-00300 
261-0232-00601 
261-0232-00700 
261-0232-00800 
261-0232-00900 
261-0232-01000 
261-0232-01001 
261-0232-01100 
261-0232-01200 
261-0232-01300 
261-0232-01400 
261-0232-01500 
261-0232-01600 
261-0232-01701 
261-0232-01702 
261-0232-01703 
261-0232-01800 
261-0232-01901 
261-0232-02100 
261-0232-02200 
261-0232-02300 
261-0232-02400 
261-0232-02500 
261-0232-02600 
261-0232-02700 
261-0232-02800 
262-0203-00100 
262-0220-00100 
262-0220-00300 
262-0220-00400 
262-0220-00500 
262-0220-00600 
262-0220-00700 
262-0220-00800 
262-0220-00900 
262-0220-01000 
262-0220-01200 
262-0220-01300 
262-0220-01400 
280-0230-01005 
280-0230-01600 
280-0230-01700 
280-0230-01800 
280-0230-02000 
280-0230-02100 
280-0230-02200 
280-0230-02300 
 
_____    
 Tax Exempt 
Map-Block-Parcel 
210-0313-00601 
223-0335-00602 
223-0335-00606 
223-0335-00701 
223-0335-00703 
223-0335-00704 
223-0335-00706 
223-0335-00707 
223-0335-00708 
223-0335-00709 
223-0335-00710 
223-0335-00711 
223-0335-00800 
224-0314-00100 
224-0314-00200 
224-0314-00300 
224-0314-00400 
224-0314-00500 
224-0578-00101 
224-0578-00200 
224-0578-00300 
224-0578-00400 
224-0578-00401 
224-0578-00500 
224-0578-00600 
224-0578-00700 
224-0578-00800 
224-0578-00900 
224-0578-01000 
224-0578-01100 
224-0578-01200 
224-0578-01300 
224-0578-01400 
224-0578-01500 
224-0578-01600 
224-0578-01700 
224-0578-01800 
224-0578-01900 
224-0578-02000 
224-0578-02100 
225-0521-00100 
225-0540-00200 
225-0540-00300 
225-0540-00301 
225-0541-00200 
225-0541-00300 
225-0541-00400 
225-0541-00500 
225-0541-00501 
225-0541-00600 
225-0541-00700 
225-0541-00701 
225-0541-01000 
225-0548-00100 
225-0548-00200 
225-0548-00300 
225-0548-00400 
225-0548-00500 
225-0548-00600 
225-0548-00700 
225-0548-00800 
225-0548-00801 
225-0548-00900 
225-0548-01000 
239-0206-00200 
239-0206-00400 
239-0207-00100 
240-0224-00100 
240-0224-00800 
240-0224-01600 
240-0224-01601 
240-0235-01200 
240-0236-02500 
240-0255-00300 
240-0255-00400 
240-0255-00401 
240-0255-01801 
240-0256-00300 
240-0256-00701 
241-0204-00201 
241-0205-00100 
241-0233-00100 
241-0233-00402 
242-0253-00100 
242-0253-00101 
242-0253-00102 
242-0253-00103 
242-0254-00100 
242-0257-00700 
242-0257-01500 
242-0257-01501 
243-0290-00500 
243-0290-00501 
243-0290-00600 
243-0290-00700 
243-0312-00400 
261-0231-00300 
261-0231-00402 
261-0231-00800 
261-0231-02000 
261-0231-02100 
261-0231-02200 
261-0231-02300 
261-0232-00200 
261-0232-00400 
261-0232-00500 
261-0251-00100 
261-0252-00100 
261-0252-00301 
261-0252-00400 
262-0220-00200 
262-0220-01100 
262-0220-01101 
262-0220-01102 
  
Chapter 37 - GRAND AVENUE SPECIAL SERVICES DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Establishment. 
There is hereby established a Grand Avenue Special Services District (hereinafter the "district") as a body politic and corporate, in accordance with the powers vested in the City of New Haven (hereinafter the "city") under Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision). 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-2. - Referendum. 
(a)  This chapter shall not take effect unless, within sixty (60) days of the enactment of this chapter by the board of aldermen, a referendum shall be held and approved. 
(b)  The referendum shall be held among all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district on the question of whether this chapter shall take effect. The city/town clerk of the city shall determine the identity of such holders in the city's land records and shall give notice of the referendum to such holders. 
(c)  The referendum shall be approved if a majority of all such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, voting one vote per property, respond affirmatively and if such holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district, the assessments of which constitute more than one-half (½) of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district, shall respond affirmatively. 
(d)  The referendum shall be conducted by mail for a period of three (3) weeks ending at 5:00 p.m. on the fifth (5th) Tuesday following after the enactment of this chapter. The city/town clerk of the City of New Haven shall supervise the referendum and shall certify the results of the referendum. The referendum shall comply, to the extent applicable and practicable, with Chapter 145 (Absentee Voting) and Chapter 152 (Referenda) of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), except as Chapter 105A of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision) and the terms of this chapter may otherwise permit or direct. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09) 
Editor's note— Approval of the voters was granted on March 29, 2009.  
Sec. 37-3. - Board of commissioners. 
(a)  The business of the district shall be conducted by the board of commissioners. The board may designate such agents as it deems necessary to act on its behalf in the conduct of the business of the board. In particular the board may designate a district manager of the district as its agent. 
(b)  The board shall consist of eleven (11) members elected in accordance with subsection (c) hereof. 
(c)  Election of the nine (9) members of the board shall be conducted at the annual February meeting of the board, except for the initial election, which shall be held within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter at a public meeting. Each voter shall be holder of record of taxable interest in real property interest in the district. 
(1)  Four (4) of the members, known as "Class A" commissioners, shall be individuals, partnerships and partners thereof, corporations or stockholders thereof, or trustees and beneficiaries of trusts who are holders of record of interests in real property in the district. 
(2)  Four (4) of the members, known as "Class B" commissioners, shall be individuals, partnerships and partners thereof, corporations or stockholders thereof, or trustees or beneficiaries of trusts operating a trade or business, or leasing real estate or residing in the district, or original Incorporators of the Grand Avenue Village Association and not qualifying as a "Class A" commissioner. At least one (10 such member shall be a resident of the district. 
(3)  One (1) of the members, known as "Class C" commissioner, shall be an individual, or representative of a government organization within the boundaries of the district, which contributes twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or more in aggregate per fiscal year. 
Said amount to be increased pro rata with any increase in overall Special Services District mill rate. 
(4)  Two (2) of the members, known as "Class D" commissioners, shall be an individual, or representative of a nonprofit organization within the boundaries of the district, which contributes one thousand dollars ($1000.00) or more in aggregate per fiscal year. These two (2) members shall represent two (2) separate and distinct nonprofit organizations. 
(5)  At the initial election, two (2) Class A commissioners and one (1) Class B commissioner shall be elected for three-year terms; one (1) Class A commissioner, one (1) Class B commissioner, and one (1) Class C commissioner shall be elected for two-year terms, and one (1) Class A commissioner, one (1) Class B commissioner, and one (1) Class D commissioner shall be elected for one-year terms. 
(6)  Thereafter, except in the case of filling vacancies, one (1) Class A commissioners, one (1) Class B commissioner, one (1) Class C commissioner and (1) one Class D commissioner shall be elected for three-year terms at annual meetings of the board, as vacancies become available. Vacancies on the board of commissioners created by resignation or death shall be filled by the board of commissioners, with the provision that Class A commissioners be chosen to fill Class A seats on the board, and Class B commissioners be chosen to fill Class B seats on the board, Class C commissioners be chosen to fill Class C seats on the board and Class D commissioners be chosen to fill Class D seats on the board. No member of one class maybe a member of another class. 
(d)  The city/town clerk of the city shall give notice of at least ten (l0) days of the first organizational meeting of the board to elect commissioners. Such notice shall be by mail to all holders of record of interests in real property in the district and by publication in a newspaper having circulation in the district. Any qualified voter may propose one or more candidates qualifying under subsection 37-3(c) hereof for the board of commissioners to the city/town clerk of the city who shall preside over and conduct balloting at the meeting for the initial election of commissioners. Thereafter, any notices for whatever purpose, shall become the responsibility of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-4. - Real property levy. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall, at its first meeting following the initial election of members of the board, and thereafter at the annual meeting and following the election of members of the board, meet for the purpose of recommending to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven the imposition of a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district. For those levies and budgets subsequent to the initial levy and budget resultant from this section, the said levy shall be based on an estimated annual budget for the provision of services within the district, which budget shall be approved by a majority of the board, who shall hold a duly noticed public hearing within the district on said proposed budget at least thirty (30) days prior to transmitting said recommended tax levy to the board of alderman, which transmission shall be at least sixty (60) days before the budget takes effect. 
(b)  The board of commissioners at such meeting may recommend to the board of aldermen a levy on each taxable interest in real property in the district, which for each taxable interest shall be the total recommended levy multiplied by a factor equal to the assessed value of the particular property divided by the total assessed value of taxable property in the district. Special assessments to be levied on behalf of the district shall not exceed three-quarters of one percent (.75%) of the assessed value of properties of the district appearing on the City of New Haven Grand List, unless upon prior approval by a majority of all holders of record of taxable interests in real property in the district. 
Upon revaluation of the property in the district, the figure "three-quarters of one percent (.75%)" in the foregoing sentence shall be reduced to that number yielding the equivalent amount of revenue on the revalued grand list. 
(c)  When the board of commissioners shall, in a timely manner, recommend to the board of aldermen a levy upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of section 37-4 of this chapter and to subsection (e) of section 7-339n of the Connecticut General Statutes (1958 Revision), it shall be the obligation of the board of alderman to impose such levy as a municipal levy. Such levy shall be in addition to the regular municipal levy, and it shall be the obligation of the City of New Haven to collect such levy for the benefit of the district. The city shall transfer to the district only such funds as shall be collected. 
(d)  All moneys, including but not limited to levies or any income, proceeds or fees issuing from the provision of services by the district of other business conducted by the district received by the board or by the city on behalf of the district shall be paid into the general fund of the city where an account shall be maintained of such moneys for the benefit of the district. Any provisions of the city's general statutes, special acts or charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the treasurer of the city shall disburse such moneys in accordance with an annual budget adopted by the board. A quarterly financial report, based on the fiscal year July through June, of all district revenues and expenditures shall be submitted to the controller of the City of New Haven within thirty (30) days of the end of each fiscal quarter. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-5. - Powers. 
(a)  The district shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; 
(2)  To acquire, hold and convey any estate, real or personal; 
(3)  To contract; 
(4)  To borrow money, provided any obligation incurred for this purpose shall be discharged not more than one year after it was incurred, and such district may pledge any revenues it shall receive against any such obligation; 
(5)  To recommend to the board of aldermen of the city the imposition of levies upon the taxable interests in real property within the district, the revenues from which may be used in carrying out any powers of the district; 
(6)  To construct, own, operate, and maintain public improvements; 
(7)  To provide, within the boundaries of the district, some or all of the services which the city is authorized to provide therein, other than elementary or secondary public. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-6. - Agreements. 
(a)  The district and the city may within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this chapter enter into a contract setting forth the services to be provided by the city to the district pursuant to section 37-4 of this chapter, and the compensation for such services. 
(b)  The city may enter into a contract with the district in which the city is excused from providing within the district some or all of the services which the district is authorized to provide pursuant to section 37-5 of this chapter and in which the district agrees to provide all such services from which the city has been excused. The city may agree, in any such contract, to make an annual grant to the district, in a fixed amount or based upon a formula in the contract, for the purpose of compensating the district for the services from which the city is excused and for which the district is to become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to section 7-339(t)(b) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The city and the district may also enter into contracts in which the district is given the right to elect to purchase from the city some or all of the services for which the district has become responsible. Any such contract is pursuant to section 7-339(t)(e) of the Connecticut General Statutes. Any contract between the city and the district pursuant to this section 37-6(b) shall be first approved by the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-7. - Properties included within the district. 
The following properties, listed by map/block/parcel number as shown on the maps of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven, shall be included within the district: 
MBP 
162-0702-00101 
166-0748-02101 
163-0742-00102 
160-1264-01000 
160-0761-02100 
162-0743-00501 
163-0742-02400 
161-0759-02300 
163-0742-01200 
161-0759-02400 
163-0742-01201 
167-0757-02200 
166-0748-01800 
173-0746-03100 
173-0746-02600 
173-0746-02700 
173-0746-02800 
180-0749-02100 
174-0736-00100 
173-0746-03000 
166-0748-02600 
160-0763-01800 
161-0760-02700 
162-0743-01401 
160-1264-00500 
162-0743-01000 
161-0760-01901 
161-0760-01900 
161-0760-02000 
161-0760-02100 
161-0760-02200 
161-0760-02500 
161-0760-02600 
163-0742-00101 
163-0742-02300 
166-0741-00100 
161-0759-02500 
160-0763-01700 
160-0763-01600 
167-0758-02100 
163-0742-02200 
167-0757-01800 
167-0757-01900 
166-0748-01701 
167-0757-02000 
167-0757-02100 
166-0741-02000 
166-0748-00100 
167-0756-01600 
166-0748-02700 
166-0748-02500 
167-0756-02000 
166-0748-02400 
166-0748-02300 
167-0756-02100 
167-0756-02200 
166-0748-02200 
166-0748-02100 
166-0748-02000 
166-0748-01900 
166-0748-01700 
173-0747-00100 
172-0754-01400 
172-0754-01500 
173-0747-02000 
173-0747-01900 
163-0742-02201 
173-0747-01600 
172-0753-01600 
172-0753-01700 
172-0752-01400 
172-0752-01500 
167-0758-02200 
173-0746-02900 
172-0752-01800 
172-0752-01900 
172-0752-02000 
172-0751-01300 
173-0746-02500 
173-0746-02400 
174-0736-00300 
174-0736-00200 
180-0749-02200 
180-0585-00100 
180-0585-00101 
180-0585-00102 
180-0585-00103 
180-0585-00104 
180-0585-00200 
 
If any owner-occupant of a one-, two-, or three-family home communicates in writing to the city/town clerk of the City of New Haven his desire to be excluded from the district, the boundaries of the district shall automatically be deemed to exclude the property owned by such owner. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-8. - Adding properties to the district. 
A parcel of real property shall be included in the district among the properties already within the district if: 
(1)  The owner(s) of such parcel shall notify the board of commissioners in writing of their intention to join the district, in a request which must be signed by the property owner(s) constituting a majority interest in said property, or a representative of such owner( s) authorized to sign such a request; and 
(2)  The board of commissioners of the district shall approve the inclusion of said parcel in the district; and 
(3)  The board of aldermen shall amend this chapter to include said parcel in the district. Such amendments shall be submitted to the board of aldermen during the months of March and/or September. 
(4)  Any government or nonprofit property that is sold to a private entity. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-9. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
(1)  Holder of record of interest in real property: The owner, in part or in whole, of an interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records. For the purpose of the election of the board of commissioners, at the organizational meeting only, under section 37-3 hereof, holders of record of an interest in real property shall be determined by the city/town clerk as of 5:00 p.m. on the eleventh day preceding said first organizational meeting to elect commissioners. Thereafter, any notices, for whatever purpose, shall become the responsibility of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Assessment, assessed value: Seventy (70) percent of the market value of a parcel of real property as shown on the real property field card for said parcel on file at the office of the tax assessor of the City of New Haven. 
(3)  Holder of taxable interest in real property: The owner, in part or in whole, ofan interest in real property as shown on the New Haven Land Records which such interest is assessed for taxation on the last completed grand-list of the city. For the purpose of the referendum on whether this chapter shall take effect, taxable interest in real property shall be determined by the city clerk as of 5 :00 p.m. on the day this chapter is adopted by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-10. - Property of district. 
All interests in real property and all interests in personal property held by the district are not subject to the city property tax to the extent that the use of such property by the district is for a "public purpose" pursuant to section 12-81(4) of the Connecticut General Statutes; except that real property on the tax rolls either as of the time of the enactment of this chapter or as of the time of the transfer of the property to the district and parking facilities within or without the district shall be subject to the city property tax unless prospectively abated by the board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-11. - Dissolution. 
(a)  At any time after the district has been established, the district may be dissolved by the enactment of an ordinance repealing the ordinance establishing this district or by the holding of a referendum by the board of commissioners among all the holders of record of taxable interests in real property within the district on the question of whether the district shall be dissolved, provided a majority of such holders shall respond affirmatively or provided the holders of taxable interests in real property the assessments of which shall constitute more than one-half of the total of assessments for all taxable interests in real property within the district shall respond affirmatively. The board of commissioners shall determine the manner in which the referendum to dissolve shall be held. Any such referendum may be conducted by mail. 
(b)  If the district is dissolved pursuant to section 37-11(a) of this chapter, the board of commissioners shall proceed to wind up the affairs of the district as to the end of the then current fiscal year of the district. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have liabilities, whether fixed or contingent, the board of aldermen of the city shall have the authority to impose, in addition to the regular municipal levy , a levy on the real property within the district, in the same manner as is provided for the determination of the levy by the board of commissioners of the district pursuant to section 37-4(b) of this chapter, for as many years as such liabilities shall remain outstanding, and such levy shall be calculated to produce enough revenues to satisfy and release such liabilities as they become due, and such revenues shall be deposited into the general fund of the city and shall be disbursed by the city, at the discretion ofthe mayor, solely for the purposes stated herein. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have liabilities, whether fixed or contingent, the board of aldermen of the city shall have the authority to impose, in addition to the regular municipal levy, a levy on the real property within the district, in the same manner as is provided for the determination of the levy by the board of commissioners of the district pursuant to section 37-4(b) of this chapter, for as many years as such liabilities shall remain outstanding, and such levy shall be calculated to produce enough revenues to satisfy and release such liabilities as they become due, and such revenues shall be depoited into the general fund of the city and shall be disbursed by the cty, at the discretion of the mayor, solely for the purposes stated herein. If, after the dissolution of the district, the district shall have assets which remain following the winding up of the affairs of the district, such assets shall be transferred to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-12. - Annual report. 
Annually on January 15th or the next business day thereafter, the board of commissioners of the district shall submit to the board of aldermen of the City of New Haven an annual report of the operation and activities of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-13. - Annual audit. 
The board of commissioners of the district shall have an independent financial audit conducted of the district's annual financial affairs by a certified public accountant on or before the thirtieth day of September. A copy of the audit shall be forwarded to the controller of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-14. - Insurance. 
The district shall, to the extent reasonably available, maintain at its own expense for itself and the City of New Haven as additional insured, public liability insurance covering personal injury and property damage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance company approved by the state insurance commissioner. To the extent of such insurance coverage, the district agrees to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liabilities, obligations, claims, actions, judgments, damages, or debts which are a direct result of the establishment of the district or its operation. A certificate evidencing such insurance shall be filed with the controller of the City of New Haven, and such insurance shall not be cancelled or modified without the express written consent of the city. The insurer may not terminate or refuse to renew the policy until thirty (30) days' notice has been given to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
Sec. 37-15. - Conflicts, severability. 
(a)  The Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, except as amended herein, remains in full force and effect. Any provisions of the Code inconsistent herewith, to the extent of such inconsistencies and no further, are hereby repealed. 
(b)  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1584, 2-9-09)  
TECHNICAL ORDINANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Technical Ordinances of the City of New Haven were published in 1962 as Volume III of the New Haven Code. In 2011 the city permitted the consolidation and transfer of the remaining Technical Ordinances to Volume II of the Code. Former and discontinued Volume III contained Title IV, Building Code; and Title V, Housing Code; associated indexes and Comparative Tables of ordinances amending these two titles. 
Former Title IV was divided into Parts I—III, Building, Plumbing and Electrical Codes; and Part IV, Flood Damage Prevention. Former Parts I—III were repealed by an ordinance adopted on July 6, 1981, as the city considered that the former Parts I—III were superseded by provisions enacted by the State of Connecticut. Part IV, Flood Damage Prevention, remained as the only active part of Title IV. 
Title V of the New Haven Code contains the housing code of the city. 
 
Title IV - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1713 , §§ 1—8, adopted July 1, 2013, amended Title IV in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former Title IV pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1640 , §§ 1—8, adopted Oct. 4, 2010. 
 
SECTION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDING OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 
 
1.1. - Statutory authorization. 
In Section 7-148(c)(7) of the General Statutes, the Legislature of the State of Connecticut delegates to local governmental units the responsibility of adopting regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Aldermen of the City of New Haven, Connecticut does ordain as follows: 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 1, 7-1-13 )  
1.2. - Findings of fact. 
1.2.1 The flood hazard areas of New Haven are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
1.2.2 These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 1, 7-1-13 )  
1.3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
1.3.1 Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
1.3.2 Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
1.3.3 Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
1.3.4 Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
1.3.5 Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 1, 7-1-13 )  
1.4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this ordinance are: 
1.4.1 To protect human life and health; 
1.4.2 To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
1.4.3 To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
1.4.4 To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
1.4.5 To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
1.4.6 To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blighted areas; and 
1.4.7 To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood hazard area. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 1, 7-1-13 )  
SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
2.1 Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
2.1.1 Addition (to an existing building) - any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls in new construction. 
2.1.2 Appeal: A request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a flood damage prevention (FDP) variance. 
2.1.3 Area of special flood hazard: The area within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
2.1.4 Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
2.1.5 Base flood elevation (BFE): The elevation of the crest of the base flood or 100-year flood. The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
2.1.6 Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
2.1.7 Breakaway wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
2.1.8 Building: Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
2.1.9 Coastal High Hazard Area: The area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or hurricane wave wash, designated on a FIRM as zone VE or V . 
2.1.10 Cost: Means, as related to substantial improvements, the cost of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, repair or other improvement of a structure shall be established by a detailed written contractor's estimate. The estimate shall include, but not be limited to: the cost of materials (interior finishing elements, structural elements, utility and service equipment); sales tax on materials, building equipment and fixtures, including heating and air conditioning and utility meters; labor; built-in appliances; demolition and site preparation; repairs made to damaged parts of the building worked on at the same time; contractor's overhead; contractor's profit; and grand total. Items to be excluded include: cost of plans and specifications, survey costs, permit fees, outside improvements such as septic systems, water supply wells, landscaping, sidewalks, fences, yard lights, irrigation systems, and detached structures such as garages, sheds, and gazebos. 
2.1.11 Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of additions, alterations or substantial improvements to buildings or structures; the placement of buildings or structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment; the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials; and the installation, repair or removal of public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
2.1.12 Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
2.1.13 Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 19, 1980, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
2.1.14 Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
2.1.15 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
2.1.16 Finished living space: As related to fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation (BFE), a space that is, but is not limited to, heated and/or cooled, contains finished floors (tile, linoleum, hardwood, etc.), has sheetrock walls that may or may not be painted or wallpapered, and other amenities such as furniture, appliances, bathrooms, fireplaces and other items that are easily damaged by floodwaters and expensive to clean, repair, or replace. A fully enclosed area below the BFE including the additional one foot of freeboard required by the ordinance cannot have finished living space and needs to be designed for exposure to flood forces and can only be used for parking, building access or limited storage. 
2.1.17 Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal water; 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
2.1.18 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and applicable risk premium zones. 
2.1.19 Flood Insurance Study: The official report of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
2.1.20 Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
2.1.21 Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement) i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. 
2.1.22 Functionally dependent use or facility: A use or facility that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to the water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. The term does not include seafood processing facilities, long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or service facilities. 
2.1.23 Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
2.1.24 Historic structure: Any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
2.1.25 Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. These areas must be designed in accordance with the definition of "elevated building" and Section 5.3.2. 
2.1.26 Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
2.1.27 Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
2.1.28 Market value: The market value of the structure shall be determined based on the appraised value of the structure using the cost to approach value method prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
2.1.29 Mean sea level: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
2.1.30 National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1988: A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
2.1.31 New construction: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after June 19, 1980, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
2.1.32 New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 19, 1980, the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
2.1.33 Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is a building on a chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and which is not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
2.1.34 Sand dunes: Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
2.1.35 Start of construction, [for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (PL 97-348)], includes substantial improvement: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
2.1.36 Structure: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
2.1.37 Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
2.1.38 Substantial improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place over a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure using the cost to approach value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local project required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimumare solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.1.39 Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. Such hardship shall be based on the unusual physical characteristics of the property in question which are not shared by adjacent parcels; hardship shall not be based on the structure, or on economic or personal hardships. 
2.1.40 Violation: Failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. A structure or other development without required permits, lowest floor elevation documentation, flood-proofing certificates or required floodway encroachment calculations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
2.1.41 Water Surface Elevation: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 2, 7-1-13 ; Ord. No. 1789, Attach. 4-4-16 )  
SECTION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
3.1. - Lands to which this ordinance applies. 
This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1713, § 3, 7-1-13)  
3.2. - Basis for Establishing the Areas of special flood hazards. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New Haven County, Connecticut, July 8, 2013, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated December 17, 2010, July 8, 2013 (Panels 09009C0429J, 09009C0433J, 09009C0434J, 09009C0437J, 09009C0439J, 09009C0441J, 09009C0442J, 09009C0443J, 09009C0444J, 09009C0453J, 09009C0557J), and December 17, 2010 (Panels 09009C0426H, 09009C0427H, 09009C0428H, 09009C0436H, 09009C0461H, 09009C0556H), and other supporting data applicable to the City of New Haven, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this ordinance it must take precedence when more restrictive until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as zones A, AE, and VE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Zone VE is also identified as a coastal high hazard area. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for a community. BFEs provided on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. The FIS and FIRM are on file with the city/town clerk. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 3, 7-1-13 )  
3.3. - Establishment of the floodplain development permit. 
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities to be undertaken in a Special Flood Hazard Area. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 3, 7-1-13 )  
3.4. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 3, 7-1-13 )  
3.5. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 3, 7-1-13 )  
3.6. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be: 1) considered as minimum requirements; 2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; 3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 3, 7-1-13 )  
3.7. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of New Haven or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 3, 7-1-13 )  
SECTION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
4.1. - Designation of the ordinance administrator. 
The building inspector is hereby appoined to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 4, 7-1-13 )  
4.2. - Certfication. 
Where required under this ordinance, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this ordinance. Such certification must be provided to the building inspector. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 4, 7-1-13 )  
4.3. - Permit procedures. 
Prior to any development activities in the Flood Damage Prevention District, application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of New Haven. Such application shall be accompanied by two sets of plans drawn to scale showing, at a minimum, the property lines and location of the parcel; existing and proposed contours; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. The following information shall also be submitted to the building inspector. 
4.3.1. Application stage. 
4.3.1.1 Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures (sections 5.3.1 and 5.3.4.2); 
4.3.1.2 Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed (section 5.3.1.2.2); 
4.3.1.3 Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
4.3.1.4 A statement as to whether or not the proposed alterations to an existing structure meet the criteria of the substantial improvement definition (section 2.1.38); 
4.3.1.5 A statement as to whether there will be dry access to the structure during the 100-year storm event; 
4.3.1.6 Certification as to floodproofing, as required by section 5.3.1.2.2; 
4.3.1.7 Certification as to the provisions of section 5.3.2 governing fully-enclosed areas below base flood elevation, if the minimum design criteria in section 5.3.2.1—5.3.2.3 is not used; 
4.3.1.8 Certification as to floodway heights, as required by section 5.2.1 and 5.3.3; 
4.3.1.9 Certification as to breakaway walls. If the design criteria stated in subsection 5.3.4.8 is not utilized then the design and construction methods must be certified as explained in subsection 5.3.4.8.1 and 5.3.4.8.2; 
4.3.1.10 Certification as to the structural anchoring provisions of subsection 5.3.4.3 and 5.3.4.4. 
4.3.2 Construction stage. Upon completion of the applicable portion of construction the applicant shall provide the building inspector with verification an elevation certificate prepared by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor, engineer or architect verifying the as-built lowest floor elevation, defined as the top of the lowest floor (including basement) in A zones (sections 5.3.1.1 and 5.3.1.2.1); defined as the lowest point of the lowest supporting structural horizontal member (excluding pilings or columns) in V zones (section 5.3.4.2); or, in the case of floodproofed buildings, the elevations to which the floodproofing is effective (section 5.3.1.2.2). 
4.3.3 Compliance. Deficiencies in the lowest floor elevations shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being performed to proceed. Failure to submit an acceptable survey or failure to make corrections required hereby shall be cause for issuance of a stop-work order. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 4, 7-1-13 )  
4.4. - Duties and responsibilities of the building inspector. 
In the administration of this ordinance, the building inspector shall perform the following duties, among others: 
4.4.1 Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
4.4.2 Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
4.4.3 Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the flood development permit. Such additional permit requirements may include, but not be limited to: Stream Channel Encroachment Line Permit, Coastal Area Management Permit, Water Diversion Permit, Dam Safety Permit, and Corps of Engineers 404 Permit. 
4.4.4 Notify the regional planning agency and the affected municipality at least 35 days prior to the public hearing if any change of regulation or use of a flood zone will affect an area within 500 feet of another municipality. 
4.4.5 Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Energy and Environmental Protection, Inland Water Resources Management Division prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
4.4.6 Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
4.4.7 Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with sections 5.3.1.1 and 5.3.1.2.1. 
4.4.8 Record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with section 5.3.1.2.2. 
4.4.9 Obtain and maintain all certifications required under this ordinance and assure that they meet the standards of section 4.2 hereof. 
4.4.10 Make the necessary interpretation, where needed, as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
4.4.11 Obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source in order to administer the provisions of section 5.3, when base flood elevation data or floodway data have not be provided in accordance with article 3, section B. 
4.4.12 Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.4.13 Review plans for adequacy of breakaway walls in coastal high hazard areas are in accordance with subsection 5.3.4. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 4, 7-1-13 )  
SECTION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
5.1 General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions shall apply: 
5.1.1 New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
5.1.2 New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
5.1.3 New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
5.1.4 Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within components during flooding conditions; 
5.1.5 New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
5.1.6 New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the system into flood waters; 
5.1.7 On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
5.1.8 In any portion of a watercourse which is altered or relocated the flood carrying capacity shall be maintained; 
5.1.9 Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes (including "mobile" homes and recreational vehicles placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer), located within zone A or AE (including, but not limited to, manufactured homes located outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park in which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood) to be placed or substantially improved shall be: 
5.1.9.1 Elevated so that the lowest floor is one foot above the base flood elevation; 
5.1.9.2 Placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement, and hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors; 
5.1.9.3 Installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. Elevation construction standards include piling foundations placed no more than 10 feet apart, and the provision of reinforcement for piers more than six feet above ground level. 
5.1.9.4 Adequate access and drainage should be provided. 
5.1.9.5 Recreational vehicles located within all areas of special flood hazard and coastal high hazard areas must either be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of a manufactured home. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
5.1.10 Compensatory storage. The water holding capacity of the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, shall not be reduced. Any reduction caused by filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint to the structure, shall be compensated for by deepening and/or widening of the floodplain. Storage shall be provided on-site, unless easements have been gained from adjacent property owners; it shall be provided within the same hydraulic reach and a volume not previously used for flood storage; it shall be hydraulically comparable and incrementally equal to the theoretical volume of flood water at each elevation, up to and including the 100-year flood elevation, which would be displaced by the proposed project. Such compensatory volume shall have an unrestricted hydraulic connection to the same waterway or water body. Compensatory storage can be provided off-site if approved by the municipality. 
5.1.11 Equal conveyance. Within the floodplain, except those areas which are tidally influenced, as designated on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for the community, encroachments resulting from filling, new construction or substantial improvements involving an increase in footprint of the structure, are prohibited unless the applicant provides certification by a registered professional engineer demonstrating, with supporting hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices, that such encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels (base flood elevation). Work within the floodplain and the land adjacent to the floodplain, including work to provide compensatory storage shall not be constructed in such a way so as to cause an increase in flood stage or flood velocity. 
5.1.12 Above-ground storage tanks. Above-ground storage tanks (oil, propane, etc.) which are located outside or inside of the structure must either be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE) on a concrete pad, or be securely anchored with tie-down straps to prevent flotation or lateral movement, have the top of the fill pipe extended above the BFE, and have a screw fill cap that does not allow for the infiltration of flood water. 
5.1.13 Portion of structure in flood zone. If any portion of a structure lies within the special flood hazard area (SFHA), the entire structure is considered to be in the SFHA. The entire structure must meet the construction requirements of the flood zone. The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive flood zone will require the entire structure to meet the standards of the more restrictive zone. 
5.1.14 Structures in two flood zones. If a structure lies within two or more flood zones, the construction standards of the most restrictive zone apply to the entire structure (i.e., V zone is more restrictive than A zone; structure must be built to the highest BFE). The structure includes any attached additions, garages, decks, sunrooms, or any other structure attached to the main structure. (Decks or porches that extend into a more restrictive zone will require the entire structure to meet the requirements of the more restrictive zone.) 
5.1.15 No structures entirely or partially over water. New construction, substantial improvements, and repair to structures that have sustained substantial damage cannot be constructed or located entirely or partially over water unless it is a functionally dependent use or facility. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 5, 7-1-13 ) 
 
5.2. - Standards for stream without established base flood elevations and/or flooding. 
The building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to section 6.4 of this ordinance, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A on the Community's FIRM meet the standards of section 5.3. 
5.2.1 In A zones where base flood elevations have been determined, but before a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted which will increase base flood elevations more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse when all anticipated development is considered cumulatively with the proposed development. 
5.2.2 Should data be required and/or provided, the City shall adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the floodway must be able to convey the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point along the watercourse. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 5, 7-1-13 )  
5.3. - Specific standards. 
5.3.1 Special flood hazard areas (A and AE). In all areas of special flood hazard A and AE where base flood elevation data has been provided, the following provisions shall apply in addition to all general standards contained in section 5.1: 
5.3.1.1 Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above to the base flood elevation. 
5.3.1.2 Non-residential construction. 
5.3.1.2.1 New construction or substantial improvement to any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure located in Zone A and AE shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
5.3.1.2.2 Non-residential structures located in all A zones may be floodproofed at least one foot above the base flood elevation in lieu of being elevated provided that together with all attendant utilities and sanitary facilities the areas of the structure below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the building inspector as set forth in 4.3.1.6. 
5.3.2 Fully enclosed areas below base flood elevation. New construction or substantial improvements of buildings that include fully-enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. An enclosed area below the base flood elevation that meets the design criteria specified below is not considered the lowest floor of the structure. The lowest floor must be elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. 
5.3.2.1 Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
5.3.2.1.1 Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
5.3.2.1.2 The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the slab elevation and set at or above the exterior ground elevation so as to permit free drainage away from the structuregrade; and 
5.3.2.1.3 Openings shall be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
5.3.2.2 Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation; and 
5.3.2.3 Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
5.3.3 Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris and potential projectiles and have erosion potential, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that proposed encroachments shall not result in any (0.00 feet) increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
5.3.4 Coastal high hazard areas (Zone VE). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.2 are areas designated as coastal high hazard area VE. Since these areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters, including hurricane wave wash, the following provisions shall apply: 
5.3.4.1 All new construction or substantial improvement shall be located 25 feet landward of the reach of the mean high tide Connecticut Coastal Jurisdiction Line as defined in Connecticut General Statutes 22a-359 as amended by Public Act 12-101; 
5.3.4.2 All new construction or substantial improvement shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest supporting structural horizontal member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood level, with all space below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water; 
5.3.4.3 All new construction or substantial improvement shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns; 
5.3.4.4 All pilings or columns and the attached structures shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. The anchoring and support system shall be designed with wind and water loading values which equal or exceed the 100 year mean recurrence interval (one percent annual chance floods and winds); 
5.3.4.5 A registered professional engineer or architect shall review and/or develop structural design specifications and plans for construction and shall certify that the design, specifications and methods of construction are in accord with acceptable standards of practice for meeting the provisions contained in sections 5.3.4.2—5.3.4.4 of this ordinance; 
5.3.4.6 There shall be no fill used as structural support. 
Non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering the building free from obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. 
The building inspector shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
5.3.4.6.1 Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; and 
5.3.4.6.2 Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
5.3.4.6.3 Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
5.3.4.7 There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage; 
5.3.4.8 Non-supporting breakaway walls, lattice work or mesh screening may be allowed below the base flood elevation provided it is not part of the structural support of the building and is designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is to be used and provided the following specific design specifications are met: 
5.3.4.8.1 Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall not be less than 10 nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or 
5.3.4.8.2 If more than 20 pounds per square foot, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design wall collapse would result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components during the base flood event. Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval). 
5.3.4.9 If breakaway walls, lattice work or screening are utilized, the resulting enclosed space shall not be designed to be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
5.3.4.10 Prior to construction, plans for any structures that will have breakaway walls, lattice work or screening must be submitted to the building inspector for approval. 
5.3.4.11 Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with breakaway walls, lattice work or screening as provided for in sections 5.3.4.08—5.3.4.09. 
5.3.4.12 Manufactured homes located in VE zone. All manufactured homes (including "mobile" homes and recreational vehicles placed on site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer) located within VE zones (including, but not limited to, manufactured homes located outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or on a site in an existing maufactured home park in which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood) to be newly placed, undergoing a substantial improvement or repaired as a result of sustained substantial damage, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member is at or above the base flood elevation (BFE). The manufactured home must also meet all the construction standards for VE zones as per section 5.3.4 coastal high hazard areas. All manufactured homes within VE zones shall be placed on a permanent foundation which itself is securely anchored and to which the structure is securely anchored so that it will resist flotation, lateral movement and hydrostatic pressures. Anchoring may include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. All manufactured homes within VE zones shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Adequate access and drainage should be provided. 
5.3.4.13 Recreational vehicles placed on sites within VE zones shall either be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet all the general standards of section 5.1 and the VE zone construction requirements of section 5.3.4, and the elevation and anchoring requirement of section 5.3.4.12. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 5, 7-1-13 )  
SECTION 6. - STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS 
In all special flood hazard areas the following requirements shall apply: 
6.1 All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
6.2 All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
6.3 All subdivision proposals shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
6.4 Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which are five acres or fifty lots, whichever occurs first, and are located in Zone A. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 6, 7-1-13 )  
SECTION 7. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
7.1 The New Haven City Plan Commission (hereafter Commission) as established by the City of New Haven shall hear and decide appeals and requests for flood damage prevention (FDP) variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
7.1.1 Applications for appeals shall be secured from and filed at the office of the commission, or its designee, with the required fee. 
7.1.2 Application fee for appeals. A filing for an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as specified in section 17-22 of the New Haven Code of Ordinances. 
7.1.3 Referral to building inspector. Following receipt of an Application for Appeal the commission may request an advisory report from the building inspector, who may return comments on the appeal to the commission with fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the Application for Appeal. Such comments shall be advisory only. 
7.1.4 Building code modification by state building inspector may be required. The grant of an FDP Variance by the Commission may not be a final action. If a modification of the provisions of the state building code is necessary, a separate application to the state for a code modification will be required. 
7.2 The commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement decision, or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
7.3 Any person aggrieved by the decision of the commission or any person owning land which abuts or is within a radius of one hundred (100) feet of the land in question may appeal within 15 days after such decision to the State Superior Court of the County of New Haven, as provided in Section 8-8 of the General Statutes. 
7.4 Specific situation variances 
7.4.1 Buildings on the historic register. FDP variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, except for section 7.5.3.1—7.5.3.4 and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical character. 
7.4.2 Pre-existing, small lot location. FDP variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size which is contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with section 7.5.3.1—7.5.3.4. 
7.4.3 Functionally-dependent uses. FDP variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage, creates no additional threat to public safety and meets the requirements of section 7.5.3.1—7.5.3.4. 
7.4.4 Floodway prohibition. FDP variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
7.5 Considerations for granting of FDP variances. 
7.5.1 In passing upon applications, the commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance; and 
7.5.1.1 The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
7.5.1.2 The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.5.1.3 The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
7.5.1.4 The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
7.5.1.5 The necessity of the facility of a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
7.5.1.6 The availability of alternative locations which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use; 
7.5.1.7 The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
7.5.1.8 The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
7.5.1.9 The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
7.5.1.10 The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
7.5.1.11 The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
7.5.2 Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of the ordinance, the commission may attach such conditions to the granting of FDP variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
7.5.3 Conditions for variances. 
7.5.3.1 FDP variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the FDP variance is the minimum necessary as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 
7.5.3.2 FDP variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
7.5.3.3 Any applicant to whom a FDP variance is granted shall be given a written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage. 
7.5.3.4 Records of all appeal actions shall be maintained and any FDP variances shall be reported to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 7, 7-1-13 )  
SECTION 8. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION 
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of an FDP variance, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100 per day, or imprisoned for not more than 60 days for each day of violation, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and reasonable legal fees involved in the case. Each day of violation shall be considered a new violation. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of New Haven from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 8, 7-1-13 )  
Title V - HOUSING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Housing Code is derived from an ordinance adopted July 12, 1954, approved July 14, 1954, and effective July 24, 1954, as amended by ordinances listed in the history note following each section. An ordinance adopted Nov. 16, 1992, approved Nov. 24, 1992, effective Dec. 3, 1992, amended the title in its entirety. In some cases, the text of a given paragraph was retained but the paragraph number was changed. In such cases, a note following the paragraph will give the former paragraph number. Completely new paragraphs will carry reference only to the 1992 ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Par. 100. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this title: 
(a)  Authority shall mean the authority appointed pursuant to paragraph 500 of this title. 
(b)  Basement shall mean a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. Where the contour of the ground level immediately adjacent to the building is interrupted by ditching, pits, or trenching, the average adjoining ground level shall be the nearest contour line parallel to the walls of the building without regard to the level created by ditching, pits, or trenching. 
(c)  Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having one-half or more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
(d)  Director of public health shall mean the legally designated health authority of the city, or his authorized representative. 
(e)  Dwelling shall mean any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter defined in subparagraph (y) of this paragraph shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
(f)  Dwelling unit shall mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
(g)  Enforcing officer shall mean the director of the office of building inspection and enforcement, except it shall mean the fire marshal with respect to any nuisance which constitutes a serious fire hazard, and it shall also mean director of public health with respect to the lead paint ordinance as amended (section 16-7 of the Code of Ordinances). The director of the office of building inspection and enforcement may deputize one (1) or more members of his office, as well as members of other city departments, who have a particular skill or competence, to act for him; and the term "enforcing officer" as used elsewhere in this title shall be deemed to include such deputies, but no order or other enforcement action shall be issued unless approved and signed or countersigned by the director or a member of his office so designated. 
(h)  Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, or other pests, by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the enforcing officer. 
(i)  Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
(j)  Good repair shall mean to keep structurally and mechanically sound, free from defects, and easily maintainable; the acceptability of which repairs shall be determined by the enforcing officer. 
(k)  Habitable room shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathroom, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, recreation rooms (but not including "living room"), private workshops or hobby rooms and storage spaces. 
(l)  Infestation shall mean the presence, within or around a dwelling, or any insects, rodents or other pests. 
(m)  Lead paint shall mean any pigmented, liquid substance applied to surfaces by brush, roller, or spray in which the total nonvolatile ingredients contain more than six-tenths of one (0.6) percent of lead, by weight, calculated as metallic lead. 
(n)  Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
(o)  Nuisance which is a serious threat to life, health or safety shall mean: 
(1)  Any condition which would constitute a public nuisance at common law; or 
(2)  Cooking and/or kitchen facilities, bathroom facilities, rubbish and/or garbage disposal facilities or means of egress, not maintained as required by subparagraphs (a), (b), (d) and/or (f), paragraph 301 of this title; or 
(3)  The absence of adequate ventilation for habitable rooms, light and ventilation for bathrooms, heating facilities or stairway and hall lighting, as required by subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and/or (f), paragraph 301 of this title; or 
(4)  Foundations, floors, walls, ceilings, roofs, windows, outside openings, stairs, porches, plumbing fixtures, bathroom floors, or facilities for the drainage and disposal of rainwater not maintained as required by subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and/or (f), paragraph 301 of this title; or 
(5)  Shared or common areas not kept in a clean and sanitary condition as required by paragraph 304 of this title; or 
(6)  Infestation by insects, rodents or other pests when it would be the responsibility of the owner to exterminate such insects, rodents, or pests pursuant to paragraph 309 of this title. 
(p)  Nuisance which constitutes a serious fire hazard shall mean any of the dangerous conditions described in paragraphs (a) through (g) of section 13-302 of chapter 13 (Fire Prevention Code) of the Code of Ordinances. 
(q)  Occupant shall mean the person, over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
(r)  Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
(s)  Owner shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally, with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this title and to the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or the same extent as if he were the owner. 
(t)  Persons shall mean and include any individual; firm, corporation, association, or partnership. 
(u)  Plumbing shall mean and include all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
(v)  Rooming house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing one (1) or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to four (4) or more persons. This term includes, but is not limited to, hotels, motels, group living residential occupancies and dwellings located in the city that house groups including fraternities and sororities that are not located on land owned by educational institutions. This term excludes hospitals, homes for the aged, community residences and health care facilities that are otherwise regulated by state law. 
(w)  Rooming unit shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
(x)  Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust. 
(y)  Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the owner-operator. 
(z)  Tenement house shall mean any house or building, or portion thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or is arranged or designed to be occupied, or is occupied, as the home or residence of three (3) or more families, living independently of each other, and doing or able to do their cooking upon the premises, and having a common right in the halls, stairways or yards. 
(aa)  Temporary housing shall mean tent, trailer, or similar structure which is used as human shelter for not more than thirty (30) consecutive days or more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year; provided that such tent, trailer, or similar structure complies with the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the City of New Haven. Nothing is herein intended to prohibit the use of a tent, trailer, or similar structure as a dwelling for more than thirty (30) consecutive days or more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year, if such tent, trailer, or similar structure complies with the provisions of this title and the statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the State of Connecticut or the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 1; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 2-3-64; Ord. of 6-6-66, § 1-5; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 1-3-77; Ord. of 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. II(A), 12-17-01)  
Par. 101. - Construction and interpretation of certain words. 
Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit," and "premises," are used in this title, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." Whenever the masculine pronoun is used, it shall also mean the feminine pronoun. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 1.21; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 102. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this title may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days; and each day's failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 11; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 103. - Effect of conflict between title, other provisions. 
In any case where a provision of this title is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, health or other ordinance or code of the city, the provisions which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 12.1; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 104. - Permit required for creation of dwelling, rooming unit in existing structure. 
No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be created within an existing structure or converted, remodeled or altered so as to create an additional dwelling unit or rooming unit unless the enforcement officer has issued a written permit certifying that the plans and specifications for such work indicate that the provisions of this title will be complied with. Said permit shall be issued without a fee and shall be prerequisite to the issuance of any permits for such work by the building department. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 14.1; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 105. - Effective date of provisions. 
The provisions of this title shall become effective thirty (30) days after enactment, except that the provisions relating to the bathtub or shower and running hot water in paragraph 300 and the provisions of paragraph 405 shall become effective on July 1, 1959, and the provisions of this ordinance shall take effect on July 1, 1975. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 15; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Editor's note— The term "this ordinance" near the end of this paragraph presumably refers to the 1975 ordinance given in the history note. The ordinance adopted Nov. 16, 1992, was effective Dec. 3, 1992.  
ARTICLE II. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Par. 200. - Inspection by enforcing officers; right of owners to enter premises to make repairs. 
The enforcing officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises located within this city in order that he may perform his duty of enforcing this Code and thereby safeguarding the health and safety and welfare of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the enforcing officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the enforcing officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Each occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs and/or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this title or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 2; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 201. - Issuance of orders by enforcing officer. 
Whenever the enforcing officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this title, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
(a)  Be in writing; 
(b)  Include a statement of the reason why it is being issued; 
(c)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(d)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about that dwelling affected by the order; or if he is served with such order by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state; 
(e)  Contain an outline of remedial action, which if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this title and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 3.2; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 6-6-66, § 6.7; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 204.  
Par. 202. - Order for the abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever the enforcing officer shall issue an order alleging the existence of a nuisance as defined in paragraph 100(p) and such order is not complied with, or not so far complied with as the enforcing officer may regard as reasonable, within the time therein designated, the order may be executed in whole or in part by the enforcing officer, his agents or contractors; or, as an alternative, if a tenement house is involved, the enforcing officer may pursue his remedies under the receivership provisions of this title. No order shall be executed or receivership initiated unless all mortgagees and lienors of record of the property where a nuisance exists shall have been served with a copy of the order at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to taking such action. If any such mortgagee or lienor cannot with due diligence be served personally within the City of New Haven, service may be had on such person by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the property where the nuisance exists, and by sending a copy thereof by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the mortgagee or lienor at the address set forth in the recorded mortgage or lien. 
(b)  The expenses and disbursements incurred by the enforcing officer in carrying out such orders shall initially be paid for from the housing repair fund hereinafter described in subparagraph (h) or any other appropriation or fund for such purpose. 
(c)  The city shall have a lien for such expenses as are incurred in the execution of an order, which lien shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances, except taxes and assessments, recorded previously to the existence of such lien. 
(d)  No such lien shall be valid for any purpose until the enforcing officer shall file with the city clerk, for recordation with deeds of land, a certificate subscribed and sworn to by the enforcing officer describing the premises, the owner of the premises, the amount claimed as a lien thereon, and the date of commencement of the activities undertaken in executing the order, and stating that the amount is justly due and that the expense has been incurred in pursuance of the order of the enforcing officer, giving the date of the order. Such certificate shall be filed at any time during the progress of the work required by such order or within four (4) months after the completion of the contract, or the final performance of the work, or the final furnishing of the materials, dating from the last item of work performed or materials furnished. 
(e)  Unless, within six (6) months after actual notice of such filing, proceedings to discharge such lien are taken by the party against whom or whose premises a lien is claimed, the filing shall, as to all persons having such actual notice, become conclusive evidence that the amount claimed in the notice of lien with interest is due and is a just lien upon the premises. 
(f)  When the enforcing officer shall have executed any order so far as it may require, the enforcing officer shall file among his records such order and an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the items of expense in general terms and the date of execution of such order. 
(g)  The expenses of executing an order, until the same are paid or discharged, shall be a lien and charge upon rent and compensation due or then maturing from any tenant or occupant of the dwelling and premises or part thereof to which any such order relates, or in respect of which any such expenses were incurred. Recovery or repayment of such expenses as are incurred in executing an order may be obtained by the enforcing officer by collecting rents directly from the tenants of the dwelling involved, or by a suit against the owner of the dwelling instituted and maintained in the name of the City of New Haven, or both. Any such recovery or repayment shall be deposited in the housing repair fund to be used for the purpose of the fund. 
(h)  A fund to be known as the housing repair fund is hereby created and established. Into such fund shall be deposited such monies as shall be appropriated or allotted by the board of aldermen and the board of finance or shall be realized from the sale of bonds issued pursuant to chapter 109 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, for that purpose, or such amounts as may from time to time be received as grants or grant-in-aid under any state or federal program, or such other monies as shall otherwise be made available to the fund. 
(Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 205.  
Par. 203. - Appeals—Procedure, conduct. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by any order which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provisions of this title may request and, upon payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) fee to the treasurer of the city, shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of appeals established under section 21B-7 of the Code of Ordinances; provided that such person, within twenty (20) days of the date of service of this order, shall file in the office of the enforcing officer a written petition containing a request for such hearing and setting forth a brief and concise statement of the error alleged to be contained in the order. The filing of such petition shall not automatically stay operation of the order. For good cause shown, the party filing the petition, within the time allowed for such filing, may make written request of the enforcing officer for a stay of operation of the order pending the hearing by the board of code appeals. Such request shall be ruled on by a committee comprised of the chairman of the board of code involved, and at least one (1) other member of the board of code appeals. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such petition, the enforcing officer shall notify said board to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner five (5) days' written notice thereof. 
(c)  At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such order shall be modified, extended or withdrawn or a variance granted. The petitioner shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to cross-examine and to call witnesses, and to introduce evidence in his own behalf. 
(d)  The hearing shall be commenced not later than sixty (60) days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that upon application of the petitioner, said board may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such sixty-day period if, in its judgment, the petitioner submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement; but in no event shall said hearing be postponed longer than sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 3.3; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 6-6-66, § 8-10; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 8; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 206.  
Par. 204. - Same—Board; authority; conditions for granting extensions; variances. 
Such hearing shall be had before the members of said board. Said board, by a majority vote of those present, may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice; it may also grant an extension or variance in accordance with the following conditions: 
(a)  Extension. The time for performance of any act required by the order may be extended for not more than eighteen (18) months subject to appropriate conditions and provided that the board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating to the following factors: 
(1)  That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any provisions of this title; and 
(2)  That such extension is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  Variances. A variance may be granted in a specific case and from a specific provision of this title subject to appropriate conditions and provided that the board makes specific findings of fact based on evidence relating to the following factors: 
(1)  That there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the provision; 
(2)  That the effect of the application of the provisions would be arbitrary in the specific case; 
(3)  That an extension would not constitute an appropriate remedy for these practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships and this arbitrary effect; and 
(4)  That such variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title in securing the public health, safety and general welfare. 
If any order is withdrawn by the board, the ten dollar ($10.00) fee shall be returned to the petitioner. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 3.4; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 6-6-66, § 11; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 9; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 207.  
Par. 205. - Same—Effect of sustaining notice of permit suspension; time for filing petition for hearing on permit suspensions. 
After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this title, when such notice has been sustained by the board, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by an order shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the enforcing officer within twenty (20) days after such notice is served. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 3.6; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 10; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 208.  
Par. 206. - Same—Record of proceedings required; right of judicial appeal. 
The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decision of the board of appeals, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the enforcing officer and open to reasonable public inspection. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. A person aggrieved by the decision of the enforcing officer or the board of code appeals may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 3.7; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 6-6-66, § 13; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 11; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 209. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of superior court over appeals from municipal boards, commissions and officers, § 52-7, Conn. Gen. Stat. (Rev. 1958).  
Par. 207. - Application of placarding and condemnation provisions. 
The provisions of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the requirements of paragraphs 208 through 212. 
(Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 210.  
Par. 208. - Condemnation of unfit dwellings—Defects warranting. 
Any dwellings or dwelling units which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the enforcing officer: 
(a)  One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(b)  One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public as prescribed by the provisions of this title. 
(c)  One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 10.1; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 211.  
Par. 209. - Same—Occupants required to vacate. 
Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and placarded by the enforcing officer shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the enforcing officer. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 10.2; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 212.  
Par. 210. - Same—Removal of placard prohibited. 
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in paragraph 209. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 10.4; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 213.  
Par. 211. - Same—Reoccupation, removal of placard when defects corrected. 
No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the enforcing officer. The enforcing officer shall remove such placard whenever the defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based has been eliminated. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 10.3; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 214.  
Par. 212. - Same—Hearing authorized. 
Any person affected by any order relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request in writing and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of code appeals under the procedure provided by paragraphs 203 through 209. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 10.5; Ord. of 1-1-71; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 12; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 215.  
Par. 213. - Study, designation of substandard areas by city plan commission. 
The city plan commission shall study from time to time the quality of housing within the city and shall certify to the enforcing officer those areas in which substandard housing exists or in which there is an imminent danger of existing housing becoming substandard. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this title the city plan commission shall certify to the enforcing officer the first of said priority areas. The city plan commission shall certify additional priority areas from time to time upon written request from the enforcing officer and within thirty (30) days of the receipt of said request. The city plan commission shall have the power to change, alter, or modify the designation of said priority areas. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, §§ 13.1, 13.3; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 216.  
Par. 214. - Enforcing officer to give authority to substandard areas. 
In the program of enforcement of this title, the enforcing officer shall give priority to those areas which have been certified to him by the city plan commission as directed in paragraph 213; provided, however, that the enforcing officer shall not be limited to such areas in the program of enforcement. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, §§ 13.1, 13.3; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
Note— Formerly, ¶ 217.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR DWELLINGS 
 
Par. 300. - Basic facilities for dwelling units. 
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Cooking facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain space for the storage, preparation and cooking of food which shall include space for a stove and other cooking facilities, space for refrigerated food storage, a kitchen sink installed (which sink shall be in good working condition and properly connected to hot and cold running water system under pressure and sewer systems, which sink and systems shall be installed and maintained in a manner prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the city), and cabinets and/or shelves for dry food storage which shall be adequate for the permissible occupancy of the dwelling unit, the surfaces of which shall be maintained in good repair. 
(b)  Bathroom facilities. Every dwelling unit, except as otherwise permitted under subparagraph (c) of this paragraph, shall be equipped with a complete bathroom fixture group consisting of a flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower in good working condition and installed and maintained in a manner prescribed by ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Said fixture group shall be properly connected to and approved sewer system and to an approved hot and cold water running water system under pressure, except that the flush water closet shall be connected to an approved sewer system and to an approved cold running water system under pressure. The flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower shall be installed in the same room, which shall afford privacy to a person within said room. 
(c)  Sharing of bathroom facilities. The occupants of not more than two (2) dwelling units may share a single flush water closet and/or a single lavatory basin and/or a single bathtub or shower if: 
(1)  The dwelling units, were created on or before September 30, 1954; 
(2)  Neither of the two (2) dwelling units contains more than two (2) rooms, provided that, for the purposes of this provision, a kitchenette or an efficiency kitchen with not more than sixty (60) square feet of floor area shall not be counted as a room; 
(3)  The habitable area of each of such dwelling units shall equal not more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area; 
(4)  Such water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower shall be in good working condition, installed and maintained, and properly connected as required in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph; 
(5)  Such shared facility or facilities are located within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities or facilities; and that 
(6)  Such shared facility or facilities are contained within a room or rooms which afford privacy to a person within said room or rooms. 
(d)  Rubbish and garbage disposal. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage facilities and with adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers whose type and location are approved by the enforcing officer. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the occupants to furnish such facilities or containers. 
(e)  Water-heating facilities. The water-heating facilities necessary to provide the hot water required under subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this paragraph and paragraphs 405 and 412 shall be properly installed and connected to hot water lines required under those sections, shall be maintained in safe and good working condition, and shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees (120) Fahrenheit. Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit heating facilities required under the provisions of paragraph 400 and subparagraph (e) of paragraph 301 are not in operation. 
(f)  Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open spaces at ground level as required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 4; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 301. - Light, heat, ventilation facilities; owner or lessor must furnish in living premises. 
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Windows, skylights for lighting habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate glass area of windows for habitable rooms shall be not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the room served by them and not less than ten (10) square feet. Whenever walls or other partitions of structures face a window of any habitable room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of such room, the minimum aggregate glass area of such skylight shall be not less than three-twentieths of the total floor area of such room. 
(b)  Ventilation of habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of the openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum aggregate glass area of the window or skylight-type window as required in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the enforcing officer. 
(c)  Light ventilation for bathrooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph except where the bathroom or water closet compartment is adequately ventilated by a ventilation system which is kept in continuous or automatic operation. 
(d)  Electrical fixtures. Every dwelling unit and all public and common areas shall be supplied with electric service, outlets, and fixtures which shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. The capacity of such services and the number of outlets and fixtures shall be as follows: 
(1)  Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) duplex convenience outlet for every twelve (12) lineal feet of usable wall space, and every bathroom shall contain at least one (1) electrical convenience outlet. 
(2)  Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, public hall, and exterior stairway shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. 
(e)  Heating facilities. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be supplied with heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of adequately heating all rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments located therein to a temperature of at least sixty-five (65) degrees Fahrenheit at a distance of three (3) feet above floor level when outside temperature is ten (10) degrees Fahrenheit. Either central or space heating facilities may be used but must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Central heating, central hot water facilities. Every heating unit and/or central hot water heating unit shall: 
(A)  Have every heat duct, steam pipe and/or hot water pipe free of leaks and functioning properly to provide an adequate amount of heat and/or hot water to the intended place of delivery; 
(B)  Be provided with seals between sections of hot air furnaces to prevent the escape of noxious gases into heat ducts; 
(C)  If employing electricity, be connected to an electric circuit of adequate capacity in an approved manner; and 
(D)  Be provided with automatic or safety devices and be installed and operated in the manner required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the city. 
(2)  Space heating, unit hot water facilities. Every space heating unit and/or unit hot water facility shall: 
(A)  Not use gasoline as a fuel; 
(B)  Not be of the portable type if using solid, liquid, or gaseous fuel; 
(C)  If employing a flame, be connected to a flue or vent in the manner required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the city; 
(D)  If employing solid or liquid fuels, have a fire-resistant panel beneath it; 
(E)  Be located at least two (2) feet away from any wall or be equipped with insulation sufficient to prevent the overheating of any wall in a manner prescribed by the current standards of the American Standards Association and the National Fire Protection Association; 
(F)  If employing gaseous fuel, be equipped with other than rubber tube connector; 
(G)  If employing electricity, be connected to an electric circuit of adequate capacity in an approved manner; 
(H)  Be installed and operated in the manner required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and the city. The standards of the New Haven Plumbing Code are those of the American Standards Association and the National Fire Protection Association. 
(3)  Oil-burning and other liquid fuel-burning space heaters prohibited after October 1, 1963; exception. Effective October 1, 1963, it shall be unlawful to use or maintain in any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit any oil-burning or other liquid fuel-burning space heater with the exception of existing kitchen ranges which are used for heating and/or cooking until July 1, 1967 [see § 13-828]. 
(f)  Stairway, hall lighting. Every common hallway and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted with lighting facilities sufficient to provide at least three (3) footcandles of light at the floor or stair tread level at all times. Every common hallway and interior stairway and exterior stairway and stairways in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four (4) dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. 
(g)  Screening. During that portion of each year when the enforcing officer deems it necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation shall likewise be supplied with screens; provided that such screens shall not be required during such period in rooms deemed by the enforcing officer to be located high enough in the upper stories of buildings as to be free from such insects, and in rooms located in areas of this city which are deemed by the enforcing officer to have so few insects as to render screens unnecessary. 
(h)  Screens to basement openings. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 5; Ord. of 7-2-62, §§ 6, 7; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 6-7-65; Ord. of 10-27-66; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92) 
State Law reference— State requirements as to heat and hot water in dwellings, § 19-65, Conn. Gen. Stat. (Rev. 1958).  
Par. 302. - Maintenance requirements imposed on owner or lessor of living premises. 
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Foundations, floors, walls, ceilings, roofs. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably weather-tight, water-tight, and rodent-proof; shall be capable of affording privacy; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(b)  Windows, outside openings. Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weather-tight, water-tight, and rodent-proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(c)  Stairs, porches. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance thereto shall be maintained and kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(d)  Plumbing fixtures. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions. 
(e)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every water closet compartment floor surface, bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(f)  Drainage, disposal of rainwater. All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to cause dampness in the walls, ceilings or floors of any habitable room, or of any bathroom or water closet compartment. 
(g)  Exterior wood surfaces. All exterior wood surfaces shall be adequately protected from water seepage and against decay and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(h)  Paint. All walls, ceilings, interior woodwork, doors and windows shall be kept free of flaking, peeling or loose paint, shall be repainted or otherwise resurfaced as needed, and shall be maintained in good repair. No person shall apply lead paint to the interior or exterior surfaces of any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit, rooming unit or facility nor on or around the common areas thereof. 
(i)  Installation and maintenance of required facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this title shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(j)  Occupancy. No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy. 
(k)  Interior door. Every interior door shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(l)  House/apartment numbering. Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for affixing and maintaining house numbers and/or apartment numbers as required under section 9-4 of the Code of the City of New Haven. 
(m)  Maintenance of accessory structures. All accessory structures, including garages, sheds and fences, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 6; Ord. of 4-11-68, § 2; Ord. of 6-3-74, § B-2; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 303. - Space, use, location requirements imposed on occupants and lessors. 
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Total floor area per occupant. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area for the first occupant thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area for every additional occupant thereof, the floor areas to be calculated on the basis of total usable floor area of habitable rooms. 
(b)  Floor area of sleeping rooms. In very dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of usable floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) additional square feet of usable floor area for each additional occupant thereof. 
(c)  Relationship between ceiling height and floor area. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet. The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five (5) feet or where the room width is less than seven (7) feet shall not be considered in computing the usable floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(d)  Use of cellar space as habitable room. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit without written permission from the enforcing officer and the building inspector. 
(e)  Use of basement space as habitable room. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless, in addition to other provisions of this title: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and insulated against dampness; and 
(2)  The minimum aggregate glass area of windows as required under subparagraph (a) of paragraph 301 is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 7; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 304. - Responsibility of owner to maintain common areas in multiple dwellings and to provide emergency maintenance information to each tenant and to the enforcing officer, upon request. 
(a)  In addition to duties specified elsewhere in this title, every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof; and 
(b)  Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall have posted on the premises in a conspicuous location, or shall provide each tenant in writing, the name of a person to call in an emergency or the landlord's and/or managing agent's home telephone number. Said posting or written notice to each tenant shall continually be kept current. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, §§ 8.0, 8.1; Ord. of 4-7-75; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 305. - Duty of occupant to keep premises clean, sanitary. 
In addition to duties specified elsewhere in this title, every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies and controls. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 8.2; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 306. - Duty of occupant to dispose of rubbish, garbage. 
In addition to duties specified elsewhere in this title, every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in rubbish containers required by subparagraph (d) of paragraph 300 of this title, and shall dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might be food for rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by said subparagraph. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, §§ 8.0, 8.3, 8.4; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 307. - Duty of occupant to hang screens. 
In addition to duties specified elsewhere in this title, every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all screens except where the owner has agreed to supply such service. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, §§ 8.0, 8.5; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 308. - Duty of occupant to maintain, care for plumbing fixtures. 
In addition to duties specified elsewhere in this title, every occupant of a dwelling shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 8.7; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 309. - Duties of occupant, owner to exterminate pests. 
In addition to duties specified elsewhere in this title, every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only dwelling unit within the dwelling that is infested. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists, in two (2) or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or common parts of any dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, §§ 8.0, 8.6; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 310. - No required facilities to be removed, discontinued. 
No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this title to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the enforcing officer. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 6.10; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 311. - Control of vegetation and bare dirt patches. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises in the city to allow grass to grow more than one (1) foot in height, unless such grass is the be harvested as hay, or to allow any weeds of similar growth to grow more than one (1) foot in height, or for front yards to be allowed to deteriorate into unattended bare dirt patches. 
(Ord. of 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1224, 12-21-98)  
ARTICLE IV. - ROOMING HOUSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Sanitary requirements for lodging houses, § 19-343 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958); overcrowding of lodging houses, requirements as to water, toilets, ventilation, § 19-346 Conn. Gen. Stats. (Rev. 1958). 
 
Par. 400. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following meanings apply: 
(a)  Rooming house has the meaning stated in paragraph 100(v) of this title. 
(b)  Rooming unit has the meaning stated in paragraph 100(w) of this title. 
(c)  Group living residential occupancy means a residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people whose size is larger than the average household size, and with an average length of stay of thirty days or longer. Such structures generally have a common eating area for residents, who may or may not may receive any combination of care, training or treatment while they reside at the site. 
(d)  Community residence means a facility that houses its staff and eight (8) or fewer mentally ill adults, licensed by the State of Connecticut Commissioner of Health Services, which provides supervised, structured group activities and psychosocial rehabilitation and other support services to mentally ill adults discharged from a state-operated or licensed facility or referred by a licensed physician specializing in psychiatry or a licensed psychologist. 
(e)  Operator has the meaning stated in paragraph 100(r) of this title. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.0; Ord. of 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. II(B), 12-17-01)  
Par. 401. - Issuance of rooming house permits. 
Issuance of rooming house permits shall conform to the following: 
(a)  Permit and license issuer. The permit and license issuer, hereinafter cited as "the issuer", is a city official who has been appointed to administer the city's permitting and licensing processes. The purposes of such appointment are to increase the efficiency of those processes and to make it easier for persons to apply for permits and licenses issued by the city. The centralization of these activities under the issuer does not relieve the police chief, fire marshal, building official, health inspector, or any other city official of any obligation imposed by federal, state or local law upon such official to review and/or approve permits or licenses of any specific class. Likewise, the issuer is not authorized to issue a license or permit that lacks such required approval. 
(b)  Controller to delegate licensing forms to issuer. Unless otherwise provided, the controller shall designate the issuer as the official who shall provide suitable records, forms, blanks and applications for every license required by this article. 
(c)  Permit required. No person may operate a rooming house, or occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with the provisions of every paragraph of this title except the provisions of paragraphs 300 and 304 through 309. 
(d)  Application. In order to obtain a permit under this article, an interested person must file an application with the issuer on the prescribed form, and provide all of the following information: 
(1)  Name, residence address and telephone number, business address and telephone number, sex, social security number, birth date and age of the applicant. 
(2)  The application date. 
(3)  Name and address of the principal. 
(4)  If applying as a partnership, corporation, or other entity: name, address, telephone number and employer identification number of such entity, application date, and the name, residence address and telephone number, business address and telephone number, sex, social security number, birth date and age of each partner or officer. 
(5)  Nature of business and activities. 
(6)  Name, residence address and telephone number, business address and telephone number, sex, social security number, birth date and age of all owners of the dwelling that is the site of the proposed rooming house, and the address of the dwelling that is the site of the proposed rooming house. 
(e)  Disqualification of applicant. An applicant will not be issued a permit if the police chief or his designee determines that the applicant is not a suitable person. This determination will be made on a case-by-case basis, depending upon factors that include, but are not limited to, one (1) or more of the factors listed below. The issuer has the discretion to request a background check, which will be performed on an as-needed basis. 
(1)  The criminal history of the applicant, specifically the factors listed in section 17-1.4(a); 
(2)  The applicant was denied a license or permit under this title within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the appropriate city authority that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist. 
(3)  The applicant had a similar license or permit previously revoked by any lawful authority for just cause not otherwise inconsistent with this ordinance. 
(4)  The applicant has named a person who has been found unsuitable under the criteria in subsection (1) as having the active management or operation of building or portion thereof. 
(5)  Other just cause not otherwise inconsistent with this section. 
(f)  Conditions. 
(1)  Before a permit may be issued under this article, the issuer shall investigate whether the use is a legal occupancy, and whether the dwelling in question is located within a zoning district that will lawfully tolerate such use. Thereafter, a housing code inspector and fire code official shall determine whether the dwelling complies with fire and housing code regulations. These investigations shall be conducted within a reasonable time from the filing date of the application. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued unless and until the inspections demonstrate that there is compliance with all relevant laws and regulations. 
(g)  Effect on neighborhood. Before the issuer may issue a permit, the police chief or his designee will investigate the neighborhood where the licensed or permitted activity is to be conducted to ensure that it will not have a negative impact on accepted community standards concerning public health, safety or welfare. 
(h)  Issuance. 
(1)  Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee prescribed by section 17-20.21 of the Code of General Ordinances of the City of New Haven, the issuer shall issue a permit to the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article and this Code. 
(2)  The issuer shall issue a permit in the name of the applicant only, and designate the place where such business is to be carried on. 
(3)  The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all times. 
(4)  If an applicant does not acquire a permit after paying the appropriate permit fee, the city shall deduct from any refund all administrative costs associated with the processing of such permit application. 
(i)  Records kept by the city. The city shall maintain a record of every permit issued, including its number, dates of issuance and expiration, the name of the licensee or permittee, the purpose for which it was issued, and any special conditions pertaining to it. 
(j)  Permits not to excuse violation of law or extend liability to city. No permit shall authorize or excuse any breach of law, or any trespass upon the rights of others. The city shall not be held liable for any damage that may be committed or caused under color thereof. 
(k)  Term. 
(1)  Each permit issued under this chapter shall be issued for one (1) year from its date of issuance. 
(2)  The renewal of a rooming house permit shall be contingent upon a satisfactory annual inspection of such dwelling by the appropriate city authorities. 
(3)  A person wishing to renew a permit shall apply for its renewal prior to its expiration date, allowing due time for the issuer and city agencies to perform their duties with respect to such application. 
(l)  Regulations. 
(1)  All those issued a permit under this article shall comply with all laws and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of this Code. In addition, each permittee shall keep a register, card file or other suitable record-keeping system in which he shall list in English the names of all persons residing from time to time in the rooming house. 
(2)  The police chief or his designee and an insurance authority's designee shall at all times have the right of inspection of all such records kept in compliance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  No permit may be transferred to a different person, location, purpose or use. 
(4)  Each permittee must notify the issuer in writing in advance of any change in the information that was part of the approved permit application, any change in ownership or interest or control of the permitted activity or premises, or closure or discontinuance of the permitted business, premises or activity. 
(5)  If issuance of a permit by the issuer was conditional upon the acquisition or retention of some other license, permit, certification or approval, then the permittee must notify the issuer immediately of the expiration, suspension, cancellation or revocation of such license, permit, certification or approval. 
(m)  Suspension, cancellation or revocation. 
(1)  The issuer, or other appropriate authority, may suspend, cancel or revoke a permit after it has been issued for any of the following reasons: 
(i)  The same was procured by fraud or false representation of facts. 
(ii)  A breach of the terms or conditions of the license. 
(iii)  The applicant or permittee has failed to comply with the provisions and requirements of any lawful rule or regulation. 
(iv)  Any other reason for which, in the opinion of the issuer or his designee, continued operation of the rooming house would jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  The police chief and his designee shall have the power to suspend, cancel or revoke the permits issued under this chapter for just cause. 
(3)  The issuer shall mail written notice of any suspension, cancellation or revocation to the permittee and make a record thereof. Such action shall take effect when the permittee receives such notice. Any act done thereafter under color of such permit shall subject the person so acting to the same penalty as if he had done such act without such permit unless the issuer's action shall be disapproved as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.1; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 13; Ord. of 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1304, Pt. 2 (b), 12-17-01; Ord. No. 1673, 4-2-12 )  
Par. 402. - Hearings on denial of rooming house permit. 
Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house has been denied may request in writing and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of code appeals under the procedure provided by paragraphs 203 through 209 for the hearing of petitions relating to notices. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.2; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 14; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 403. - Inspection of rooming houses, suspension of permits. 
Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house the enforcing officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this title, the enforcing officer shall give notice in writing to the operator of such rooming house that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the enforcing officer, the operator's rooming house permit will be suspended. At the end of such period the director of the building office shall reinspect such rooming house, and if he finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such rooming house, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.3; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 404. - Hearings on permit suspensions; notice of prospective suspension. 
Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been suspended, or who has received notice from the enforcing officer that this permit is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his rooming house are corrected, may request in writing and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board of code appeals under the procedure provided by paragraphs 203 and 212; provided that, if no petition for such hearing is filed within twenty (20) days following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.4; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 15; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 405. - Required bathroom facilities. 
At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the enforcing officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said facilities; provided that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half of the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be located within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (e) of paragraph 300. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the enforcing officer. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57; § 9.5; Ord. of 9-10-62; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 406. - Bed linen, towels supplied by operator. 
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplies, bed linen and towels therein at least once a week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.6; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 407. - Floor area of sleeping quarters. 
Every room in a rooming house occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) person shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of usable floor area as defined in subparagraph (c) of paragraph 303, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of usable floor area as so defined for each additional occupant thereof.  
Par. 408. - Means of egress. 
Every rooming unit in a rooming house shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level as required by the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the State of Connecticut and this city. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.8; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 409. - Responsibility of operator for sanitation. 
The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.9; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 410. - Applicability of rooming house provisions to hotels. 
Every provision of this title which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to hotels, except as provided in paragraph 411 and except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful regulation of any state board or agency. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.10; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 411. - Preparation, eating of meals in rooming houses. 
No meals may be prepared or eaten in a rooming house, other than in a dwelling unit contained therein, unless such meals are prepared and eaten in communal kitchens and dining rooms conforming to the standards of paragraphs 412 and 413; except that this paragraph shall not apply to the eating of meals in establishments which hold valid restaurant licenses issued by the New Haven health department and which have the rooming house and restaurant operations integrated as a single business enterprise. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.11; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 412. - Standards for communal kitchens. 
A communal kitchen shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Floor space. It shall contain at least sixty (60) square feet of floor area in every case and at least one hundred (100) square feet if meals are both prepared and eaten therein. 
(b)  Dining facilities. If occupants are permitted to eat meals therein, it shall be supplied with one (1) dining chair and two (2) lineal feet of dining table space, in addition to the surface area for food preparation required under subparagraph (f) below, for each occupant of the rooming house permitted to eat in the kitchen, the surface of each dining table to be smooth and easily cleanable. 
(c)  Sink, water supply. It shall contain at least one (1) supplied kitchen sink of an approved type which shall be supplied with hot water at all times in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (e) of paragraph 300. 
(d)  Stove. It shall contain at least one (1) supplied kitchen gas stove or electric stove, every such stove to have at least two (2) top burners and an oven. 
(e)  Refrigerator. It shall contain one (1) supplied electric or gas refrigerator with an adequate food storage capacity. 
(f)  Surface for food preparation. It shall contain one (1) or more supplied tables or other facilities having a total surface area for food preparation of not less than six (6) square feet, the surface of each table or other facility to be suitable for the preparation of food, smooth and easily cleanable. 
(g)  Storage. It shall contain at least one (1) supplied cabinet of adequate size for and suitable for storage of food and eating and cooking utensils. 
(h)  Rubbish, garbage disposal. It shall be supplied by the operator with the rubbish storage facilities and the garbage disposal or storage facilities specified by subparagraph (d) of paragraph 300. 
(i)  Location, accessibility. It shall be located within a room accessible to the occupant of each rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchen without going outside of the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.12; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 413. - Communal dining rooms. 
When a communal kitchen does not conform to the provisions of paragraph 412 relating to the eating of meals therein, meals shall be eaten in a communal dining room that complies with the following standards: 
(a)  Floor area. It shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area. 
(b)  Chairs and tables. It shall be supplied with one (1) dining chair and two (2) lineal feet of dining table space for each occupant of the rooming house permitted to eat in the dining room, the surface of each dining table to be smooth and easily cleanable. 
(c)  Location. It shall be located on the same floor of the rooming house as the communal kitchen in which the meals are prepared and shall be as nearly adjacent to the communal kitchen as is practicable, and it shall be located within a room accessible to the occupant of each rooming unit sharing such dining room without going outside of the dwelling and without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.13; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 414. - Posting of "no cooking" signs in rooming units. 
The operator of any rooming house shall post in every rooming unit a sign on which shall be written or printed in letters not less than three-eighths inch in height the following words: "No Cooking Permitted in This Room"; and such sign shall remain so posted at all times the room is occupied. 
(Ord. of 7-1-57, § 9.14; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
ARTICLE V. - THE ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES IN TENEMENT HOUSES 
 
Par. 500. - State statute adopted; authority appointed. 
The provisions of Public Act No. 554 (1965) are hereby adopted; and the secretary of the code enforcement committee, appointed pursuant to paragraph 203 of this title, is hereby appointed the authority for the enforcement of said act, in accordance with the provisions of section 1 thereof. The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint the development administrator his delegate for the purpose of serving as receiver in accordance with the provisions of said act. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66, § 14; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 501. - Application to the court of common pleas. 
Whenever a nuisance which constitutes a serious fire hazard or is a serious threat to life, health or safety has been found to exist in a tenement house, and an order for the abatement of such nuisance has been properly made and served and has not been complied with, or not so far complied with as the appropriate authority finds reasonable, within the time allowed, then the authority may apply to the court of common pleas, pursuant to section 19-347b of the General Statutes, for a rule requiring the owners or any mortgagees or lienors of record to show cause why the court should not appoint a receiver of the rents, issues and profits of such tenement house and why said receiver should not remove or remedy such nuisance and, to secure payment of all costs of the receiver in removing or remedying such condition, including funds paid over to the receiver from the tenement house operating fund as provided herein, obtain a lien in favor of the City of New Haven having a priority over all existing mortgages or liens. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66, § 14; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 502. - Same—Contents of application. 
The application made to the superior court [court of common pleas] shall be verified and shall include: 
(a)  Proof by affidavit that an order of the proper authority has been issued and served on the owner, mortgagees and lienors of records; 
(b)  A statement that a nuisance which constitutes a serious fire hazard or is a serious threat to life, health or safety continued to exist in such property after the time fixed for the removal thereof in such order and a description of the property and the conditions constitute such nuisance; 
(c)  A brief description of the nature of the work required to remove or remedy the nuisance and an estimate as to the cost thereof; 
(d)  A copy of the written finding of fact prepared by the code enforcement committee pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 203 of this title, or of an order issued under the provisions of section 19-344 of the General Statutes. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66; § 14; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 503. - Same—Evidence of imminent damage. 
If the condition constituting the nuisance is such that, unless it is immediately cured, irreparable damage may be caused to the property, or if it constitutes an imminent danger to its occupants or the occupants of adjoining properties, the authority shall apply to the court of competent jurisdiction to make the rule to show cause returnable in less than five (5) days, in accordance with the provisions of section 19-347b or the General Statutes. In such case, the authority shall include with such application proof of affidavit, executed by the director of health, the fire marshal, the police chief, the building inspector, the chief electrical inspector, the director of the bureau of environmental sanitation, or the director of the office of building inspection and enforcement, that in his expert opinion such danger or imminent danger to property or persons exist. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66, § 14; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 7-6-81, § 16; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 504. - Same—Conduct and termination of receivership. 
Following compliance with the procedures set forth in section 19-347b of the General Statutes, and upon appointment of a receiver by the court of common pleas pursuant to said section 19-347b, the receiver shall furnish a bond, with sufficient surety, in an amount to be determined by the court, and provide sufficient evidence to the court that he has obtained liability insurance in an amount to be set by the court, but at least in an amount, for a single injury, equal to one hundred (100) percent of the appraisal value of the property, disregarding encumbrances. Once the receiver has furnished the bond required by the court and provided sufficient evidence of insurance, the receiver with all reasonable speed shall remove the delinquent matters and deficiencies in the property constituting a serious fire hazard or a serious threat to life, health or safety, and during the term of the receivership shall repair and maintain the property in a safe and healthful condition and shall exercise all power and authority granted by the receiver by section 19-347c of the General Statutes, and upon completion shall apply to be discharged pursuant to section 19-347f of the General Statutes. The receiver, during the term of receivership, shall be liable for injuries to persons and property by reason of the condition of the property for which he is receiver in a case where an owner would have been liable, but the receiver shall be liable only to the extent that he is insured against such liability or to the extent that he would have been insured against such liability had he purchased and maintained the insurance required by this paragraph. The receiver shall not be liable for such injury in his personal capacity or out of the assets in his hands as receiver, except as provided above. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66, § 14; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 505. - Tenement house operating fund created; custody, records. 
A fund to be known as the tenement house operating fund is hereby created and established. Into such fund shall be deposited such monies as shall be appropriated by the board of aldermen or be realized from the sale of bonds issued pursuant to chapter 109 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended, for that purpose, or as shall be otherwise made available to the fund. Such fund shall be in the custody of the treasurer of the City of New Haven, and the books and accounts of such funds shall be kept by the controller of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66, § 14; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 506. - Collection of rents; additional costs; application to board of code appeals. 
The receiver shall collect the accrued and accruing rents, issues and profits of the tenement house in which the nuisance exists and apply the same in the order of preference specified in paragraph 508 hereof. If the income of the property is sufficient to cover the cost of remedying or removing such nuisance, the receiver shall apply for additional funds to the board of code appeals which shall review such requests and authorize disbursements from the tenement house operating fund to be made to the receiver as the board in its sole discretion deems necessary and proper under the circumstances. 
(Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 507. - Enforcement of receiver's lien. 
After the court has appointed a receiver of the rents of any property under the provisions of this article and section 19-347b of the General Statutes and funds have been advanced to the receiver from the tenement house operating and to allow him to remedy or remove a nuisance as provided herein, the City of New Haven, in accordance with section 19-347b-a and 19-347c of said General Statutes to secure payment of such funds, shall have a lien against the property having priority with respect to all existing mortgages or liens. 
(Ord. of 6-6-66, § 14; Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 1-11-71; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 508. - Expenditures and application of funds. 
All rents, issues and profits collected or received by the receiver shall be expended or applied in the following order of priority: 
(1)  To pay the cost of removing or remedying the nuisance which was the subject to the rule to show cause; 
(2)  To pay the expenses of the receiver and such reasonable fee or fees as he may be awarded by the court; 
(3)  To pay the cost of repairing and maintaining the property in a safe and healthful condition and to pay the expenses reasonably necessary for the proper operation and management of the property, including the fees of the managing agent, if any; insurance premiums; and unpaid taxes, assessments, water and sewer rates, and penalties and interest properly imposed thereon; 
(4)  To reimburse the tenement house operating fund for such monies as may have been received from it as provided herein. 
Excess funds, if any, held by the receiver, shall be paid over, in the order of entitlement, to mortgagees or other lienors whose mortgages or liens have been properly recorded in the land records of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
Par. 509. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable; and if any provision of this article or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of the article or the application of such provision to any persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 8-5-68; Ord. of 11-16-92)  
ARTICLE VI. - SMOKE DETECTORS AND CARBON MONOXIDE MONITORS  
DIVISION 1. - SMOKE DETECTORS 
 
Par. 600. - Definition(s) 
For the purposes of this division, the following term(s) shall have the following meaning(s): 
Smoke detector means a device which detects particles or products of combustion other than heat. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 601. - Smoke detectors; required. 
Smoke detectors shall be installed in all dwelling units and common areas where applicable, (as required by this Code, the Connecticut State Building Code ("SBC") or Connecticut State Fire Code ("SFC"), which may include the basement, interior stairwells, hallways and storage attics. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 602. - Smoke detectors; type and installation. 
(a)  All smoke detectors must be approved by a nationally recognized standards testing laboratory, and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, as well as conform to local, state and federal laws and regulations, including this Code, the SBC and the SFC. 
(b)  Each installed smoke detector shall be battery-operated or hard-wired, (as required by this Code, the SBC and the SFC), capable of sensing visible or invisible particles of combustion, and provide a suitable audible alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 603. - Smoke detectors maintenance; property owners, tenants. 
(a)  All owners, and agents in charge, if any, of residential rental property shall be responsible for the proper installation of smoke detectors. 
(b)  Tenants of residential rental units shall periodically test the smoke detectors installed therein, and replace spent, defective or missing batteries to ensure their continued safety. 
(c)  The owner will be liable to replace detectors that malfunction due to reasons other than fault on the part of the tenant(s). Otherwise, the tenant will be charged with replacement cost. 
(d)  No person may remove or render a smoke detector inoperative except for its periodic maintenance, or to conduct maintenance or repair to the dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 604. - Regulations; building official, fire marshal. 
The building official and the fire marshal shall have the authority to issue rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this division for its implementation and administration. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 605. - Conflict with other standards. 
If a provision of this division is found to conflict with any provision of the state building code or the state fire code, the provisions of said codes shall be deemed to prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
DIVISION 2. - CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS 
 
Par. 606. - Definition(s) 
For the purposes of this division, the following term(s) shall have the following meaning(s): 
(a)  Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless, poisonous gas, which is produced by the incomplete burning of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. 
(b)  Fossil fuel shall include coal, natural gas, kerosene, oil, propane and wood. 
(c)  Sleeping area means the area of the dwelling unit in which the bedrooms or sleeping rooms are located. Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by another use area such as a kitchen or living room are separate "sleeping areas." 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 607. - Carbon monoxide detectors; required. 
(a)  Unless otherwise exempted, carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in all dwelling units and common areas where applicable, (as required by this Code, the Connecticut State Building Code ("SBC") or Connecticut State Fire Code) ("SFC"). 
(b)  The detectors shall be installed within the immediate vicinity of all sleeping areas. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 608. - Carbon monoxide detectors; type and installation. 
(a)  Each installed carbon monoxide detector shall be battery-operated, a plug-in-type or hard-wired (where required by this code, building code or fire code). 
(b)  All carbon monoxide detectors must be approved by a nationally recognized standards testing laboratory, and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, as well as conform to local, state and federal laws and regulations, including this Code, the SBC and SFC. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 609. - Carbon monoxide detectors, exemptions. 
The following residential units shall not require carbon monoxide detectors: 
(1)  A residential unit in a building that does not rely on combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation or hot water. 
(2)  Residential units in a building that does not pose a risk of carbon monoxide poisons due to sole dependence on systems that do not emit carbon monoxide. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 610. - Carbon monoxide detectors; owners' responsibilities. 
(a)  The owner of a residential rental property structure, or his/her agent in charge, shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  The proper installation of carbon monoxide detectors; and 
(2)  Provide written information regarding carbon monoxide testing and maintenance to at least one (1) adult tenant in each dwelling unit. 
(b)  Tenants of residential rental units shall periodically test carbon monoxide detectors installed therein, and replace spent, defective or missing batteries to ensure their continued safety. 
(c)  The owner will be liable to replace detectors that malfunction due to reasons other than fault on the part of the tenant(s). Otherwise, the tenant will be charged with replacement cost. 
(d)  No person may remove or render a carbon monoxide detector inoperative except for its periodic maintenance, or to conduct maintenance or repair to the dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 611. - Regulations; building official, fire marshal. 
The building official and the fire marshal shall have the authority to issue rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this division for its implementation and administration. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06)  
Par. 612. - Conflict with other standards. 
If a provision of this division is found to conflict with the state building code or the state fire code, the provisions of said codes shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1411, 4-17-06) 


ZONING ORDINANCE CITY OF NEW HAVEN, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
A Reprint of Title VI, Volume III, Code of Ordinances of the 
City of New Haven, Connecticut 
Published in 2004 
____________ 

ZONING OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
NEW HAVEN, CONNECTICUT 
____________ 
  
CITY PLAN COMMISSION BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS Ex Officio Members Members Toni N. Harp, Mayor Gaylord Bourne, Secretary Giovanni Zinn, City Engineer Charles Decker A. Walter Esdaile- Alternate Members Victor Fasano Kevin Diadamo - Alternate Patricia King, Chair Hon. Adam Marchand, Alder Ward 25       Benjamin Trachten Edward Mattison, Chair Leslie Radcliffe Marcel Ramos-Valcarcel Audrey Tyson  
____________ 
  
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION Katherine M. Learned, Chair Douglas Royalty Thomas Kimberly, Clerk George Knight  
PREFACE 
    The 1995 Zoning Ordinance of the City of New Haven was originally published by the city as a separate reprint designated as Volume III, Title VI of the Code of the City of New Haven. Subsequently the city has updated the Zoning Ordinance on an annual basis with indexing provided by Municipal Code Corporation. 
    The Zoning Ordinance was republished in its entirety by Municipal Code Corporation in 2003. The Zoning Ordinance will be updated by supplements published by Municipal Code Corporation. Each replacement supplement will carry a supplement number, starting with No. 1, at the bottom left of the page. 
    The Zoning Ordinance is divided into articles which are then divided into sections. The pages of this volume are numbered with a two-part system with the article number as a prefix and a sequential numeral as the section part. The Code Comparative Table and the Index at the end of the volume carry their own prefix designations. 
    The republication of this volume was under the direct supervision of Robert S. Hornyak, Editor, and credit is gratefully given to other members of the publisher's staff for their able assistance throughout the project. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 1635  9- 7-11 Omitted 11 1641 10-14-10 Included 11 1646  1- 3-11 Omitted 11 1649  4- 4-11 Omitted 12 1658  9- 6-11 Omitted 12 1660  9- 6-11 Omitted 12 1662  9-19-11 Included 12 1664 10- 3-11 Omitted 12 1665 10- 3-11 Included 12 1674  4- 2-12 Omitted 13 1685  8- 6-12 Included 13 1686  9- 4-12 Omitted 13 1687  9- 4-12 Omitted 13 1690 10-15-12 Omitted 13 1695  5- 6-13 Omitted 14 1696  5- 6-13 Included 14 1712  7- 1-13 Included 15 1719  9- 3-13 Omitted 15 1724 12- 2-13 Omitted 16 1726 12- 2-13 Included 16 1727 12- 2-13 Omitted 16 1750  8- 6-14 Omitted 17 1751  8- 6-14 Included 17 1752 11- 6-14 Included 18 1753 11- 6-14 Omitted 18 1766  4- 6-15 Included 19 1780  8- 3-15 Included 19 1788  1-19-16 Included 20 1790  4-4-16 Included 20 1793  4-4-16 Omitted 22 1804  8- 1-16 Included 22 1805  8- 1-16 Included 22 1806  8- 1-16 Omitted 22 1807  8- 1-16 Included 22 1820  6- 5-17 Included 22 1830  1- 2-18 Omitted 23 1841  6- 4-18 Omitted 23 1842  6- 4-18 Included 23 1846  3-27-18 Omitted 23 1847  3-13-18 Included 23  
ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to all parts of the zoning ordinance. Words not defined in this ordinance shall be as defined in the most current edition of Webster's New World Dictionary, College Edition. Words in boldface italic in this ordinance are defined in this Article I or in an applicable section if their use is limited. 
    ACCESS CORRIDOR: A portion of the site providing access from a street and having a minimum dimension less than the required lot width, except that no portion of a site having side lot lines radial to the center of curvature of a street from the street property line to the rear lot line shall be deemed an access corridor. The area of an access corridor shall not be included in determining the lot area. 
    ACCESSORY BUILDING: See BUILDING, ACCESSORY. 
    ACCESSORY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE: See RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE. 
    ACCESSORY USE: See USE, ACCESSORY. 
    ADULT CABARET: An establishment that regularly features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, nude dancers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
    ADVERTISING SIGN: See SIGN, ADVERTISING. 
    AREA: See LOT AREA. 
    AREA OF SIGN: See SIGN, AREA OF. 
    AREA PER DWELLING UNIT: See LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. 
    AREA PER SLEEPING ROOM: See LOT AREA PER SLEEPING ROOM. 
    ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A facility consisting of private residential units which provides a managed group living environment, including the provision of assisted living services as described in Regs., Conn. State Agencies § 17b-342-2(c)(1). 
    ATTACHED DWELLING: See DWELLING, ATTACHED. 
    AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE: Any electronic machine that enables customers to withdraw paper money or carry out other banking transactions on insertion of an encoded plastic card. 
    AVERAGE HEIGHT (OF A BUILDING): See HEIGHT, AVERAGE. 
    AVERAGE LOT WIDTH: See LOT WIDTH, AVERAGE. 
    BELT SIGN: See SIGN, BELT. 
    BOARDER: See ROOMER, BOARDER OR LODGER. 
    BOARDING HOUSE: See ROOMING, BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE. 
    BUILDING: A structure which is completely enclosed by a roof and by solid exterior walls along whose outside faces can be traced an unbroken line for the complete circumference of the structure, which is permanently affixed to a lot or lots, and used or intended for the shelter, support of enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
The connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make them one building. A building may occupy more than one lot, but in the case of a series of two or more attached and/or semi-detached dwellings, the building which such dwellings comprise shall be considered to occupy a single lot, regardless of ownership, for purposes of determining lot area, average lot width, lot area per dwelling unit, floor area ratio, the number of parking spaces and other pertinent requirements, if the resulting parking spaces are usable open space are and will continue to be available in the same proportion to all occupants of the building or buildings on the lot; otherwise, each such dwelling shall be considered to occupy a separate lot. 
    BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building located on the same lot as a principal building and devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use. Any portion of a principal building devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory building. 
    BUILDING, NONRESIDENTIAL: A building that is devoted to one or more of the commercial or industrial uses listed in section; 42B.-T. and/or the nonresidential uses permitted in residential districts and which is not a mixed use building. 
    BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted, or is intended to be conducted, the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 

_____
    BUILDING COVERAGE: The proportion of the lot area, expressed as a percent, that is covered by the maximum horizontal cross section of a building or buildings. Structures which are below the finished lot grade, including shelters for nuclear fall-out, shall not be included in building coverage. 
    BUILDING FOUNDATION WALL: A wall of the foundation upon which a building rests. 
    BUSINESS SIGN: See SIGN, BUSINESS. 
    CARSHARING PARKING SPACE: A parking space that is reserved for the parking of a vehicle that is available to multiple users. 
    CHILD DAYCARE CENTER: See DAYCARE. 
    COMMON AMENITY SPACE: (i) Common amenity interior space that is available to all residents of a residential principal building or a mixed use building for their use and enjoyment, such as bicycle rooms, business centers, gyms, laundry rooms, common restrooms, lobbies, party rooms, indoor pools, shared overnight guest quarters, theaters, libraries, game rooms, common recreational/function rooms, conference rooms, but not including utility or similar rooms, corridors, or in a mixed use building, commercial space; (ii) storage space not located within a dwelling unit but which is assigned to an individual dwelling unit ; and (iii) usable open space that is provided in addition to the usable open space that is required to be provided under this ordinance. 
    COMPACT PARKING SPACE: A parking space that measures 7.5 feet × 15 feet. 
    CONFERENCE CENTER: A building or group of buildings used for business and professional conferences and seminars accommodating up to 500 people along with associated accessory functions, such as lodging and facilities for eating and recreation designed to be used primarily for conference attendees. The provision of rooms for rent and meals generally available to the public shall not be considered associated accessory uses. 
    CONSTRUCTION STAGING AREA: The use of a structure or lot, in whole or in part, for the storage of materials and supplies associated with an off-site transportation, public works and/or private sector construction project. 
    CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet. 
    CONVENTION CENTER: A building or group of buildings designed to accommodate 300 or more people used for business or professional conventions, conferences, seminars, product displays, trade shows, special events, recreational activities, and entertainment or athletic functions, along with accessory functions, including temporary outdoor displays, and food and beverage preparation and service for on-premises consumption, excluding the provision of rooms for rent. 
    CORNER LOT: See LOT, CORNER. 
    COURT: A horizontal open space between the exterior walls of a single building that face one another on an angle of less than 60 degrees, excluding shafts designed solely for ventilation. 
    COVERAGE: See BUILDING COVERAGE. 
    CUSTODIAL CARE FACILITY. A facility which provides custodial care and treatment in a protective living environment for persons accused or convicted of a misdemeanor or a non-violent felony and residing voluntarily or by court placement, including, without limitation, correctional and post correctional facilities, halfway houses, transitional housing, juvenile detention facilities and temporary detention facilities, such as alternative to incarceration programs approved by the Chief Court Administrator in accord with the Connecticut General Statutes Sec. 53a-39a. This provision is not intended to address disabled individuals pursuant to the Fair Housing Act. 
    DAYCARE: The term daycare includes any of the three specifically defined daycare uses listed below. The following definitions conform to the daycare permit categories defined by Public Act 82-35. 
a.  Child daycare center: Any premises used for care of more than 12 children, and meeting all standards of the Connecticut Department of Health Services. 
b.  Group daycare home: Any premises used for the care of not less than seven nor more than 12 related or unrelated children, and meeting all standards of the Connecticut Department of Health Services. 
c.  Family daycare home: A private family home caring for not more than six children, including the provider's own children not at school full time, and meeting all standards of the Connecticut Department of Health Services. 
d.  Special workplace daycare: Any of the above-described uses primarily serving employees of the immediate zoning district in which the workplace is located. 
    DETACHED DWELLINGS: See DWELLING, DETACHED. 
    DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: See SIGN, DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. 
    DORMITORY: A building or part of a building operated by an institution containing a room or rooms forming one or more habitable units which are used or intended to be used by residents of the institution for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the laws of the State of Connecticut or of the United States. The term includes, but it not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
(6)  Dilutents and adulterants, such a quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used in holding burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court, zoning officer, zoning board, building department, or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
1.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
2.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under a state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
3.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of such law; 
4.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
5.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
6.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, of anyone control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom it knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of any law of the State of Connecticut or of the United States; the innocence of the owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of such law shall not prevent a finding the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
7.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
8.  Descriptive materials accompanying any object which explain or depict its use; 
9.  National or local advertising concerning its use; 
10.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
11.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
12.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
13.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
14.  Expert testimony concerning its use; 
    DRUG PARAPHERNALIA CENTER: Any store, restaurant, bar, premises or other establishment which, in addition to any other trade, business or service conducted therein, includes a significant amount of drug paraphernalia. For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, an amount of drug paraphernalia shall be deemed significant as to any store, restaurant, bar, premises or other establishment if: 
(a)  10% or more of the square footage or active display area of such store, restaurant, bar, social club, premises or other establishment is devoted to or occupied by drug paraphernalia; or 
(b)  10% or more of the monthly gross revenue of such store, restaurant, bar, social club, premises or other establishment is or can reasonably be expected to be attributable to the sale or rental of drug paraphernalia; or 
(c)  10% or more of the value of the inventory and equipment or of such store, restaurant, bar, social club, premises, or other establishment consists of drug paraphernalia. 
Any amount above such a threshold shall be deemed a separate use, subject to the provisions of the New Haven Zoning Ordinance. 
    DWELLING: A building containing one or more dwelling units; but in the case of a building having two or more portions divided by one or more party walls forming a complete separation, each such portion shall be considered to be a separate building. 
_____ 
3 Dwellings 
_____
    DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling having any portion of each of two walls in common with adjoining dwellings. 
    DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling having open space on all sides. 
    DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling having three or more dwelling units. 
    DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED: A dwelling having any portion of one wall in common with an adjoining dwelling. 
    DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling having only one dwelling unit from ground to roof and having independent outside access. 
    DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling having two dwelling units, one above the other. 
    DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a residential building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family. 
    EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit having only one room exclusive of bathroom, water closet compartment, kitchen, laundry, pantry, foyer, communicating corridor, closets or any dining alcove with less than 70 square feet of floor space. In no event shall the gross floor area of the efficiency unit (the one room plus all other elements designated above) exceed 500 square feet. 
    ELDERLY HOUSING UNIT: A dwelling unit specifically designed for the needs of an elderly person or persons, and conforming to the requirements of state and/or federal programs providing for housing for the elderly. 
    ENTRANCE, PRINCIPAL: A point of access for pedestrians to a building, which entrance faces a street and determines a property address for the building. A building may have more than one principal entrance. 
    FAMILY: A person living alone, or any of the following groups living together, with any domestic servants or gratuitous guests thereof, as a single non-profit housekeeping unit and sharing common, bathing, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities, sharing at least one common living room space: 
(a)  Any number of people related by blood, marriage, adoption or legally recognized foster relationship; 
(b)  A group of up to four (4) people who need not be so related with up to an additional four (4) people related to a person in the group by blood, marriage, adoption or legally recognized foster relationship; 
(c)  Not more than eight (8) people who are disabled as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. s 3602 (h) and this ordinance as well as one (1) facility manager. This definition does not include those persons currently illegally using a "controlled substance" as defined in the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. s 802 (6) or those persons claiming to be disabled solely on the basis of having been adjudicated a juvenile delinquent, having a criminal record or being a sex offender. 
Exceptions: "Family" does not include and shall not be interpreted to include the following facilities addressed in this and other sections of this ordinance: Convalescent Homes (including hospices), Rest Homes, Nursing Homes and Sanitariums, Rectories, Convents, Rooming, Boarding or Lodging Houses, Fraternities, Sororities, Custodial Care Facilities or Dormitories. 
Note: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term "disabled" shall have the same meaning as the term "handicapped" as contained in the Fair Housing Act. 
Note: Occupancy limits established under the Housing Code may further limit the number of people living in one dwelling unit. 
    FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: See DAYCARE. 
    FINISHED LOT GRADE: See LOT GRADE, FINISHED. 
    FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls (and from the center lines of party walls if the portions of the building separated by such party walls are to be treated separately), including: 
(1)  Basement space where more than one-half the basement height is above the finished lot grade average along the exterior walls of the building; 
(2)  Elevators and stairwells at each floor; 
(3)  Attic space, whether or not a floor has been laid, over which there is structural headroom of seven foot or more; and 
(4)  Enclosed porches, interior balconies and mezzanines, and penthouses; and excluding floor space permanently devoted to mechanical equipment used in the operation and maintenance of the building, and floor space permanently devoted to a parking space or parking spaces. 
    FLOOR AREA, NET: The total floor area within a building devoted or intended to be devoted to a particular use, with structural headroom of seven feet or more, whether above or below the finished lot grade, excluding (a) elevators, stairwells, hallways, walls and partitions, and (b) floor space permanently devoted to a parking space or parking spaces, mechanical equipment, closets, washrooms, or other items permanently preventing the floor space from being occupied by persons while engaged in the use. 
    FLOOR AREA RATIO: The ratio of the gross floor area to the principal building or principal buildings on a lot to the total lot area. 
    FOUNDATION WALL: See BUILDING FOUNDATION WALL. 
    FRONT LOT LINE: See LOT LINE, FRONT. 
    FRONT YARD: See YARD, FRONT. 
    GAME MACHINE: Any machine or device operated by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, or other means of payment for the purpose of amusement, recreation skill, or chance, such as electronic game machines, video games, pin ball, pool tables or other similar devices. The term game machine shall not include a bowling alley or juke box. 
    GAME ROOM: A building or portion thereof whose principal use or intended use is for operation of three or more game machines for the use by the general public or specific invitees. 
    GROSS FLOOR AREA: See FLOOR AREA, GROSS. 
    GROUND SIGN: See SIGN, GROUND. 
    GROUP DAYCARE HOME: See DAYCARE. 
    HEALTH CARE CLINIC: An outpatient clinic licensed by the Connecticut Department of Public Health pursuant to Regs., Conn. State Agencies § 19-13-D45 or an outpatient clinic that provides the services described in said regulation which is operated by a partnership or an individual and licensed by the Connecticut Department of Public Health, an outpatient hospital clinic, a medical walk-in clinic, a physical therapy office, an occupational therapy office, an outpatient chronic dialysis center, a community health center, a public health center, an industrial health facility as that term is defined in Regs., Conn. State Agencies § 19-13-D1.(b)(3)(F), an occupational health clinic, a clinic operated by a union exclusively for its members and their dependents, a family planning and reproductive health service center, a primary care clinic, a clinical or diagnostic laboratory, a sports medicine clinic, an emergency services clinic, a wellness center, a dental clinic, an imaging center, and/or a mental health center, but not including an Outpatient Surgical Center listed in Section 42. 
    HEALTH PRACTITIONER'S OFFICE: Office of a physician, osteopath, dentist, audiologist, naturopath, optometrist, psychologist, social worker, chiropractor, and/or nurse practitioner but not including an office which is defined as a Health Care Clinic or an Outpatient Surgical Center listed in Section 42. 
    HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished lot grade to the highest point of the ceiling of the top story of a building or structure in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, and the average height between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
    HEIGHT, AVERAGE: The total volume of a building or structure (enclosed by the outer faces of building or structure walls, the outer faces of roofs, and the finished lot grade ), divided by the area of the maximum horizontal cross-section of the building or structure. Average height for a portion of a building or structureis measured in an equivalent manner as to that portion. 
    HIGH TECHNOLOGY EQUIPMENT DESIGN AND FABRICATION: A use which has as its principal function the research, development, engineering, design, assembly, fabrication, machining and/or light manufacturing of high technology equipment used in high technology uses, instrumentation and computer software and the associated warehousing of such equipment. 
    HIGH TECHNOLOGY USES: A use, including a research and/or development laboratory, which has as its principal function the research, development, engineering, design, assembly, fabrication, or machining and/or light manufacturing of high technology uses, including but not limited to uses associated with agricultural technology, biological or pharmaceutical technology, software technology, telecommunications, biomedical technology, defense and aerospace technologies or other technology oriented or emerging industrial or business activity and the associated warehousing of such products as permitted by applicable state and/or federal law. 
    HIGH TECHNOLOGY SERVICES: A use which has as its principal function the providing of services to high technology uses, including but not limited to computer information transfer, communication, distribution, management, processing, administrative, experimental, developmental, technical, or testing services. 
    INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: See SIGN, INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. 
    LIVE-WORK CONVERSION AND LIVE-WORK UNIT: A unit that contains both a residential use and a commercial/work activity including but not limited to Home Occupations and residences with a professional office described in subsection 13(b)(2)a. as well as other commercial and fabrication uses subject to the requirements of sections 18A and 18B. 
    LOADING SPACE: An off-street space available for the standing, loading or unloading of one truck, excluding adequate maneuvering area. 
    LODGER: See ROOMER, BOARDER OR LODGER. 
    LODGING HOUSE: See ROOMING, BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE. 
    LOT: A parcel of land in the same ownership, or any part thereof designated by its owner or owners as a separate lot having a frontage on a street. The lot shall have access on an accepted street that is determined by the city engineer, police, public works, fire and traffic and parking departments to be adequate for the needs of the departments. The beneficiaries of a private easement cannot consider the area of the easement for calculation of lot area for purposed of this ordinance. For purposes of this ordinance, a lot may or may not have boundaries identical with those shown on New Haven Land Records. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance, the following shall be deemed to constitute a lot: any parcel of land subject to a declaration recorded prior to the enactment of this amendment under the Common Interest Ownership Act as delineated in the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, as amended from time to time, to which the declarent rights are retained by the delcarent or its successor to any lands or real property described in said declaration, surveys or schedules attached thereto and which has, in whole or part, been subject to previously approved or permits for development and use including, but not limited to, building permits or certificates of occupancy for any portion of the land or real property subject to said declaration, either in the text, description or maps attached thereto. 
Contiguous parcels occupied or proposed to be occupied entirely by public or institutional uses may be considered to make up a single lot whether under the same ownership or not, if joint application for building permits is made by all the owners of such parcels. 
A series of two or more attached and/or semi-detached dwellings may under certain conditions be considered to occupy a single lot regardless of ownership (see BUILDING definition). 
_____
    LOT, CORNER: A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the intersection of two street lines . A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Corner Lot 
    LOT AREA: The total horizontal area of a lot lying within the lot lines and excluding any area lying beyond a street line. 
  Note- A series of two or more attached and/or semi-detached dwellings may under certain conditions be considered to occupy a single lot regardless of ownership (see definition of BUILDING).   Note- Lot area as used in all sections of this ordinance shall not include the following categories of land area: 1. State-designated tidal wetlands defined and mapped under Sections 22a-29(a)(2) and 22a-30 of the Connecticut General Statutes (CGS). 2. Wetlands and water courses defined under Sections 22a-38(15) and (16) of the CGS and appearing on the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey of New Haven County. 3. Any land below the mean high water mark.  

Lot Area 
_____
    LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT: The amount of lot area, whether occupied by structures or not, that exists for each dwelling unit located on the lot. 
    LOT AREA PER SLEEPING ROOM (ROOMING, BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE): The amount of lot area, whether occupied by structures or not, that exists for each sleeping room located on the lot. 
    LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: An interior lot having a frontage on more than one street. 
    LOT, FLAG OR CORRIDOR: A lot connected to a street by an access corridor having a width of not less than 16 feet or more than 25 feet, and having a length not exceeding 250 feet. 
    LOT GRADE, FINISHED: The lot surface as graded and prepared for building, and such surface if imagined to be extended through any structure on the lot. 
    LOT LINE: Any boundary of a lot, except where a lot contains a body of water or inland or tidal wetlands the lot line shall be the mean high water mark or the boundary of the inland or tidal wetland. 
    LOT LINE, FRONT: A street line, or in the case of a flag or corridor lot the lot line closest to the street shall be considered the front lot line. 
    LOT LINE, REAR: Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45 degrees of being parallel to a street line, except for a lot line that is itself a street line, and except that in the case of a corner lot the owner shall have the option of choosing which of the two lot lines that are not street lines is to be considered a rear lot line. In the case of a lot having no street frontage or a lot of odd shape, only the one lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line. 
    LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear lot line. 
    LOT WIDTH, AVERAGE: The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines, or in a case where there is only one side lot line, between such side lot line and the opposite rear lot line or street line. 
Note- A series of attached and/or semi-detached dwellings may under certain conditions be considered to occupy a single lot regardless of ownership (see definition of BUILDING). 
_____
Definition of Lot Lines 

_____
    MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. 
    MULTI-LOT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A residential or mixed use development located in a RM-1, RM-2, RH-1, RH-2, or RO District, on more than one lot , which is to be developed, operated and maintained as a single development and which contains at least one of the following: (i) one or more residential accessory buildings, structures or use(s) that are available to all residents of the development or (ii) common usable open space within the development which is available to all residents of the development or (iii) parking spaces on a lot in the development which are available to residents of another lot in the development. A multi-lot residential development may be developed in phases. 
    NEIGHBORHOOD PLANNING AGENCY: Any incorporated neighborhood based organization (a) having the staff capability to do comprehensive neighborhood planning and to make reports; and (b) having applied for and received official "neighborhood planning agency" designation from the Board of Aldermen. Such designations shall be granted only to organizations which identify in the application with specificity the geographic area they represent and show they are representative of community residents or have a process for including community participation, and demonstrate objectivity in their approach to neighborhood matters and any other relevant facts. Such designation shall be effective for two-year periods and organizations may apply for redesignation. 
    NONCONFORMING USE: See USE, NONCONFORMING. 
    NON-ILLUMINATING SIGN: See SIGN, NON-ILLUMINATED. 
    NURSERY: See DAYCARE. 
    OPEN SPACE, USABLE: Space on a lot or on or attached to a building or located in a multl-lot residential development which is unoccupied by principal or accessory buildings and is not devoted to a parking structure, a parking lot (although landscaped islands in a parking lot can be counted toward satisfying usable open space requirements) or service driveways. Usable open space includes but is not limited to parks, lawns, running trails, wildlife viewing areas, ponds, balconies, patios, courtyards, gardens, private yards, plazas, greens, squares, paths and walkways, rooftop green spaces and patios, terraces, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other outdoor spaces devoted to recreation, relaxation or gathering opportunities and which meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  Common usable open space shall be so located and designed so as to emphasize convenience of tenant access and ease of use. 
b.  All common grade level usable open space shall be landscaped and otherwise developed to maximize recreational utility. Landscape improvements shall include trees, shrubs, ground cover and, wherever possible, the retention of existing landscape features. 
c.  Any usable open space provided above grade level, either in the form of a roof terrace or deck, shall include as improvements at least the following: a wearing surface in addition to a standard rooftop finish, safety railings or walls, passive recreational facilities such as benches, sheltered arbors and vegetative landscaping, and lighting. 
    PARKING, SHARED: An arrangement in which two or more uses or structures with different peak parking demands use the same off-street parking spaces to meet off-street parking requirements. Publicly shared parking is an arrangement where at least 50 percent of the off-street parking provided for a building is available for public use, in terms of allocation of time when the parking spaces are available to the public. Privately shared parking is an arrangement where two or more uses and/or structures agree to share the same parking spaces. 
    PARKING SPACE: An off-street space available for the parking of one automobile (excluding adequate driveways and aisles) and meeting the ordinance requirements of the appropriate district in which such parking space is located. The term parking space shall include garages, carports, and other enclosed and semi-enclosed spaces for the parking of automobiles. 
    POLE SIGN: See SIGN, POLE. 
    PRINCIPAL BUILDING: See BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. 
    PRINCIPAL USE: See USE, PRINCIPAL. 
    PROJECTION: Any structure attached to a principal or accessory building and extending beyond the face of a building foundation wall, including roofs, cornices, chimneys, bay windows, shading devices, shelters, carports, balconies, outside stairways, fire escapes, steps and open porches, but excluding fences, flag poles, latticework, drying and recreational equipment, and landscape planting. 
    REAR LOT LINE: See LOT LINE, REAR. 
    REAR YARD: See YARD, REAR. 
    RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE: A building, structure or use clearly incidental or subordinate to, and customary in connection with the residential principal building(s) located either on the same lot with a residential principal building or in a residential neighborhood development including but not limited to: 
a.  Buildings such as storage sheds, pool houses, maintenance garages, and private greenhouses; 
b.  Structures such as fences, walls, private swimming pools, and permitted signs ; 
c.  Parking spaces for the parking of passenger automobiles; but excluding parking of commercial vehicles other than vehicles not exceeding one-half ton loading capacity that are needed for travel to and from work by residents of the principal building , are completely enclosed within a building , and are without materials or equipment; and also excluding repairs, sale of gas, and other such commercial uses ; and 
d.  The keeping of one roomer, boarder or lodger as an accessory use to any dwelling unit , if such roomer, boarder or lodger is within the residential principal building . 
    RESIDENTIAL PRINCIPAL BUILDING: Any building containing one or more dwelling units, excluding residential accessory buildings for domestic servants and caretakers employed on the premises and for occasional gratuitous guests. 
    RESTAURANT: A space in a suitable and permanent building kept, used maintained, advertised and held out to and known by the public as primarily a food service establishment where hot meals are regularly served. If alcoholic drink is served in any restaurant, it shall be as an adjunct function of serving food and operate under a Restaurant Liquor Permit as provided in C.G.S. Section 30-22, as amended, and comply with all Liquor Control Commission Regulations pertaining thereto. Restaurants shall be open during regularly posted hours which are clearly marked and shall have no regular and recurring unusual barriers to entry such as cover charges or age restrictions. 
    ROOMER, BOARDER OR LODGER: A person occupying any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, and paying compensation for lodging or board and lodging by prearrangement for a week or more at a time to an owner or operator who is not the husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of such person. Any person occupying such room or rooms and paying such compensation without pre-arrangement or for less than a week at a time shall be classed for purposes of this ordinance not as a roomer, boarder or lodger, but as a guest of a commercial lodging establishment (tourist home, hotel or motel). 
    ROOMING, BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE shall mean a building, or any part of a building (other than an institutional building ) occupied or intended to be occupied by four or more roomers, boarders, or lodgers. See also, RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE. 
    SCHOOL: Any public, private, parochial, charitable, charter or nonprofit elementary or secondary school, junior college or university, other than a trade or business school, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living quarters, restaurants, dining rooms, kitchens, heating plants and other support facilities for students, teachers and employees, including support to multiple facilities, student bodies, and/or teacher groups, as well as any other facilities or uses which may be approved or required in the future by the Connecticut State Department of Education. 
    SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING: See DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED. 
    SIDE LOT LINE: See LOT LINE, SIDE. 
    SIDE YARD: See YARD, SIDE. 
    SIGN: Any structure, part thereof, or device or inscription attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, which is located upon any land, or any building, or on the outside or inside of a window, and which displays or includes any numeral, letter, word, model, banner, emblem, insignia, device, trademark, or other representation used as, or in the nature of, an announcement, advertisement, direction, warning, or designation of any person, firm, group, organization, place, commodity, product, service, business, profession, enterprise, or industry. 
But this definition shall not include the flag, emblem, insignia, poster or other display of any nation or political subdivision including traffic or similar regulatory devices; or legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings, signs or tablets which are primarily memorials, or emblems of religious institutions that are attached to buildings. 
    SIGN, AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all such faces shall be included in determining the sign area, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger of the two faces. 
    SIGN, BELT: A sign placed flat against the front wall of a building. 
    SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered, or conducted, other than incidentally, on the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed. 
    SIGN, DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED: A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within such sign including, but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs. 
    SIGN, GROUND: A free-standing sign resting upon the ground or attached to it by means of two or more poles or standards. 
    SIGN, INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED: A sign illuminated with a light so shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere than on the lot where said illumination occurs. If such shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign. 
    SIGN, NON-ILLUMINATED: A sign which is not illuminated, either directly or indirectly. 
    SIGN, POLE: A free-standing sign attached to the ground by means of a single pole or standard. 
    SIGN, PROJECTING or BLADE: A sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or wall, generally at right angles to the building, including signs that project into the right-of-way. 
    SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. 
    SLEEPING ROOM: Any room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
    STORY: That part of a building which is between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above and has structural headroom of seven feet or more, excluding any such space which is contained in a cellar that is not more than one-half above the finished lot grade averaged along the building's exterior walls, and also excluding any such space that is not suitable for human habitation but devoted permanently to mechanical equipment used in the building's operation and maintenance. 
    STREET: A right of way for pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle traffic, whether designated as a sidewalk, path, street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or otherwise designated which has been dedicated or acquired for public uses and has been accepted by the Board of Aldermen as a public right-of-way. 
    STREET LINE: The line separating private property from a street or alley existing or dedicated in public ownership. 
    STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, including a building, which has a permanent location on the ground, or anything attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
    TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS: See DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. 
    USABLE OPEN SPACE: See OPEN SPACE, USABLE. 
    USE: Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. 
    USE, ACCESSORY: A use that is clearly incidental or subordinate to, and customary in connection with the principal use and is either located on the same lot with a principal use or in a multi-lot residential development . 
    USE, ACCESSORY, RESIDENTIAL: See RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE. 
    USE, NONCONFORMING: A use, structure or lot which existed lawfully, whether by variance or otherwise, on the date this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto became effective, and which fails to conform to one or more of the applicable regulations in the zoning ordinance or such amendment thereto. 
    USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use on a lot. 
    WALKING DISTANCE: The distance between an outside entrance to a building or part thereof or to an outdoor use, and a parking space assigned to such building, part thereof or outdoor use, along the shortest, most convenient pedestrian walkway open to the user or users of such parking space. 
    WASTE PROCESSING AND TRANSFER: Uses that receive solid or liquid wastes for processing, storage, treatment or disposal on-site or for transfer to another location; uses that collect sanitary wastes; uses that treat contaminated materials; uses that process materials for recycling; and uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material. Examples of such uses include energy recover plants, portable sanitary collection equipment, storage and pumping, recycling operations, sewer treatment plants, waste composting, waste incineration, transfer stations for solid, bulk, medical or biomedical waste. 
Accessory uses include offices, recycling of materials, and repacking and transportation of byproducts, but exclude motor vehicle junkyards and collection facilities for ties and oil within gas stations and repairers. 
    YARD: An open space unobstructed from the ground up, on the same lot, with a principal building, extending along a lot line or street line and inward to the principal building. The size of a required yard shall be measured as the shortest distance between the outer face of the building foundation wall and a lot grade, including shelters for nuclear fall-out, shall not be deemed to occupy required yards. 
    YARD, FRONT: A yard between a principal building and a street line and extending the entire length of the street line. 
In the case of a corner lot, the yards extending along all streets are front yards. In the case of a lot other than a corner lot that fronts on more than one street, the yards extending along all streets are front yards. In any case where a building line requirement has been established by the Building Lines Commission which is different from the front yard requirement, the stricter of the two requirements shall control. 
    YARD, REAR: A yard between a principal building and a rear lot line and extending the entire length of the rear lot line. 
    YARD, SIDE: A yard between a principal building and a side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of a lot having no street frontage or a lot of odd shape, any yard that is not a front yard or a rear yard shall be considered a side yard. Where there are three or more side yards on the same lot and two different side yard requirements exist in the District Regulations, only one such yard must meet the larger of the two requirements. 
    ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: Three or more single family dwellings that are attached dwellings ,with one common side yard of zero feet for end dwelling units and two common side yards of zero feet each, for interiordwelling units,located on individuallots. 
_____
Definition of Yard Types 

Lot and Yard Types 

(Ord. No. 1367, § 1, 12-6-04; Ord. No. 1368, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1665, 10-3-11; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 1751, Sched. A, § 1, 8-6-14; Ord. No. 1820, Sched. B, 6-5-17) 
ARTICLE II. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP 

Section 2. - Districts enumerated; map adopted; interpretation. 
a.  For the purpose of this ordinance the City of New Haven is divided into the following districts: 
Residence Districts 
RS-1       Districts: Special Single-Family RS-2       Districts: General Single-Family RM-1       Districts: Low-Middle Density RM-2       Districts: High-Middle Density RH-1       Districts: Special High Density RH-2       Districts: General High Density RO       Districts: Residence-Office  
Business Districts 
BA       Districts: General Business BA-1       Districts Neighborhood Center Mixed Use BB       Districts: Automobile Sales BC       Districts: Marine BD       Districts: Central Business BD-1       Districts: Central Business/Residential BD-2       Districts: Central Business/Medical BD-3       Districts: Central Business/Mixed-Use BE       Districts: Wholesale and Distribution  
Industrial Districts 
IL       Districts: Light Industry IM       Districts: Light Industry - Marine IH       Districts: Heavy Industry  
Other Districts 
PARK Districts CEMETERY Districts AIRPORT District Planned Development Districts Historic Districts Coastal Management District Inland Wetland District Flood Damage Prevention District Soil Erosion and Sediment Control District  
b.  The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the City of New Haven Zoning Map (consisting of a series of section maps, numbered 1 to 21, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet), which accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance. The official copy of said map is prepared in a digital format, stored in the City's Geographic Information System, reproduced and placed on file in the office of the City Clerk and at the City Plan Department, and may be viewed in those offices during normal working hours. Said map, with all subsequent amendments thereto, supersedes all prior zoning maps of the City of New Haven. 
c.  Where any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district as shown on said map the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where boundary lines are indicated as following streets and alleys, they shall be construed as following the centerlines thereof; 
(2)  Where boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines and the extensions of lot lines, such lot lines and extensions of lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
(3)  Where a boundary line divides a lot or crosses unsubdivided property, the location of such boundary shall be measured on a copy of said map at a scale appropriate to determine the boundary line; 
(4)  Where further uncertainty exists, the City Plan Commission, upon written application, shall by resolution determine the location of a disputed boundary, giving due consideration, among other things, to the apparent indicated location thereof, the scale of said map, and the expressed purposes of the zoning ordinance; 
(5)  Wherever any property is not under these rules specifically included in any district shown on said map, such property is hereby declared to be in the most restrictive district abutting such property on said map, or, if no district so abuts such property, then in an RS-1 District. 
(Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, § 1), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1443, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12) 
Sections 3-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. RESIDENCE DISTRICTS: DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 11. - RS-1 Districts: Special Single-Family. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist for the protection of certain fully developed single-family areas of relatively small total size but of unique and irreplaceable value to the community as a whole. The specific purpose of these districts is to stabilize and preserve the low-density residential character of these areas to the maximum possible extent. To this end the use of land and buildings within these areas is limited primarily to single-family homes. The particular character, size and surroundings of these areas create little need for the location within their boundaries of further such non-residential uses as generally support a low-density residential area, and the location of any further such uses within these areas would undesirably limit or diminish the number of homes in them. It is hereby found and declared that these regulations are necessary for the protection of these areas and that their protection is essential to the maintenance of a balanced community of sound residential areas of diverse types. 
All RS-2 Districts are subject to the general provisions for residence districts set forth in Article IV as well as to all other provisions of this ordinance. 
    Uses permitted. In an RS-1 District, a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residentialusesas follows. The General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. There shall be only one principal building on a lot. Building requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 7,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum average lot width: 60 ft., except for nonconforming lots under subsection 67(e). 
c.  Maximum building coverage: Total coverage of principal and accessory buildings not to exceed 30% of lot area. 
d.  Maximum building height: Such height shall not exceed either three stories or an average height of 35 feet. 
Provided that, no point on a side or rear building wall shall be so located that it is closer to a side or rear lot line than one foot for each two feet that such point is above the average finished lot grade along such side or rear building wall. 
e.  Minimum yards: 
Front -25 ft., except that where 75% or more of the entire street frontage (in feet) on the same side of the same street between the nearest two intersecting streets has been developed with buildings with front yards smaller than 25 feet, the required front yard shall be the same as the yard presently followed by existing buildings along the greatest quantity of street frontage (in feet). 
Rear -25 ft. 
Side -One at least eight ft. and the other at least twelve ft.; in the case of a corner lot, at least eight ft. for the one side yard. 
f.  Minimum parking: One parking space for the first bedroom, and one-half parking space for each additional bedroom, rounded to the next higher number if a fraction. All parking spaces shall be located on the same lot, and shall conform to section 29 and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. 
g.  Maximum impervious surface coverage: Total coverage of building(s) and paved area (parking and walkways) shall not exceed 70% of the lot area. 
(2)  Residential accessory buildings, structures and uses, as regulated by paragraph (1) above and by the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
(3)  Conversion of an existing building to a greater number of dwelling units by variance as follows: 
Supplemental statement of purpose: Preservation of the unique residential character of RS-1 District areas requires that variances for uses not allowed in these districts be granted only where absolutely necessary and only for the least possible departure from the provisions of these districts. Any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, no variance shall be granted from the use regulations of these districts except for conversion of existing buildings to a greater number of dwelling units in accordance with the standards of this section. These standards are hereby found and declared to be minimum standards for stabilizing and preserving the character of RS-1 District areas and their value to the community as a whole, and any variance of the use regulations of these districts other than in accordance with these standards is hereby declared to violate the spirit of this ordinance and the general purpose and intent of these regulations. 
A variance for conversion of an existing building to a greater number of dwelling units may be granted only in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  It must be clearly demonstrated that continued use of the building with its existing number of dwelling units would create such hardship as would practically destroy or greatly decrease its value, provided that: 
1.  The evidence offered to demonstrate such hardship shall not relate to such deterioration of the building as would suggest its removal and reuse of the land for single-family detached dwellings in accordance with the provisions of these districts; and 
2.  Before granting a variance for conversion of a principal building, the Board shall find that such hardship cannot be sufficiently mitigated by subdivision of the lot for one or more additional lots conforming to the standards of these districts for single-family detached dwellings or by conversion of an existing accessory building to a single-family detached dwelling where such subdivision or such conversion would have a lesser impact upon the surrounding area than would conversion of the principal building to a greater number of dwelling units in accordance with the standards of this paragraph (3). 
b.  The building shall have been erected more than 30 years before conversion, and any increase of its gross floor area beyond 20% during the ten years immediately preceding conversion shall not be deemed to contribute to hardship under subparagraph 11(a)(3)a. or be considered in determining the maximum number of allowable dwelling units under subparagraph 11(a)(3)c. of this paragraph 11(a)(3). 
c.  Any variance granted for conversion of a building to a greater number of dwelling units shall be for the minimum number of dwelling units necessary to mitigate the hardship and in no case for more dwelling units than are allowable under the requirement that the building and lot in question contain an average of: 
1,500 sq. ft. of gross floor area; 
7,500 sq. ft. of lot area; and 
60 ft. of average lot width 
per dwelling unit after conversion. (In the case of a corner lot, the width of the lot for purposes of this subparagraph 11.A.3.c shall be deemed to be the average of its two street frontages.) 
d.  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building being converted equal to the number of dwelling units on the lot after conversion. 
e.  Stairways leading to the second or any higher floor shall be located within the walls of the building wherever practicable, and stairways and fire escapes shall otherwise be located on the rear wall in preference to either side wall and in no case on a front wall or side wall facing a street. 
f.  Except for the provision of stairways and fire escapes in accordance with the preceding subparagraph, there shall be no major structural change in the exterior of the building in connection with the conversion, and after conversion the building shall retain substantially the appearance it had before such conversion. 
(b)  Non-residential uses as follows: The standards in paragraph 11(a)(1) above relating to minimum lot area, minimum average lot width, building coverage, minimum building height, and minimum yards shall apply to non-residential uses except as indicated below. 
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the following uses are permitted in connection with such uses. 
Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the following uses may be located (by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance) on a separate lot in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 are met. 
Section 29 relating to parking and all other pertinent sections of the general provisions for residence districts in Article IV shall apply to all such uses. 
(1)  As of right: 
a.  Parks and other facilities for passive recreation, and public playgrounds. 
b.  Reservoirs, dams, public utility substations and pumping stations, telephone exchanges, police stations, fire stations and post offices, with no industrial activities or outside storage. 
c.  Family daycare home. 
(2)  Where permitted by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance: 
a.  Temporary uses and structures such as rental offices, booths for charitable purposes and parking for special events, with a time limit of not more than six (6) months. 
b.  Peripheral expansion of existing institutions as follows: 
Any of the following uses of land and/or buildings: 
1.  Religious institutions; 
2.  Public and private elementary and secondary schools meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Connecticut; 
3.  Private and public colleges and universities (excluding trade and/or business schools); and 
4.  Pre-school (nursery and day care center) programs when provided as part of the broader programs of such religious and educational institutions; and noise and all other possible disturbance aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened, or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties and streets in the surrounding area. 
c.  When in existence on the effective date of the RS-1 District provisions, items in subsection 11.(b)(2)b. may be further developed and expanded as follows: 
1.  Property owned by such an institution in an area designated as an RS-1 District on the effective date of such designation may be used and further developed by the institution owning it for its own religious or educational purposes, as of right, regardless of any other provision of this section 11. By special exception, such property may be used and developed by another religious or educational institution as described above, provided that such other institution shall not be allowed to expanded under clauses 2. and 3. below. 
2.  Such an institution either (1) owning property in the RS-1 part of a block designated in whole or in part as an RS-1 District on the effective date of such designation, or (2) owning property in the non-RS-1 part of a block designated in part as an RS-1 District and acquired by the institution in accordance with the zoning regulations applicable to that non-RS-1 part of the block, may expand peripherally into and within the RS-1 part of that block by acquisition and use for its religious or educational purposes of any property that adjoins property owned by it under 11(b)(1) or 11(b)(2) above or acquired in accordance with this peripheral expansion provision. 
3.  Such an institution may expand across a street in or into an RS-1 District as follows: once 50% of the land area in the block from which it is expanding (herein called the base block), as well as 75% of the linear frontage of the base block that abuts a particular adjoining block, is used for religious or educational purposes by one or more such institutions, then any one of such institutions owning and using for its religious or educational purposes 100,000 square feet of land in the base block and 100 feet of its linear frontage abutting the adjoining block may expand across the street into said adjoining block once it acquires and uses for its religious or educational purposes therein (1) as much of the linear frontage of said adjoining block that abuts upon the base block as necessary, when added to any of that frontage already being used by one or more such institutions for religious or educational purposes, to constitute 75% of that frontage, plus (2) as much additional and adjoining property in said adjoining block, when added to the frontage of the property acquired by the expanding institution, to constitute 100,000 square feet of land. 
4.  Any property further developed or acquired by a religious or educational institution under the provisions of this sub-paragraph (c) may be used for religious or educational purposes only if the off-street parking requirements for such institution stated in the district regulations for RS-2 Districts are met. 
5.  Nothing contained in this subparagraph shall be construed to prevent the use of property anywhere within an RS-1 District by a religious or educational institution as a single-family detached dwelling within the provisions of paragraph (a)(1) of this section; provided, however, that property so used shall not later be used for other purposes nor be used as a basis for expansion by that institution under clause 11(b)(2).c.2 of this subparagraph 11(b)(2)c. 
(Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
RS-1 Special Single-Family 
RS-2 General Single-Family 
    The two illustrations show typical construction in these districts, both in perspective and in plan. Property lines are indicated by heavy dotted lines, and required yards by dashed lines. The numbers on the plan refer to the various restrictions on size and placement of structures. All these restrictions are the same for both districts. 
Special & General Single-Family 
  1 Minimum front yards: 25 feet. 
  2 Minimum rear yards: 25 feet. 
  3 Minimum side yards: one eight and one 12 feet. In the case of corner lots, at least eight feet for the one side yard.) Size of side yard is also related to height of building walls (see text of each district). 
  4 Minimum average lot width: 60 feet. 
  5 Accessory buildings may extend into side and rear yards (See General Provision for Residence Districts). 
  6 Fences may extend into all yards (See General Provisions for Residence Districts). 
Other Requirements: 
Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet. 
Maximum building coverage (all buildings ): 30% of lot area. 
Maximum building height: Three stories or an average height of 35 feet. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for the first bedroom, and one-half parking space for each additional bedroom, rounded to the next higher number if a fraction. All parking spaces shall be located on the same lot. 
Note- These pages are for illustration only. For greater detail, and for non-residential construction, refer to text of each district and to the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
Section 12. - RS-2 Districts: General Single-Family. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist for the protection of areas, most of them large in size, that have been and are being developed predominantly for single-family dwellings. Accordingly, the use of land and buildings within such areas is limited to single-family detached dwellings, and to such non-residential uses as generally support and harmonize with a low-density residential area. The non-residential uses permitted in RS-2 Districts, subject to adequate conditions and safeguards, are hereby found and declared to be the only appropriate such uses for such areas. It is hereby found and declared, further, that these regulations are necessary to the protection of these areas and that their protection is essential to the maintenance of a balanced community of sound residential areas of diverse types. 
All RS-2 Districts are subject to the general provisions for residence districts set forth in Article IV as well as to all other provisions of this ordinance. 
    Uses permitted. In an RS-2 District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residentialusesas follows. The General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. There shall be only one principal structure on a lot. 
Building requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 7,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum average lot width: 60 ft., except for nonconforming lots under subsection 67(e). 
c.  Maximum building coverage: Total coverage of principal and accessory buildings not to exceed 30% of lot area. 
d.  Maximumbuildingheight: Such height shall not exceed either three stories or an average height of 35 feet. 
Provided that no point on a side or rear building wall shall be so located that it is closer to a side or rear lot line than one foot for each two feet that such point is above the average finished lot grade along such side or rear building wall. 
e.  Minimum yards: 
Front -25 ft., except that where 75 percent or more of the entire street frontage (in feet) on the same side of the same street between the nearest two intersecting streets has been developed with buildings with front yards smaller than 25 feet, the required front yard shall be the same as the yard presently followed by existing buildings along the greatest quantity of street frontage (in feet). 
Rear -25 ft. 
Side -one at least eight ft. and the other at least 12 ft.; in the case of a corner lot, at least eight ft. for the one side yard. 
f.  Minimum parking: One parking space for the first bedroom, and one-half parking space for each additional bedroom, rounded to the next higher number if a fraction. All parking spaces shall be located on the same lot and shall conform to section 29 and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. 
g.  Maximum impervious surface coverage: Total coverage of building(s) and paved area (parking and walkways) shall not exceed 70 percent of the lot area. 
(2)  Residential accessorybuildings,structuresanduses,as regulated by paragraph 1 above and by the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
(3)  Conversion of an existingbuildingto a greater number ofdwelling unitsby a variance as follows: 
Any other provisions of this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, no variance shall be granted from the use regulations of these districts for conversion of an existing building to a greater number of dwelling units except in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  It must be clearly demonstrated that continued use of the building with its existing number of dwelling units would create such hardship as would practically destroy or greatly decrease its value, provided that: 
1.  The evidence offered to demonstrate such hardship shall not relate to such deterioration of the building as would suggest its removal and reuse of the land for single-family detached dwellings in accordance with the provisions of these districts; and, 
2.  Before granting a variance for conversion of a principal building , the Board shall find that such hardship cannot be sufficiently mitigated by subdivision of the lot for one or more additional lots conforming to the standards of these districts for single-family detached dwellings or by conversion of an existing accessory building to a single-family detached dwelling where such subdivision or such conversion would have a lesser impact upon the surrounding area than would conversion of the principal building to a greater number of dwelling units in accordance with the standards of this paragraph (3). 
b.  The building shall have been erected more than 30 years before conversion, and any increase of its gross floor area beyond 20% during the ten years immediately preceding conversion shall not be deemed to contribute to hardship under subparagraph a of this paragraph (3). 
c.  Any variance granted for conversion of a building to a greater number of dwelling units shall be for the minimum number of dwelling units necessary to mitigate the hardship and in no case for more dwelling units than are allowable under the requirement that the lot in question contain an average of 7,500 sq. ft. of lot area per dwelling unit after conversion. 
d.  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building being converted equal to the number of dwelling units on the lot after conversion. 
e.  Stairways leading to the second or any higher floor shall be located within the walls of the building wherever practicable, and stairways and fire escapes shall otherwise be located on the rear wall in preference to either side wall and in no case on a front wall or side wall facing a street. 
f.  Except for the provision of stairways and fire escapes in accordance with the preceding paragraphs, there shall be no major structural change in the exterior of the building in connection with the conversion, and after conversion the building shall retain substantially the appearance it had before such conversion. 
(b)  Non-residential uses as follows: The standards in paragraph (a)(1) above relating to minimum lot area, minimum average lot width, maximum building coverage, maximum building height, and minimum yards shall apply to non-residential uses. 
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the following uses are permitted in connection with such uses. 
Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the following uses may be located (by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance) on a separate lot in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 are met. 
Section 29 relating to parking and all other pertinent sections of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall apply to all such uses. 
(1)  As of right: 
a.  Parks and other facilities for passive recreation, and public playgrounds. 
b.  Reservoirs, dams, public utility substations and pumping stations, telephone exchanges, police stations, fire stations and post offices, with no industrial activities or outside storage. 
c.  Agriculture, including tilling of the soil and orchards, but excluding the keeping of livestock and commercial greenhouses and nurseries except for the keeping of hens per section 34 of this ordinance. No substance producing odor or dust shall be stored within 200 feet of any lot line unless completely enclosed. 
d.  Religious institutions, including parish houses, rectories, convents, and other facilities normally incidental to places of worship but excluding funeral homes and cemeteries. 
Minimum parking: One (1) parking space for each eight seats in the largest place of assembly of such institution, based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
e.  Cultural activities not carried on as a gainful business, including art galleries, libraries and museums. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each three employees, plus one parking space for each four seats in each place of assembly based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats, plus one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area excluding any place of assembly, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
f.  Public and private elementary and secondary schools meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Connecticut, and adult education facilities connected with such schools, including dormitories connected with such schools but excluding fraternities and sororities. Noise, odors, lights, smoke, dirt, and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets in the surrounding area. 
Minimum parking: One (1) parking space for each four seats in each place of assembly commonly having events open to the public, based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
g.  Public and private colleges and universities, including dormitories connected with such institutions but excluding: fraternities and sororities, trade/or business schools and colleges, and schools and colleges operated as commercial enterprises. Noise, odors, lights, smoke, dirt, electrical disturbance, radioactive particles and rays, and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets beyond the boundaries of such college or university. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each two full-time faculty members or the equivalent (two part-time members equaling one full-time member), plus one parking space for each three employees, plus one parking space for each three non-resident students, plus one parking space for each six beds if residents are allowed to keep automobiles, plus one parking space for each eight seats in each place of assembly (other than classrooms) commonly having one-half or more of its attendance made up of students (and otherwise having one parking space for each four seats) based on the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
h.  General and special inpatient hospitals, and health care clinics; excluding private offices for doctors, convalescent homes, rest homes, nursing homes, sanitariums, homes for the aged and handicapped, and orphanages. Noise, odors, electrical disturbance, radioactive particles and rays, and all possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets in the surrounding area. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each four patient beds (excluding bassinets), plus one parking space for each staff or visiting doctor (based on the average number of such doctors at the hospital or health care clinic at peak times), plus one parking space for each four employees in the largest shift including nurses; plus, in the case of health care clinics, a number of parking spaces for patients equal to twice the number of parking spaces required for doctors; all of which parking spaces are to be located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance except in the BD-3 District. 
i.  Family daycare home. 
(2)  Where permitted by special exception under sub-section 63(d) of this ordinance: 
a.  Temporary uses and structures such as rental offices, booths for charitable purposes and parking for special events, with a time limit of not more than six months. 
b.  Recreation facilities and athletic clubs; and community centers and clubs drawing a substantial number of users from the immediate neighborhood in which they are located; excluding residential accommodations and any activity carried on as a gainful business other than incidental concessions. Noise, odors, lights, signs and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets in the surrounding area. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each four persons present at such facilities when they are filled to capacity, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
c.  Railroad and other rights-of-way. 
d.  Establishments providing convenience goods and services, as described and regulated by section 31 of this ordinance. 
e.  Group daycare home. 
(Ord. No. 1368, §§ 3, 4, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1598, § 2, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Section 13. - RM-1 Districts: Low-Middle Density. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist for the protection of areas that have been and are being developed predominantly for low-middle density dwellings of various types. Accordingly, the use of land and buildings within these areas is limited in general to dwellings at a density of about 12 dwelling units per acre, and to such non-residential uses as generally support and harmonize with a middle density area. The non-residential uses permitted in RM-1 Districts, subject to adequate conditions and safeguards, are hereby found and declared to be the only appropriate such uses for such areas. It is hereby found and declared, further, that these regulations are necessary for the protection of these areas and that their protection is essential to the maintenance of a balanced community of sound residential areas of diverse types. 
All RM-1 Districts are subject to the general provisions for residence districts set forth in Article IV as well as to all other provisions of this ordinance. 
    Uses permitted. In an RM-1 District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residentialusesas follows. The General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply. 
(1)  Dwellings: Single-family, two-family and multi-family. 
Building requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 6,000 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum average lot width: 50 ft., except for nonconforming lots under subsection 67(e). 
c.  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 3,500 sq. ft., except 2,500 sq. ft. in the case of an efficiency unit and 1,750 sq. ft. in the case of an elderly housing unit; except, further, that in any case of a dwelling existing on the effective date of the application of these regulations thereto, there may be located therein by conversion an average of one dwelling unit per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in the dwelling on said effective date, whether or not the standards of lot area per dwelling unit are met, provided that an increase in dwelling units by conversion which would result in an excess of three dwelling units within the same structure shall be permitted only by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance. 
d.  Maximum building coverage: Total coverage of principal and accessory buildings not to exceed 30% of lot area. 
e.  Maximum building height: such height shall not exceed either three stories or an average height of 35 feet. 
Provided that no point on a side or rear building wall shall be so located that it is closer to a side or rear lot line than one foot for each two feet that such point is above the average finished lot grade along such side or rear building wall. 
f.  Minimum yards: 
Front -20 ft., except that where 75% or more of the entire street frontage (in feet) on the same side of the same street between the nearest two intersecting streets has been developed with buildings with front yards smaller than 20 feet, the required front yard shall be the same as the yard presently followed by existing buildings along the greatest quantity of street frontage (in feet). 
Rear -25 ft. 
Side -One at least eight ft. and the other at least 12 ft.; in the case of a corner lot, at least eight ft. for the one side yard. 
g.  Minimum parking: One parking space per dwelling unit (except that only one parking space shall be required for each two elderly housing units ) located either on the same lot as the principal building or within 300 feet walking distance of an outside entrance to the dwelling unit to which such parking space is assigned, and conforming to section 29 and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. 
(2)  Residential accessory buildings , structures and uses, as regulated by paragraph (1) above and by the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
(3)  Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the permitted residential uses may be located on a separate lot without a special exception in a multi-lot residential development and by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance in all other instances in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 (residential parking) are met. 
(b)  Non-residential uses as follows: The standards in paragraph (a)(1) above relating to minimum lot area, minimum average lot width, maximum building coverage, maximum building height, and minimum yards shall apply to non-residential uses. 
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the following uses are permitted in connection with such uses. 
Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the following uses may be located (by Special Exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance) on a separate lot in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 are met. 
Section 29 relating to parking and all other pertinent sections of the general provisions for residence districts in Article IV shall also apply to all such uses. 
(1)  Such non-residential uses as are permitted, and in the same manner, as in RS-2 Districts. 
(2)  As of right: 
a.  Home Occupations customarily and traditionally conducted in a dwelling unit as an incidental use, such as dressmaking and watchmaking, provided no such home occupation shall involve: 
1.  Any employee not resident in the dwelling unit; 
2.  Storage of a stock in trade or sale of commodities on the premises; 
3.  Use of more than 25% of the net floor area of the dwelling unit, or any space outside the dwelling unit; 
4.  External evidence of the use other than signs permitted by section 27; 
5.  Emission of offensive smoke, dirt, dust, vibration, odor, light, heat, glare, noise, electrical disturbance, or radioactive particles or rays. 
b.  Offices and studios of doctors, dentists, architects, artists, designers, accountants, lawyers, engineers, tutors, real estate and insurance agents, brokers, and members of other recognized professions residing in the same dwelling unit, incidental to the main purpose of a residence (excluding veterinarians, dancing and music studios having more than one student at a time, barber shops, beauty parlors, and other similar uses ), together with incidental laboratory and mechanical equipment, provided no such office shall involve: 
1.  More than one employee not resident in the dwelling unit, or use by any outside colleague or associate; 
2.  Storage of a stock in trade or sale of commodities on the premises; 
3.  Use of more than 25% of the net floor area of the dwelling unit, or any space outside the dwelling unit; 
4.  External evidence of the use other than signs permitted by section 27; 
5.  Emission of offensive smoke, dirt, dust, vibration, odor, light, heat, glare, noise, electrical disturbance, or radioactive particles or rays. 
Minimum parking: For each such office, one parking space for the one permitted outside employee, plus two parking spaces for visitors, located on the same lot. 
c.  Peripheral expansion of family, group, or child daycare when provided as part of the broader program of a religious or educational institution. 
(3)  Where permitted by special exception under subsection 63.(d) of this ordinance: 
a.  Fraternities and sororities (whether or not residential in whole or in part), when located on land owned by an elementary or secondary school meeting all requirements of the compulsory educational laws of the State of Connecticut or land owned by a college or university other than a trade and/or business college and other than a school or college operated as a commercial enterprise. Noise, odors, lights, signs and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets in the surrounding area. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each three beds if residents are permitted to keep automobiles, plus one parking space for each four seats in each place of assembly based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
b.  Convalescent homes, rest homes, nursing homes, sanitariums, homes for the aged and disabled (not to include elderly), and orphanages. Noise, odors, electrical disturbance, radioactive particles and rays, and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets in the surrounding area. Minimum parking: one parking space for each six beds, plus one parking space for each staff or visiting doctor (based upon the average number of such doctors at such institutions at peak times), plus one parking space for each four employees in the largest shift including nurses, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
c.  Transition parking as follows: In any case in which a business, industrial or residence-office district or districts abut directly upon a residence district and adequate property for off-street parking is not available in such business, industrial or residence-office district, the use of property in such residence district up to a distance of 150 feet from a business, industrial or residence-office district may be permitted for parking of passenger automobiles of employees, visitors and/or customers in connection with uses in such business, industrial or residence-office district or districts, provided that, in addition to such other conditions and safeguards as are found appropriate under subsection 63.(d) of this ordinance: 
1.  Such property abuts directly on the lot or lots occupied by the business, industrial or office use or uses with which such parking is connected, for at least 75 feet unless it is found that a lesser distance would be consistent with the purposes of this provision for transition parking. 
2.  No structures are erected or used for parking of automobiles on more than one level; no automobile sales, service, dead storage, or other such commercial enterprise is conducted upon such property; and no signs are erected thereon except signs complying with section 27 which are necessary to state the condition of use and to regulate traffic and parking. 
3.  The area on such property used for parking is suitably paved and drained, provided with bumper or wheel guards where needed, and arranged so that the flow of automobiles to and from streets and alleys will cause minimum interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
4.  The surrounding residential areas are adequately protected by: 
(a)  Location of entrances and exits when practicable in Business, Industrial and Residence-Office Districts and in no event within 20 feet of any other residentially-zoned property. 
(b)  Provision of standard residential front yards as required by the applicable district regulations, suitably landscaped, between the paved parking area and all street lines in residence districts, unless it is found that a lessening of the front yard requirement can be permitted under subsection 29(c) of this ordinance. 
(c)  Provision of a buffer strip of land at least five feet in width, located on such property between the paved parking area and all residentially-zoned land on which such property abuts directly, unless it is found that the purposes of this provision for transition parking can be accomplished by reducing the buffer strip to some other width which is no less than two feet. 
(d)  Provision of a suitable fence, wall or evergreen planting at least five (5) feet in height, designed to screen noise, odors, visibility and headlight glare between the paved parking area and all residentially-zoned property on which such property abuts either directly or across a street or alley. 
(e)  Arrangement of such artificial lighting as is used for the parking area so that all direct rays fall entirely within the paved parking area or within areas used for business, industrial or office purposes. 
d.  Child daycare centers meeting all licensing standards of the State Department of Health Services and providing one passenger drop-off/pick-up loading space for each twenty-four (24) children or fraction thereof. 
Minimum parking: one (1) parking space for each three (3) employees. 
All noise and other disturbing aspects of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled. 
RM-1 Low Middle Density 
    The two illustrations show typical construction in this district, both in perspective and in plan. Property lines are indicated by heavy dotted lines, and required yards by dashed lines. The numbers on the plan refer to the various restrictions on size and placement of structures. 
RM-1 Low Middle Density 
1 Minimum front yards: 20 feet. 
2 Minimum rear yards: 25 feet. 
3 Minimum side yards: one eight and one 12 feet. (In the case of corner lots, at least eight feet for the one side yard. ) Size of side yard is also related to height of building walls (see text of each district). 
  4 Minimum average lot width: 50 feet. 
  5 Accessory buildings may extend into side and rear yards. (See General Provisions for Residence Districts). 
  6 For projections into required yards see General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
Other requirements: 
Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
Maximum lot area per dwelling unit: 3,500 sq. ft.; 2,500 sq. ft. per efficiency unit; 1,750 sq. ft. per elderly housing unit. 
Maximum building coverage (all buildings ): 30% of lot area. 
Maximum building height: Three stories or an average height of 35 feet. 
Minimum parking: One parking space per dwelling unit, located either on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
Note- These pages are for illustration only. For greater detail, and for non-residential construction, refer to text of each district and to the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 5, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Section 14. - RM-2 Districts: High-Middle Density. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist for the protection of areas that have been and are being developed predominantly for high-middle density dwellings of various types. Accordingly, the use of land and buildings within these areas is limited in general to dwellings at a density of about 22 dwelling units per acre, and to such non-residential uses as generally support and harmonize with a middle density area. The non-residential uses permitted in RM-2 Districts, subject to adequate conditions and safeguards, are hereby found and declared to be the only appropriate such uses for such areas. It is hereby found and declared, further, that these regulations are necessary to the protection of these areas and that their protection is essential to the maintenance of a balanced community of sound residential areas of diverse types. 
All RM-2 Districts are subject to the general provisions for residence districts set forth in Article IV as well as to all other provisions of this ordinance. 
    Uses permitted. In an RM-2 District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residentialusesas follows: The General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply. 
Building requirements: 
(1)  Dwellings-single-family, two-family and multi-family. 
a.  Minimum lot area: 5,400 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum average lot width: 50 ft., except for nonconforming lots under subsection 67(e). 
c.  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 2,000 sq. ft., except 1,400 sq. ft. in the case of an efficiency unit and 1,000 sq. ft. in the case of an elderly housing unit; except, further, that in any case of a dwelling existing on the effective date of the application of these regulations thereto, there may be located therein by conversion an average of one dwelling unit per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in the dwelling on said effective date, whether or not the standards of lot area per dwelling unit are met. 
d.  Maximum building coverage: Total coverage of principal and accessory buildings not to exceed 30% of lot area. 
e.  Maximumbuildingheight: Such height shall not exceed either four stories or an average height of 45 feet. 
Provided that no point on a side or rear building wall shall be so located that it is closer to a side or rear lot line than one foot for each two feet that such point is above the average finished lot grade along such side or rear building wall. 
f.  Minimum yards: 
Front -17 ft., except that where 75% or more of the entire street frontage (in feet) on the same side of the same street between the nearest two intersecting streets has been developed with buildings with front yards smaller than 17 feet, the required front yard shall be the same as the yard presently followed by existing buildings along the greatest quantity of street frontage (in feet). 
Rear -25 ft. 
Side -one at least eight ft. and the other at least 10 ft.; in the case of a corner lot, at least eight ft. for the one side yard. 
g.  Minimum parking: One parking space per dwelling unit (except that only one parking space shall be required for each two elderly housing units ) located either on the same lot as the principal building or within 300 feet walking distance of an outside entrance to the dwelling unit to which such parking space is assigned, and conforming to section 29 and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. 
(2)  Residential accessory buildings , structures and uses, as regulated by paragraph (1) above and by the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
(3)  Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the foregoing residential uses may be located on a separate lot without a special exception in a multi-lot residential development and by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance in all other instances in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 (residential parking) are met. 
(b)  Non-residential uses as follows: The standards in paragraph (a)(1) above relating to minimum lot area, minimum average lot width, maximum building coverage, maximum building height, and minimum yards shall apply to non-residential uses. 
Accessory use customarily incidental to the following uses are permitted in connection with such uses. 
Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the following uses may be located (by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance) on a separate lot in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 are met. 
Section 29 relating to parking and all other pertinent sections of the general provisions for residence districts in Article IV shall apply to all such uses. 
(1)  Such non-residential uses as are permitted, and in the same manner, as in RM-1 Districts. 
RM-2 High Middle Density 
    The two illustrations show typical construction in this district, both in perspective and in plan. Property lines are indicated by heavy dotted lines, and required yards by dashed lines. The numbers on the plan refer to the various restrictions on size and placement of structures. 
RM-2 High Middle Density 
  1 Minimum front yards: 17 feet. 
  2 Minimum rear yards: 25 feet. 
  3 Minimum side yards: one eight and one 10 feet. (In the case of corner lots, at least eight feet for the one side yard. ) Size of side yard is also related to height of building walls (see text of each district). 
  4 Minimum average lot width: 50 feet. 
  5 Accessory buildings may extend into side and rear yards. (See General Provisions for Residence Districts). 
  6 For projections into required yards see General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
Other Requirements: 
Minimum lot area : 5,400 square feet. 
Maximum lot area per dwelling unit: 2,000 sq. ft.; 1,400 sq. ft. per efficiency unit; 1,000 sq. ft, per elderly housing unit. 
Maximum building coverage (all buildings ): 30% of lot area. 
Maximum building height: Four stories or an average height of 45 feet. 
Minimum parking: One parking space per dwelling unit , located on the same lot, within 300 feet walking distance or in a multi-lot residential development. 
Note- These pages are for illustration only. For greater detail, and for non-residential construction, refer to text of each district and to the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
(Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Section 15. - RH-1 Districts: Special high density. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist for the protection of certain multi-family areas of relatively small total size but of unique and irreplaceable value to the community as a whole. The specific purpose of these districts is to stabilize and preserve the existing residential character of these areas to the maximum possible extent. To this end, the use of land and buildings within these areas is limited primarily to relatively high density residential uses, as the particular character, size and surroundings of these areas create little need for the location within their boundaries of further other such non-residential uses as generally support a residential area. Moreover, these areas are found especially along major streets traversing large residential sections of the city, and the outward movement of office or other commercial uses along these streets would constitute a serious threat to the residential quality of the areas to either side of them. Encroachment of office or other commercial uses along these streets would violate the spirit of this ordinance and its general purpose and intent and, any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, no variance shall be granted for such uses in these districts. It is hereby found and declared that these regulations are necessary to the protection of these areas and that their protection is essential to the maintenance of a balanced community of sound residential areas of diverse types. 
All RH-1 Districts are subject to the General Provisions for Residence Districts set forth in Article IV as well as to all provisions of this ordinance. 
    Uses permitted. In an RH-1 District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residentialusesas follows. The General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply. 
(1)  Dwellings-single-family, two-family and multi-family. 
Building requirements: 
a.  Minimumlot area: 7,500 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum average lot width: 60 ft., except for nonconforming lots under subsection 67(e). 
c.  Maximum building coverage for principal building or principal buildings : 25% of lot area. 
d.  Maximum building height: No direct limit. 
Provided that no point on a side or rear building wall shall be so located that it is closer to a side or rear lot line than one foot for each two feet that such point is above the average finished lot grade along such side or rear building wall. 
e.  Minimum yards: 
Front -25 ft., except that where 75% or more of the entire street frontage (in feet) on the same side of the same street between the nearest two intersecting streets has been developed with buildings with front yards smaller than 25 feet, the required front yard shall be the same as the yard presently followed by existing buildings along the greatest quantity of street frontage (in feet). Provided that, the front yard shall in any case be increased if necessary to maintain a ratio of one foot between the front building wall and the center line of the street to two feet of average height measured along the front building wall, except as provided in subsection 30(b). 
Rear -25 ft. 
Side -10 ft. for each side yard. 
f.  Maximum gross floor area: No such building or buildings shall have a gross floor area greater than 0.5 times the lot area; except that this floor area may be increased by 0.1 times the lot area (up to a maximum of 1.7 times the lot area ) for each 1% of lot area by which the building coverage of the principal building or buildings is reduced below the maximum of 25% of lot area set by subparagraph (c) above. The maximum floor area ratio allowable at each percent of building coverage under this formula is as follows: 
Building 
Coverage 
in Percent Floor Area Ratio 25 0.5 24 0.6 23 0.7 22 0.8 21 0.9 20 1.0 19 1.1 18 1.2 17 1.3 16 1.4 15 1.5 14 1.6 13 or less 1.7  
In any case of a building existing on the effective date of the application of these regulations thereto, which building then becomes nonconforming in building coverage and/or floor area ratio under the above formula, there may be located therein by conversion no more than an average of one dwelling unit per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area in the building on said effective date. 
Where a lot contains more than one principal building in the same ownership, all such buildings shall be considered together in determining the floor area ratio. 
g.  Minimum usable open space : 125 square feet per dwelling unit , except 100 square feet in the case of elderly housing units by special exception under subparagraph 63.(d) of this ordinance, provided that in the event that a minimum of 50 square feet of private usable open space in the form of balconies, patios, decks, porches or private courts that are attached or are located immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit that they serve is provided, then the balance of the usable open space required under this subsection for such dwelling unit shall be reduced by one-quarter. All usable open space shall be subject to the following minimum standards in addition to others which may be applicable. 
1.  Common usable open space shall be so located and designed as to emphasize convenience of tenant access and ease of use. 
2.  All common grade level usable open space shall be landscaped and otherwise developed to maximize recreational utility. Landscape improvements shall include trees, shrubs, ground cover and, wherever possible, the retention of existing landscape features. 
3.  Any usable open space provided above grade level, either in the form of a roof terrace or deck, shall include as improvements at least the following: a wearing surface in addition to a standard rooftop finish, safety railings or walls, passive recreational facilities such as benches, sheltered arbors vegetative landscaping, and lighting. 
h.  Minimum parking : One parking space per dwelling unit (except that only one parking space shall be required for each two elderly housing units ) located either on the same lot as the principal building , within 300 feet walking distance of an outside entrance to the dwelling unit to which such parking space is assigned or within a multi-lot residential development , and conforming to section 29 (residential parking) and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. 
(2)  Residential accessory buildings , structures and uses, as regulated by paragraph (1) above and by the General Provisions for Residence Districts, having a building coverage of no more than 10% of the lot area and an average height not exceeding 20 feet. 
(3)  Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the foregoing residential uses not meeting the standards of subsection 15(a)(1)h may be permitted by special exception under subsections 29(i) and 63(d) of this ordinance. 
(b)  Non-residential uses as follows: The standards in paragraph (a)(1) above relating to minimum lot area, minimum average lot width, maximum building coverage, maximum building height, minimum yards, and maximum gross floor area shall apply to non-residential uses except as indicated below. 
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the following uses are permitted in connection with such uses. 
Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the following uses may be located in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 (residential parking) are met. 
Section 29 relating to parking and all other pertinent sections of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply to all such uses. 
(1)  Such non-residential uses as are permitted, and in the same manner, as in RS-1 Districts. 
(2)  On lots in use for any of the uses described in section 11(b)(2)b. on or before October 15, 2003, any of the uses described in section 11(b)(2)b.1., 2. or 4. excluding dormitories, fraternities and sororities. 
Building requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area : One acre; 
b.  Minimum side yard : One at least ten feet and the other at least 12 feet, notwithstanding the requirements of section 15(a)(1)(d); 
c.  Maximum building height : Such height shall not exceed either four stories or an average height of 50 feet; 
d.  Maximum building coverage: Total building coverage for principal building or buildings not to exceed 30 percent of lot area; 
e.  Maximum gross floor area : No building or buildings shall have a gross floor area greater than 0.6 times the lot area equivalent to a maximum floor area ratio of 0.6; and 
f.  Minimum parking: The greater of one parking space for each eight seats in the largest place of assembly commonly having events open to the public, based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats; or one parking space for each full-time equivalent staff person, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance on a separate lot in the district, shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1377, § 1, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Section 16. - RH-2 Districts: General High Density. 
    Description and purpose . These districts exist for the protection of areas that have been and are being developed predominately for high density dwellings, commonly apartment houses and other dwellings with a high ratio of floor area to land area. Accordingly, the use of land and buildings within these areas is limited to dwellings meeting a Floor Area Ratio designed for a density ranging from 22 to 74 dwellings units per acre and to such non-residential uses as generally support and harmonize with a high density area. The non-residential uses permitted in RH-2 Districts, subject to adequate conditions and safeguards, are hereby found and declared to be the only appropriate such uses for such areas. It is hereby found and declared, further, that these regulations are necessary to the protection of these areas and that their protection is essential to the maintenance of a balanced community of sound residential areas of diverse types. 
All RH-2 Districts are subject to the General Provisions for Residence Districts set forth in Article IV except for Section 28 as well as to all other provisions of this ordinance. 
    Uses permitted. In an RH-2 District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residential uses as follows. The General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply. 
(1)  Dwellings-Single-family (except zero lot line developments per subsection 16(a)(2)), two-family and multi-family. 
Building requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 5,400 sq. ft. 
b.  Minimum average lot width: 40 ft. 
c.  Maximumbuildingcoverage forprincipal buildingorprincipal buildings: 50% of lot area. 
d.  Maximum building height: No direct limit. 
Provided that, no point on a side or rear building wall shall be so located that it is closer to a side or rear lot line than one foot for each two feet that such point is above the average finished lot grade along such side or rear building wall. 
e.  Minimum yards: 
Front -Five ft, , except that where 75% or more of the entire street frontage (in feet) on the same side of the same street between the nearest two intersecting streets has been developed with buildings with front yards smaller than five feet, the required front yard may be the same as the yard presently followed by existing buildings along the greatest quantity of street frontage (in feet). Provided that in the case of any building or structure which has an average height in excess of 60 ft.,the front yard shall be increased proportionally (up to a maximum of 25 feet of required front yard ) if necessary to maintain a ratio of one foot between the front building wall and the center line of the street to two feet of average height measured along the front building wall. 
Rear -20 ft. 
f.  Maximumgross floor area:No suchbuildingorbuildingsshall havegross floor areagreater than 2.0 times the lot area. 
In any case of a building existing on the effective date of this section, which building then becomes nonconforming in building coverage and/or floor area ratio , there may be located therein by conversion no more than an average of one dwelling unit per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area in the building on said effective date. 
Where a lot contains more than one principal building in the same ownership, all such buildings shall be considered together in determining the floor area ratio . 
g.  Minimum usable open space : 125 square feet per dwelling unit , except 100 square feet in the case of elderly housing units , only by special exception, provided that in the event that a minimum of 50 square feet of private usable open space in the form of balconies, patios, decks, porches or private courts that are attached or are located immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit that they serve is provided, then the balance of the usable open space required under this subsection for such dwelling unit shall be reduced by one-quarter. All usable open space shall be subject to standards enumerated in subsection (a)(1)g. of section 15 of this ordinance. 
h.  Minimum parking: .75 parking space per dwelling unit (three parking spaces for each four dwelling units ), except that only .33 parking space (one parking space for each three elderly housing units ) shall be required for each elderly housing unit , and only .50 parking space per dwelling unit (one parking space for each two dwelling units ) shall be required for each dwelling unit located on a lot owned by a public housing authority (such as the Housing Authority of the City of New Haven). All parking spaces required under this section shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, within 300 feet walking distance of an outside entrance to the dwelling unit to which such parking space is assigned or in a multi-lot residential development . Such parking spaces shall conform to section 29 (residential parking) and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. 
(2)  Zero Lot Line developments. 
Building requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 2,000 sq. ft. for interior lots and 3,500 sq. ft. for end and corner lots; 
b.  Minimum average lot width: 18 ft. for interior lots and 35 ft. for end and corner lots; 
c.  Maximum building coverage for principal building and accessory buildings combined not to exceed 60% of lot area for interior lots and 50% of lot area on end and corner lots . 
d.  Maximum building height: Average height of 45 ft. 
Provided that, no point on a side or rear building wall shall be so located that it is closer to a side or rear lot line than one foot for each two feet that such point is above the average finished lot grade along a rear or side building wall, excepting side yards for connecting buildings on adjoining lots. 
e.  Minimum yards: 
Front -The lesser of five ft. or the existing average front yards (excluding projections ), measured in feet, between the nearest two intersections on the same side of the street on which the zero lot line development is to be located (excluding any structure or building to be removed in connection with the proposed zero lot line development ). 
Rear -20ft. for interior, end and corner lots that are also end lots ; zero ft. for corner lots that are not end lots . 
Side -All side yards of zero ft. must be located adjacent to a common zero-foot side yard located on a lot that is part of the zero lot line development. 
f.  Minimum usable open space: 125 square feet per dwelling unit , except 100 square feet in the case of elderly housing units , only by special exception, provided that in the event that a minimum of 50 square feet of private usable open space , either in the form of balconies, patios, decks, porches or private courts that are attached or are located immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit which they serve is provided, then the balance of the usable open space required for such dwelling unit shall be reduced by on one-quarter. All usable open space shall be subject to standards enumerated in subsection(a)(1)g. of section 15 of this ordinance. 
g.  Minimum parking: .75 parking space per dwelling unit (three parking spaces for each four dwelling units ), except that only .33 parking space (one space for each three elderly housing units ) shall be required for each elderly housing unit. All parking spaces required under this section shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, within 300 feet walking distance of an outside entrance to the dwelling unit to which such parking space is assigned or in a multi-lot residential development . Such parking spaces shall conform to section 29 (residential parking) and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. A maximum of two curb cuts shall be permitted for any zero lot line development. 
h.  In connection with an application for site plan approval for a zero lot line development , the applicant shall submit a deed, agreement, easement, or similar instrument and/or a homeowners' association's operating documents (such as articles of association, articles of organization, articles of incorporation, operating agreement, bylaws, and/or rules and regulations) for approval by the City Plan Commission with respect to the allocation of responsibility for the maintenance, repair and replacement of shared walls, driveways, parking areas, open space, and any other shared facilities, which approved instrument or documents shall be filed in the New Haven land records prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of the zero lot line development. 
(3)  Residential accessory buildings , structures and uses, as regulated by paragraph (1) above and by the General Provisions for Residence Districts. 
(4)  Rooming, boarding and lodging houses (excluding hotels, motels and tourist homes), as well as the keeping of only one or two roomers, boarders or lodgers, where renting of rooms is not subordinate to some other enterprise. Such rooming, boarding and lodging houses shall be regulated by the standards in paragraph (1) above, except that minimum parking shall be one parking space for each three beds, located either on the same lot as the rooming, boarding or lodging house or within 300 feet walking distance of an outside entrance to the rooming, boarding or lodging house; and in addition minimum lot area per sleeping room shall be 500 square feet. 
(5)  Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the foregoing residential uses may be located on a separate lot in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 (residential parking) are met. 
(6)  Automobile trailer camps, in accordance with the provisions of the Automobile Trailer Camp Ordinance, when located on a tract of not less than ten acres and permitted by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance with a time limit of not more than five years. 
(b)  Non-residential uses as follows: The standards in paragraph (a)(1) above relating to minimum lot area, minimum average lot width, maximum building coverage, maximum building height, minimum yards, and maximum gross floor are a shall apply to non-residential uses. 
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the following uses are permitted in connection with such uses. 
Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the following uses may be located on a separate lot in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 (residential parking) are met. Section 29 relating to parking and all other pertinent sections of the General Provisions For Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply to all such uses . 
(1)  Such non-residential uses as are permitted, and in the manner, as in RM-2 Districts. 
(2)  As of right: 
a.  Charitable and philanthropic organizations, provided no more than 50% of the gross floor area of any building is occupied by offices of such organizations. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area of the building located on the same lot, within 300 feet walking distance or in a multi-lot residential development. 
b.  Professional offices of the types specified in the regulations for RO Districts (other than charitable and philanthropic organizations) located in the basement, ground floor level or second floor of a building that fronts on an Urban Principal Arterial or an Urban Minor Arterial, as classified by the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation, with an aggregate gross floor area no greater than 15% of the total gross floor area of the building in which such offices are located. 
c.  Retail uses located at the basement and/or ground floor level of a building that fronts on an Urban Principal Arterial or an Urban Minor Arterial, as classified by the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation, as follows: (i) uses listed in subsections 31(b)(1) through (10) and (13) (but not subject to the conditions of section 31); section 42C (but not including Package Alcoholic liquor); section 42D (but not including a Funeral home, gun and weapons repair, firearms training, firing range, shop or a swap shop); section 42G; section 42H (but not including gun shops); section 42I; and (ii) a Restaurant , caterer, music, or dancing school. The aggregate gross floor area of the foregoing uses shall not exceed 15% of the total gross floor area of the building in which they are located. 
Where both professional offices and retail uses are located in the same building, the combined gross floor area of the professional offices and retail uses shall be no greater than 15% of the total gross floor area of the building in which they are located. In addition, no parking spaces shall be required for the professional offices and retail uses permitted under this subsection. 
(3)  Where permitted by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance. 
a.  Fraternities and sororities (whether or not residential in whole or in part), whether or not located on land owned by an educational institution. Noise, odors, lights, signs and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets in the surrounding area. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each three beds if residents are permitted to keep automobiles, plus one parking space for each four seats in each place of assembly based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
b.  Other social organizations, including clubs, lodgings, veterans' and fraternal organizations (whether or not residential in whole or in part); but excluding any activity carried on as a gainful business other than incidental concessions. Noise, odors, lights, signs and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of properties or streets in the surrounding area. 
Minimum parking: One parking space for each three employees, plus one parking space for each three beds plus one parking space for each four seats in each place of assembly based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
c.  Professional offices of the types specified in the regulations for RO Districts (other than charitable and philanthropic organizations) located in the basement, ground floor level or second floor of a building that does not front on an Urban Principal Arterial or an Urban Minor Arterial, as classified by the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation, with an aggregate gross floor area no greater than 15% of the total gross floor area of the building in which the offices are located. 
d.  Retail uses located at the basement and/or ground floor level of a building thatdoes notfront on an Urban Principal Arterial or an Urban Minor Arterial, as classified by the State of Connecticut Department of Transportation, as follows: (i) uses listed in subsections 31(b)(1) through (10) and (13) (but not subject to the conditions of section 31), section 42C (but not including Package Alcoholic liquor), section 42D (but not including a Funeral home, gun and weapons repair, firearms training, firing range, shop or a swap shop), section 42G, section 42H (but not including gun shops), section 42I and (ii) a Restaurant , caterer, music, or dancing school, The aggregate gross floor area of the foregoing uses shall not exceed 15% of the total gross floor area of the building in which they are located. 
Where both professional offices and retail uses are located in the same building, the combined gross floor area of the professional offices and retail uses shall be no greater than 15% of the total gross floor area of the building in which they are located. In addition, no parking spaces shall be required for the professional offices and retail uses permitted under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 1820, Sched. B, 6-5-17) 
Section 17. - RO Districts: Residence-Office. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist in order to set aside and protect certain areas for development of professional and service offices in addition to high density dwellings. Accordingly, the use of land and buildings within these areas is limited to dwellings meeting a flexible floor area ratio formula designed for a density ranging from 22 to 74 dwelling units per acre depending upon building height and coverage, to professional and service offices, and to such other non-residential uses as generally support and harmonize with a high density area of this type. The non-residential uses permitted in RO Districts, subject to adequate conditions and safeguards, are hereby found and declared to be the only appropriate such uses for such areas. It is hereby found and declared, further, that these regulations are necessary to the protection of these areas and that their protection is essential to the maintenance of a balanced community of sound residential areas of diverse types. 
All RO Districts are subject to the General Provisions for Residence Districts set forth in Article IV as well as to all other provisions of this ordinance. 
    Uses permitted. In an RO District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residentialusesas follows. The General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV shall also apply. 
(1)  Such residential uses as are permitted, with such standards as are required for them, in RH-1 Districts. 
(b)  Non-residentialusesas follows. The standards in paragraph (a)(1) above relating to minimum lot area, minimum average lot width, maximum building coverage, maximum building height, minimum yards and maximum gross floor area shall apply to non-residential uses. 
Accessory uses customarily incidental to the following uses are permitted in connection with such uses. 
Parking spaces required by this ordinance for the following uses may be located (by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance) on a separate lot in any district in which the principal use is permitted, provided the standards of section 29 are met. 
Section 29 relating to parking and all other pertinent sections of the general provisions for residence districts in Article IV shall also apply to all such uses. 
(1)  Such non-residential uses as are permitted, and in the same manner, as in RM-2 Districts. 
(2)  As of right: 
a.  Offices and studios of doctors, dentists, architects, artists, designers, accountants, lawyers, engineers, tutors, real estate and insurance agents, brokers, and members of other recognized professions (excluding veterinarians, dancing and music studios having more than one student at a time, barber shops, beauty parlors, and other similar uses), together with incidental laboratory and mechanical equipment; government offices; and offices of insurance companies, charitable and philanthropic organizations and other similar service enterprises and organizations. All such offices shall meet the following standards: 
1.  No storage of a stock in trade or sale of commodities on the premises; 
2.  No visits by the general public as purchasers of goods or as customers as distinguished from patients or clients; 
3.  No offensive emission of smoke, dirt, dust, vibration, odor, light, heat, glare, noise, electrical disturbance, or radioactive particles or rays; 
4.  Maximum coverage for accessory buildings : 10% of lot area; 
5.  Minimum parking: Three parking spaces per practitioner in the case of doctors and dentists, and one parking space for each 600 square feet of net floor area used or intended to be used for offices in all other cases, located on the same lot or within 300 feet walking distance. 
RH-1 Special High Density 
RH-2 General High Density 
RO Residence-Office 
    The two illustrations show typical construction in the RH-1 and RO districts, both in perspective and in plan. Property lines are indicated by heavy dotted lines, and required yards by dashed lines. The numbers on the plan refer to the various restrictions on size and placement of structures. 
RH-1, RH-2 & RO 
  1 Minimum front yards: 25 feet for RH-1 and RO; 5 feet for RH-2. Size is also related to height of building wall (see text for each district). 
  2 Minimum rear yards: 25 feet for RH-1 and RO; 20 feet for RH-2. Size is also related to height of building wall (see text for each district). 
  3 Minimum side yards: 10 feet for each side in RH-1 and RO; zero feet in RH-2. Distance is also related to height of building wall (see text for each district). 
  4 Minimum average lot width: 60 feet for RH-1 and RO; 40 feet for RH-2. 
  5 Accessory buildings may extend into side and rear yards . (See General Provisions for Residence Districts). 
Other Requirements: 
Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet for RH-1 and RO; 5,400 square feet for RH-2. 
Maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.): 0.5 to 1.7, depending upon building coverage (see text), except for RH-2 where F.A.R. is 2.0. 
Maximum building coverage: principal building(s) 25% or less for the RH-1 and RO, (see text), 50% for the RH-2, accessory building, 10%. 
Maximum building height: no direct limit, except for zero lot line developments. 
Minimum usable open space: 125 sq. ft. per dwelling unit. 
Minimum parking: For the RH-1 and RO districts, one parking space per dwelling unit. For the RH-2 district, .75 parking space per dwelling unit, located on the same lot, within 300 feet walking distance or in a multi-lot residential development ; also for RO, one parking space for each 600 square feet of net floor area of office space; and for RH-2 one parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area of space used for charitable or philanthropic uses located on the same lot, within 300 feet walking distance or in a multi-lot residential development . 
Note- These pages are for illustration only. For greater detail, and for other non-residential construction, refer to text of each district and to the general provisions for residence districts. 
(Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 18A. - Live-work loft conversions. 
    The purpose of this provision is to encourage adaptive reuse of existing older loft style multi-level commercial and industrial structures existing in 1963 to limited work and residence use by Special Permit in all residential districts and in business and industrial districts as set forth in Section 42, as follows: 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  Disturbing aspects. Noise, odors, lights, signs and all other possible disturbing aspects connected with the operation of such uses shall be enclosed, screened or otherwise controlled to the extent that the operation of any such use shall not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of other properties or streets in the surrounding area. 
(2)  Signs. All uses permitted by this section shall comply with the requirements for signs in section 27 of this ordinance. 
(3)  Parking shall be subject to the standards of section 29 and section 45. Each work-live unit will require one parking space in addition to the required parking for the existing business/industrial uses on the site. 
(b)  Conversion standards for loft industrial structures to live-work lofts meeting the general standards above and the specific standards below shall be allowed by special permit as follows: 
(1)  Live-work loft gross floor area per unit: 
Minimum-700 sq. ft. 
Structure average-1,000 sq. ft. 
(2)  Each live-work unit shall be structurally separate, spatially contiguous, integrated living and working space utilized by a single housekeeping unit. 
(3)  Full-time workers of the live-work unit shall reside in the unit. 
(4)  The residential area of the unit may not be rented separately from the working space. 
(5)  Retail sale of merchandise is limited to items produced in the live-work unit. 
(c)  Review standards for live-work lofts. In addition to section 64 standards the commission shall determine whether the specific proposal meets the following additional standards: 
(1)  The specific location and proposed physical configuration will be compatible with existing surrounding industrial and commercial uses. 
(2)  The proposal will not preclude development of permitted industrial and commercial uses on adjacent parcels. 
(3)  The site can reasonably accommodate live-work lofts with minimum conflict with existing commercial and industrial tenants. 
(4)  The site can reasonably accommodate parking and loading needs for work-live lofts and commercial and industrial use on the parcel. 
(d)  Residential development internal amenities. 
(1)  All conversions yielding 20 or more units shall have in-unit washer/dryer hookups or common laundry facilities. 
(2)  All conversions of 20 or more units shall provide secure indoor bicycle storage facilities. 
(3)  All conversions over 50 units shall provide an indoor activity or exercise room available to residents. 
(4)  All conversions of over 100 or more units shall provide, in addition to an exercise room, a function room available to all residents. 
(Ord. No. 565, 4-7 08; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12) 
(Ord. No. 1565, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1752, Sched. A, 11-6-14) 
Section 18B. - Live-work units (post 1963 and new structures). 
(a)  Live-work units other than live-work loft conversions described in Section 18A shall be allowed by special permit in the Business D-3 District. 
(b)  Live-work units shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Noise, odor, light, dust, dirt, fumes, or other environmental impacts from work conducted in the live-work unit will be so enclosed, screened or otherwise contained so as not to adversely affect the use and enjoyment of the other properties in the surrounding area. 
(2)  The proprietor of the business located in the live-work unit shall live in the live-work unit, and up to two persons who do not reside in the live-work unit may work in the unit. 
(3)  No portion of the live-work unit may be separately leased or sold. 
(4)  At least 30 percent of the total square footage of the live-work unit shall be allocated to the residential use. 
(5)  The display and sale of products in the live-work unit shall be limited to the products created in the live-work unit. 
(Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1752, Sched. A, 11-6-14) 
Section 19. - Custodial care facilities. 
    Description and purpose. These provisions exist in recognition of state law, which make allowances for custodial care alternatives to traditional prison settings. These provisions are further intended to provide opportunities for custodial care facilities to locate and operate in New Haven in a manner which (1) is of a size and scale that is appropriate for the structure; (2) is of a size and scale that is consistent with residential uses in the surrounding area; (3) avoids undue concentration of such facilities; (4) avoids undue conflict with other social needs programs; and (5) avoids undue conflict with youth populations, by restricting siting near schools, parks and day care centers. 
(a)  Definition. CUSTODIAL CARE FACILITY. A facility which provides custodial care and treatment in a protective living environment for persons accused or convicted of a misdemeanor or a non-violent felony and residing voluntarily or by court placement, including, without limitation, correctional and post correctional facilities, halfway houses, transitional housing, juvenile detention facilities and temporary detention facilities, such as alternative to incarceration programs approved by the Chief Court Administrator in accord with the Connecticut General Statutes Sec. 53a-39a. This provision is not intended to address disabled individuals pursuant to the Fair Housing Act. 
(b)  Development standards. The following standards shall apply: 
(1)  General standards. A custodial care facility shall comply with the standards relating to minimum lot area, average lot width, building coverage, maximum impervious surface coverage, maximum building height, and minimum yards for the underlying zoning district. 
(2)  Residential development standard. A custodial care facility shall be developed in a manner consistent with that of a residential structure and is, therefore, subject to the following regulations regardless of the underlying zoning district: Structures within required yards (section 25); Fences and enclosure walls (section 26); Signs (section 27); and Corner visibility (section 28). See 19.B.11 for parking standard. 
(3)  Permitted locations. A custodial care facility shall be permitted only by special exception in the following locations and no other: 
a.  A custodial care facility, with up to six or less residents, shall be allowed only by Special Exception in the following districts: RM-1 and RM-2; and 
b.  A custodial care facility, with up to 30 residents shall be allowed only by special exception in the following districts: BA, BA-1 BD, and BD-1. In a BA-1 district residential portions of custodial care facilities are limited to above ground floor occupancy. 
(4)  Prohibited Locations. Custodial care facilities are prohibited in the following zoning districts: 
a.  Residential: RS-1, RS-2, RH-1, RH-2 and RO; 
b.  Business: BB, BC, BD-3 and BE; and 
c.  Industrial: IL, IM and IH. 
(5)  Minimum lot area. A Custodial Care Facility shall have a minimum lot area of: 
a.  6,000 s.f. in RM-1 districts; and 
b.  5,400 s.f. in RM-2, BA, BA-1, BD and BD-1 districts. 
(6)  Minimum lot area per resident. There shall be a minimum of 500 s.f. of lot area for each of the first 20 residents. For facilities with more than 20 residents, there shall be a minimum of 500 s.f. of lot area for each of the first 20 residents and 1,000 s.f. for every one (1) resident above the first 20 residents. 
(7)  Location restriction. A custodial care facility shall not be located within 1,500 linear feet of a lawfully existing custodial care and/or alternative incarceration facility. The distance shall be measured in linear feet from the edge of the property line of the proposed custodial care facility to the edge of the property line of the use(s) listed above. 
(8)  Minimum exterior usable open space. There shall be a minimum amount of usable open space as follows: 
a.  100 s.f. per resident in a Residence District; and 
b.  75 s.f. per resident in a Business District. The area of front and side yards shall not be included to meet this requirement. 
(9)  Minimum interior recreational space. There shall be a minimum of 50 s.f. per resident useable interior recreation space. 
(10)  Staff. There shall be at least one (1) resident caretaker and at least one (1) staff person per 20 residents or portion thereof, on premises at all times. 
(11)  Parking standard. Custodial care facilities are to be developed in a manner consistent with that of a residential structure, and are therefore subject to parking standards pursuant to Section 29. The parking requirement shall be as follows: 
a.  Resident caretaker. One (1) off-street parking space for the resident caretaker; 
b.  Staff. One (1) off-street parking space for each day time full or part-time staff person at peak staff requirement time; 
c.  Resident. One (1) parking space per resident owning a motor vehicle; and 
d.  Visitor. One (1) parking space for each six (6) residents or portion thereof. 
(c)  Standards for review. Special exceptions for custodial care facilities shall be granted only where the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the proposed facility is in accord with the public convenience and welfare after taking into account the standards for review found in section 63.(d); compliance with the development standards found in section 19.(b); demonstration of need in the community and degree to which the applicant considered a number of in-city and regional locations; consistency with the comprehensive plan of development; the proximity and potential for adverse impact on public and private schools, emergency shelter facilities, and licensed day care centers. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 4, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12) 
TABLE 1. SUMMARY SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 
Note- This summary schedule is for convenience in use of the ordinance. In case of conflict, the District Regulations shall prevail. 
Key: R: As-of-Right SP: Special Permit SE: Special Exception X: Not Permitted 
Zoning District Use Category RS-1 RS-2 RM-1 RM-2 RH-1 RH-2 RO Residential, Temporary & Agricultural: Single-family detached dwellings R R R R R R R Other single-family dwellings X X R R R R R Two-family and multi-family dwellings X X R R R R R Limited conversion of dwellings by variance see text X X X X X Residential accessory buildings structures and uses R R R R R R R Zero lot line developments X X X X X R X Rooming, boarding and lodging houses X X X X X R X Automobile trailer camps X X X X X SE X Temporary uses and structures SE SE SE SE SE SE SE Live-work loft conversions (§ 18A) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Agriculture X R R R X R R Parking & Rights-of-Way: Accessory parking for permitted uses on separate lots: non-residential SE SE SE SE SE SE SE Accessory parking on separate lots: residential X X SE SE SE SE SE Transition parking X X SE SE X SE SE Railroads and other rights-of-way X SE SE SE X SE SE Government & Institutional: Parks, playgrounds R R R R R R R Reservoirs, Dams, Public utility substations and pumping stations, Telephone exchanges, Police and Fire stations, Post offices R R R R R R R Charitable and philanthropic organizations X X X X X R X Non-profit recreation facilities, community centers, clubs X SE SE SE X SE SE Non-profit cultural activities X R R R X R R Other non-profit social organizations X X X X X SE X Antenna or wireless site, subject to § 49, standards SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Custodial care facilities, with six or less residents, (See section 19) X X SE SE X X X Medical & Religious: Convalescent homes, rest homes, nursing homes, sanitariums, homes for the aged and handicapped, orphanages X X SE SE X SE SE General and special hospitals X R R R X R R Limited expansion of religious uses SE X X X SE X X Religious institutions X R R R X R R Educational, Fraternities & Sororities: Elementary and secondary schools X R R R X R R Colleges and universities X R R R X R R Fraternities & sororities on land owned by an educational institution X X SE SE X SE SE Fraternities & sororities not on land owned by an educational institution X X X X X SE X Limited expansion of educational uses SE X X X SE X X Daycare: Family daycare home R R R R R R R Group daycare home X SE SE SE X SE SE Child daycare center X X SE SE X SE SE Retail & Office: Convenience goods & services (See Section 31 Standards) X X R R X R R Customary home occupations and Professional home offices X X R R X R R Retail (15% of floor area) X X X X X R 1 X Professional offices (15% of floor area) 2 X X X X X R 3 X Professional, Government and Service offices (no floor area limit) X X X X X X R  
1 Retail located in a building that fronts on an arterial is permitted as of right. Retail located in all other buildings in the RH-2 District is permitted by special exception. 
2 If a building has both retail and professional offices, the total square feet of both is limited to 15% of the gross floor area. 
3 Professional offices located in a building that fronts on an arterial are permitted as of right. Professional offices located in other buildings are permitted by special exception. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 7, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS: 
TABLE 2. SUMMARY OF DENSITY, BULK, PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
Note- This Summary Schedule is for convenience in use of the ordinance. In case of conflict, the District Regulations shall prevail. Terms in boldface italics are defined in Section 1 of this Ordinance. 
Residential Districts Business & Industrial Districts MINIMUM STANDARDS RS1 RS2 RM1 RM2 RH1 RH2 RO BA BB BC BD BD-1 BD-2 BD-3 BE IL IH Lot Area (Square Feet) 7500 7500 6000 5400 7500 7 5400 7500 None None None None None None None None None None Lot Area per Dwelling Unit 1 Standard 7500 7500 3500 2000 NA NA NA 2000 2000 3500 NA NA NA NA NA X X (Square Feet) Efficiency NA NA 2500 1400 NA NA NA 1400 1400 2000 NA NA NA NA X X X Elderly NA NA 1750 1000 NA NA NA 1000 1000 1750 NA NA NA NA X X X Yards (In Feet) Front 25 25 20 17 25 5 25 ..... See Section 43 ..... Rear 25 25 25 2 25 10 25 ..... See Section 43 ..... Side 8,12 8,12 8,12 8,10  10,10 7 0 10 ..... See Section 43 ..... 2 Corner 8 8 8 8 10 0 10 ..... See Section 43 ..... Usable Open Space per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet) X X X X 125 125 125 X X X X X NA 50 X X X Elderly Housing Units 100 100 100 Average Lot Width (In Feet) 3 60 60 50 50 60 40 60 X X X X X NA NA X X X MAXIMUM STANDARDS Total Building Coverage (%) 30 30 30 30 25 4 50 4 25 4 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA ..... All buildings ..... ..... Principal ..... Buildings Building height, Lesser of: Number of Stories 3 3 3 4 No Direct Limit ..... No Direct Limit ..... 200 feet 8 No Direct Limit Average Height (In Feet) 35 35 35 45 No Direct Limit ..... No Direct Limit ..... No Direct Limit Floor Area Ratio (FAR) NA NA NA NA .5-1.7 2.0 .5-1.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 9 6.0 6.0 3.0 4.0 PARKING AND LOADING Per Dwelling Unit:       Elderly NA NA 1/2 1/2 1/2 1/31/2 1/2 1/2 1/2 0 1/2 1/2 1/2 NA NA NA Standard See note 5. below ..... 1 1 1 .75 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 NA NA NA For Public Housing Authority Lots NA NA NA NA NA 1/2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA For Commercial or Industrial Use: General Office, Per 600 N.S.F. NA NA NA NA 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 * 10 0 1 1 1 6 Retail, Per 200 N.S.F. Sales/Service Area NA NA NA NA 1 0 NA 1 1 1 0 0 * 10 0 1 1 1 Per Medical Practitioner NA NA NA NA NA 0 3 3 X X 0 0 * 10 * 10 X X X Other Uses NA See § 45 Zoning Ordinance Text For Other Uses Not Listed Here * 10 * 10 See § 45 Commercial or Industrial Use Loading See § 45(a)(1)(b) Ordinance Text - Depends On Whether Use Is Concerned With Handling Of Goods Key:  NA-Not Applicable; X-Not Permitted.  
Notes:   1 See Ordinance text for standard for developed blockfronts with lesser setbacks.   2 Corner lot: Any yard facing a street is a front yard. Rear and side yards are by owner choice.   3 Variable. Lower building coverage permits a higher floor area ratio (FAR), which is a ratio of gross building area to land area.   4 See subsection 15(b)(2) for expansion of certain institutional uses.   5 For single family dwellings that are detached dwellings in the RS1 and RS2 Districts, one parking space for the first bedroom and 1/2 parking space for each additional bedroom, rounded to the next higher whole number if a fraction. All parking spaces shall be located on the same lot. For an efficiency unit, one parking space.   6 For stores less than 5,000 square feet. One parking space per 100 square feet sales or service area is required for space over 5,000 square feet.   7 See section 15(b)(2) for expansion of certain institutional uses.   8 Ten-foot height bonus available under § 43(c)(2).   9 When a rear or side lot line in a BD-2 District abuts a residential district, FAR shall not exceed 2.5.   10 See section 45(a), section 45(a)(7) and section 12(b)(1)h.  
(Ord. No. 1377, 5-16-05; Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, § 2), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENCE DISTRICTS: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
    In addition to the requirements contained elsewhere in this ordinance, the following provisions shall apply to all areas of the city contained within any residence district. 

Section 21. - Conversion to a greater number of dwelling units and/or rooming units. 
    No existing building shall be converted to a greater number of dwelling units and/or rooming units unless in compliance with the requirements contained in the District Regulations for lot area per dwelling unit , lot area per sleeping room, lot area per square foot of gross floor area, and usable open space, and unless in addition: 
(a)  One additional off-street parking space is provided for each dwelling unit in the building added by conversion (except that only one parking space shall be required for each two elderly housing units ) and one off-street parking space is provided for each three beds in the building after conversion in the case of a rooming, boarding or lodging house. Such off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building being converted or (except in RS Districts) within 300 feet walking distance of an outside entrance to the dwelling unit or rooming units to which such parking space is assigned. 
(b)  Stairways leading to the second or any higher floor are located within the walls of the building wherever practicable, and stairways and fire escapes are otherwise located on the rear wall in preference to either side wall and in no case on a front wall or side wall facing a street. 
Section 22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, repealed former § 22 in its entirety which pertained to garden apartment buildings and derived from the 2003 republication of the zoning ordinance. 
Section 23. - Residential principal buildings and rooming, boarding and lodging houses; size of courts and distance between buildings. 
    The following requirements shall apply to any one or more of such buildings constructed after the effective date of these regulations. 
(a)  Minimum horizontal distance between facing walls of a court : 
(1)  Where both facing walls contain a window or windows; such distance shall be no less than 1.5 feet for each foot of average height , above the lower horizontal surface of the court , of the facing wall having the greater average height . 
(2)  Where only one of the facing walls contains a window or windows: such distance shall be no less than one foot for each foot of average height , above the lower horizontal surface of the court , of the facing wall that has no windows. 
(3)  Where neither of the facing walls contains a window or windows: such distance shall be no less than five feet. 
(b)  Minimum horizontal distance between two unattached buildings in single ownership located on a single lot: where any exterior wall of onebuildinglies such that it can be intersected by a line drawn perpendicular to an exterior wall of the otherbuilding, such distance shall be 0.5 ft. for each foot ofaverage building heightof the taller of the twobuildingsup to a maximum distance of 35 ft. 
(Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Section 24. - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  All accessory buildings shall be subject to the provisions of section 25 with regard to location within required yards and to the District Regulations with regard to building coverage. 
(b)  No accessory building shall have an average height of more than 12 feet for any portion of such accessory building that is located within a required yard . Any portion of an accessory building that is not located within a required yard may have such greater height as is permitted by the District Regulations. See illustration at end of this section. 
Section 25. - Structures within required yards utility meter, transformer or similar device placement. 
(a)  No wall of a building shall extend beyond the outer face of a building foundation wall into a required yard for more than six inches. 
(b)  A projection from a building may extend into a required yard for not more than one-third of the width of such required yard , but in no case more than five feet into such required yard for fire escapes, one-story open porches and steps leading up to the ground floor, or three feet into such required yard for all other projections, and in no case to within five feet of any lot line. 
(c)  Fences and enclosure walls located in required yards shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(d)  No accessory building shall be located within any required front yard , except as provided in subsection 29(c) An accessory building may be located within any required side yard or rear yard , provided that no part of such accessory building shall extend within five feet of any side lot line if located within a required side yard , or within five feet of any required side yard located on an adjoining lot , and in no case shall any accessory building be closer than two feet to any lot line unless it is built directly on such lot line. (The Building Code should also be consulted on distance of structures from lot lines. ) A one-story garage for storage of passenger cars that is on its own lot in an RM, RH or RO District may be located within required yards according to the standards of this subsection (d). 
(e)  No utility meter, electric transformer, or other similar device shall be placed on the street facade of any residential structure, or within any front yard in any residential district, except by variance from the board of zoning appeals, which shall make a written finding that a street facade of a structure or front yard is the only physically practicable location, and that the proposed installation is architecturally integrated with the structure or is so landscaped as to harmonize with the surroundings. 
Upon a written determination by the zoning enforcement officer that the meter or device is provided with evergreen landscaping, fencing, or other means of buffering so that the proposed installation is architecturally integrated with the structure or is so landscaped as to harmonize with the surroundings, a single structure with one to four dwelling units and not part of a larger development shall not be subject to this requirement. See illustration at end of this section. 
Requirements for Accessory buildings and Projections 
Section 26. - Fences and enclosure walls. 
    Fences and enclosure walls shall be subject to the provisions of section 25 if located within a required yard , and to the provisions of section 28 relating to corner visibility. 
Section 27. - Signs. 
    All signs in residence districts shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Specific signs permitted: 
(1)  Non-illuminated signs for home occupations and professional, governmental and service offices where permitted by the District Regulations, indicating only names of persons and their occupations or professions and names of governmental and service enterprises and organizations, not to exceed one square foot in area. 
(2)  Indirectly illuminated and non-illuminated signs indicating names of residents and house numbers, not to exceed one square foot in area. 
(3)  Non-illuminated signs indicating the name and purpose of a building and the name of its management, not to exceed three square feet in area. 
(4)  Temporary or non-illuminated signs of persons concerned with work on buildings under actual construction or alteration, located at least 10 feet inside any lot; line and not to exceed 20 square feet in area. 
(5)  Temporary non-illuminated signs advertising for sale or for rent the lot or building on which they are placed or some part thereof, located at least five feet inside any lot line and not to exceed ten square feet in area. 
(6)  Non-illuminated signs solely for the control of traffic and parking, not to exceed four square feet in area. 
(7)  Non-illuminated signs advertising for sale agricultural produce raised on the premises, where such sale is permitted, located at least 50 feet inside any lot line and at least 100 feet from any intersection, and not to exceed 30 square feet in area. 
(8)  Indirectly illuminated and non-illuminated signs of churches, schools, or other public or semi-public institutions and civic bodies, located at least ten feet inside any lot line and not to exceed 20 square feet in area. 
(9)  Directly illuminating, indirectly illuminated and non-illuminated business signs for establishments providing convenience goods or services under section 31 of this ordinance or providing accessory retail goods or services in an RH-2 District, which signs are to be of the belt type and of a size not exceeding ten percent of the area of the ground floor wall surface on which such signs are located, including window and door area. 
(b)  Additional requirements: 
(1)  No sign shall be located above the ground floor of any building, or more than 20 feet above the upper surface of the nearest curb, whichever is less. 
(2)  No part of a pole sign or ground sign shall be located closer to a street line than one-half of the required front yard for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  No sign shall violate the corner visibility restrictions in section 28. 
(4)  Any permitted indirect illumination shall be confined to the surface of the illuminated sign; such sign shall be located and arranged as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of any adjacent street, or into the path of oncoming vehicles, or onto any other residential premises. No flashing or rotating illumination shall be used. 
(5)  For each use on a lot, there shall be no more than one sign of each of the types described in subsection A above facing each street adjacent to such use, plus one such sign for each public entrance to such use in excess of one public entrance on each street. 
Section 28. - Corner visibility. 
    On a corner lot in any residence district, other than the RH-2 District, no planting shall be placed or maintained, and no fence, building, wall or other structure other than necessary retaining walls shall be constructed after the effective date of these regulations, if such planting or structure thereby obstructs vision at any point between a height of two and one-half feet and a height of ten feet above the upper face of the nearest curb and within the triangular area bounded on two sides by two street lines, or by projection of such lines to their point of intersection, and on the third side by a straight line connecting points of such street lines (or their projections) each of which points is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection of the two street lines. Poles, posts, and guys for street lights and for other utility services, and tree trunks exclusive of leaves and branches, shall not be considered obstructions to vision within the meaning of this provision. 
Corner Visibility 
  
(Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Section 29. - Parking. 
(a)  In any residence district parking spaces and bicycles spaces shall be provided in the amount and location specified by the regulations of that district. Where parking requirements are expressed as a ratio to beds, employees, floor area, etc., any fraction of the stated amount of beds, employees, floor area, etc., shall require one parking space or bicycle space, but after the first such parking space or bicycle space, only a fraction of 1/2 or greater shall require an additional parking space or bicycle space. 
(b)  All parking spaces shall be 9 feet × 18 feet exclusive of adequate driveways and aisles, except, thirty (30%) of all parking spaces may be compact car spaces if located in a parking lot or structure that contains 20 or more parking spaces. All parking spaces shall have direct access to a circulation aisle, alley or street, be suitably surfaced and drained and be provided with bumper or wheel guards where needed. All parking areas containing three or more parking spaces shall include a turnaround designed and located so that vehicles can enter and exit the area without backing into the public right-of-way. 
(c)  No parking space shall be located within any required front yard , except that: parking spaces (whether enclosed or not) may be permitted to be located within a required front yard by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance upon finding, among other things, that such parking spaces are necessary to the use with which they are connected, that they cannot be practically located elsewhere on the lot, that their location within a required front yard will not depreciate property values or cause vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazards or substantially decrease the open aspect of the street, and that such parking spaces are properly screened and otherwise arranged in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
A parking space or bicycle space may be located within a required side yard or rear yard , provided that no such parking space or bicycle space shall extend within two feet of any side of any side lot line or rear lot line ; but a parking space or bicycle space within an accessory building shall follow the requirements of section 25 as to location within required side and rear yards . 
(d)  A site shall provide two bicycle spaces for the first ten required or proposed parking spaces and one additional bicycle space for each additional ten required or proposed motor vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof. 
In any case of a use in a residence district for which ten or more motor vehicle parking spaces are required one bicycle parking space may be substituted for one motor vehicle parking space per each ten required motor vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof. 
(e)  Bicycle parking spaces shall comply with designs approved by the City of New Haven Department of Transportation, Traffic and Parking and at a minimum must provide a bicycle rack that permits the locking of a bicycle frame and one wheel while supporting the bicycle in a stable position that will not damage the bicycle or its components or interfere with pedestrian access to the sidewalk and ingress and egress to buildings or facilities. Required bicycle parking spaces are also subject to the additional following standards: 
(1)  Short-term bicycle parking is intended to encourage bicycle use for shoppers, customers and visitors by providing convenient bicycle parking located adjacent to main entrances of buildings. It should be located within 50 feet of each main building entrance as measured by the most direct pedestrian access route. 
(2)  Long-term bicycle parking provides safe and weather protected places for users requiring longer periods of bicycle storage such as residents, employees and students. Specific requirements include: 
a.  Long-term bicycle must be located on or within 100 feet of the site. 
b.  At least 50 percent of required spaces must be covered. 
c.  The area must be locked or secured. 
(3)  Short and long range parking by use. 
a.  Multi-family residential: Short term-10%, long term-90% 
b.  Retail, restaurant: Short term-66%, long term -33% 
c.  Office: Short term-20%, long term-80% 
d.  Manufacturing and warehouse: Long term-100% 
e.  Medical uses: Short term-66%, Long term-33% 
f.  Other uses: To be determined by City Plan Commission 
(f)  In the case of any use in a residence district for which three or more parking spaces are required, all parking spaces not within a building shall be provided with a suitable fence, wall or evergreen planting at least five feet in height, designed to screen noise, odors, visibility and headlight glare, and located between such parking spaces and any other lot in a residence district that abuts directly or across a street or alley. This requirement shall not apply to parking spaces located on a lot owned by a public housing authority. 
(g)  All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces shall be so arranged that all direct rays from such lighting fall entirely within such parking space or spaces and shall comply with the requirements of Section 60.1 of these regulations regarding exterior lighting. 
(h)  No sales or servicing or dead storage of automobiles or automotive equipment shall be carried on in any parking space . 
(i)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to lessen the requirements of this ordinance as to the number of parking spaces required and/or increase the maximum allowable walking distance to such parking spaces, but only upon a finding that either particular circumstance or mitigative measures qualify such action. Particular circumstance may include, but not be limited to availability of public parking, proximity to public transit or significant levels of pedestrian access. Mitigative measures may include, but not be limited to van and/or car pooling, public parking validation programs, flexible work schedules or other transportation demand management measures. All deviations from normal requirements by means of this paragraph shall be considered as special exceptions under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance. In the case of any religious or educational institution or any hospital, which has an overall parking plan for all of its facilities which has been approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals, the limit of 300 feet walking distance shall not apply. Amendments to a parking plan that covers an area which include a planned development must be submitted for approval per section 65 of this ordinance. All deviations from normal requirements by means of this subsection 29(i) shall be considered special exceptions under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance, and the Board of Zoning Appeals may impose time limits where it finds that the continued adequacy of such other parking standards cannot be fairly predicted. 
(j)  Where it is proposed that two or more uses for which a parking space or spaces are required make joint use of the same parking space or spaces, such joint use shall not be permitted unless: 
(1)  A special exception is granted under the provisions of subsection 63(d), upon a finding, among other things, that the proposed joint use of parking will meet the requirements of this ordinance for the two or more uses involved at the time when such uses are in operation. 
(k)  Two parking spaces may be subtracted from the quantity of parking spaces required for a use or a structure for each carsharing parking space provided in a parking lot or structure containing 50 or fewer parking spaces serving such use or structure, provided, however, that in no event shall the number of parking spaces provided for a use or a structure (excluding carsharing parking spaces ) be reduced by more than five percent of the parking spaces required for such use or structure. Five parking spaces may be subtracted from the quantity of parking spaces required for a use or a structure for each carsharing parking space provided in such parking lot or structure containing in excess of 50 parking spaces, provided, however, that in no event shall the number of parking spaces provided for a use or a structure (excluding carsharing parking spaces ) be reduced by more than ten percent of the parking spaces required for such use or structure. Fifty percent of carsharing parking spaces at the same location may be compact parking spaces. 
(l)  Once any required parking space has been established within the provisions of this section 29, whether on the same lot as the structure or use to which it is assigned or on a separate lot, such parking space shall not be discontinued if the result would be a reduction below the amount of parking required by this ordinance. Any such discontinuation of a parking space shall constitute a violation of this ordinance, and any existing building permit or certificate of occupancy that could not have been issued without the assignment of such parking space to the structure or use for which it was issued shall become null and void. 

Parking, Etc., Requirements in Residential Zones 
  
  
(Ord. No. 1357, § 3, 9-7-04; 1662, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13) 
Section 30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1726, Sched. 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, repealed former § 30 in its entirety which pertained to optional rules concerning height of buildings in relation to distance from lot lines and derived from the 2003 republication of the zoning ordinance. 
Section 31. - Special provision for convenience goods and services in residence districts. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. This provision exists in order to provide for the continued availability in certain residential neighborhoods of convenience goods and services to meet the daily needs of neighborhood residents within a short distance of their homes. It is intended that the uses allowed be limited to those which are both necessary to the neighborhood and so arranged that they will cause minimum conflict with the residential character of the area. 
(b)  Usesprovided for. Where provided for in the District Regulations, the supplying of any of the following convenience goods and services, entirely at retail, shall be considered a use which may be permitted by special exception under the conditions of this section 31: 
(1)  Convenience stores, groceries and related goods, including incidental seating for a maximum of six people. No additional parking shall be required for incidental seating. 
(2)  Baked goods, including incidental seating for a maximum of six people. No additional parking shall be required for incidental seating. 
(3)  Package liquor, subject to section 42.1 of this zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Drugs or cosmetics, with or without an incidental soda fountain or lunch counter. 
(5)  Barbering. 
(6)  Beautician services. 
(7)  Laundering, cleaning, dyeing, with all business at retail on the premises, including pick-up station and any self-service laundromat. 
(8)  Tailoring. 
(9)  Shoe repair. 
(10)  Tobacco or news. 
(11)  Accessory uses , customarily incidental to the above permitted uses , occupying no more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the establishment. 
(12)  One or two game machines as an accessory use provided the hours of operation shall not exceed those of the principal use , and meeting the general standards of section 42.2(b) of the zoning ordinance. 
(13)  Seasonal outdoor seating for a maximum of 15 seats may be provided on private property as an accessory use to shops selling baked goods, and groceries and related goods, and convenience stores . A maximum of 15 indoor and outdoor seats is permitted and no additional parking shall be required for seasonal outdoor seating. The City Plan Commission may adopt administrative regulations regarding the placement, spacing and storage of tables and chairs and other operational limits as it deems necessary. Special consideration shall be given to the placement, spacing and storage of tables and chairs and other operational limits on outdoor seating that is proposed to extend into the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Existing uses of the above types may continue, but: 
(1)  The rules of subparagraph 67(c)(6).b of this ordinance shall determine whether any use has been abandoned, and any such use that has been abandoned shall not be reestablished except as a new use under subsection (d) below. 
(2)  Conversion from one of the above permitted uses to another such use shall be considered the establishment of a new use under subsection (d) below. 
(3)  No alteration of a structure or of the remainder of the premises shall be made which creates or increases any nonconformity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(4)  Any expansion of the amount of floor area and/or lot area occupied by the use or by functions incidental to it (such as parking and loading) shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (d) below. 
(d)  New uses of the above types may be established, and existing uses expanded, only by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance, subject to the following standards in addition to others which may be applicable: 
(1)  There must be a finding by the City Plan Commission that space for such a use is not available in nearby areas which are zoned for business, and that such new use or expansion of an existing use is necessary to serve the immediate neighborhood adequately with convenience goods or services, giving due consideration, among other things, to the character of the neighborhood, the density of development, the shopping habits of neighborhood residents, and the availability of public and private transportation. The clustering of two or more uses of diverse types, rather than scattering of such uses , shall generally be regarded as an advantage, but the existence nearby of a use of the same type as one which is proposed shall require a more extensive showing of necessity for the proposed use . As a general rule, clustering of uses shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of net floor area for all uses in a cluster. 
(2)  The net floor area used for sales or other business purposes in any establishment (excluding space used for storage and similar purposes) shall not exceed 1,500 square feet. 
(3)  In the case of new construction and additions and alterations, the yard requirements and other applicable Building Requirements in the District Regulations shall control. 
(4)  If the City Plan Commission determines that off-street parking is necessary, such parking shall be supplied in the quantity specified by the City Plan Commission, complying with the standards of section 29 of this ordinance. 
(5)  No business shall be conducted, and no goods, materials or equipment shall be stored, except in a fully enclosed building . 
(6)  Establishments of the "drive-in" type, offering goods or services directly to customers waiting in parked vehicles, shall not be permitted. 
(7)  The exterior presentation and design of storefront(s) shall be submitted as part of the special exception review. The following shall not be allowed on the exterior of a building or grounds: telephones; on-premises or off-premises signs, banners, or temporary advertising materials except those permitted pursuant to section 29(a)(9) [these regulations]; security gates covering window and door openings; and vending machines. 
(8)  The ground-floor storefront shall consist, at a minimum, 50% non-opaque visible windows. 
(9)  The establishment shall maintain the property free of trash and debris, shall provide a regular maintenance schedule. 
(e)  All uses permitted by this section shall comply with the requirements for signs in section 27 of this ordinance. 
Section 32. - Standards for flag or corridor lots in RS-1 and RS-2 Residence Districts. 
(a)  Supplemental statement of purpose. This provision exists to protect the character, privacy and fabric of established single family residential neighborhoods in the City of New Haven, and recognizes that the effects of development of residences on flag or corridor lots poses unique problems which require additional standards to assure compatibility with existing surrounding uses. 
These additional standards for review exist in order to protect neighborhoods, to minimize conflicts with adjacent uses and the surrounding area, to assure the health and safety of the public by providing adequate buffering and parking on site, to provide adequate circulation within and egress from the premises, and to assure compatibility with surrounding uses by incorporating building massing, design, and materials which are compatible with surrounding structures. 
(b)  Uses provided for. The development of flag or corridor lots shall be permitted by special exception under the standards of subsection 63 and the additional standards of this section 32. 
(c)  Additional standards for review of flag or corridor lots. 
(1)  The effect of interior and exterior noise on immediate neighbors and other nearby uses . 
(2)  Architectural compatibility with existing area structures in terms of scale, massing and materials. 
(3)  The adequacy of on-site parking and potential impacts on adjacent or nearby residential uses . 
(4)  The placement and adequacy of landscaping, fencing, lighting and other exterior features which may affect the privacy of the subject property and abutting land uses . 
(d)  Building requirements. 
Minimum lot area: 7,500 sq. ft. 
Minimum average lot width: 60 feet. 
Maximum building coverage: 30%, including accessory structures. 
Maximum building height: Such height shall not exceed three stories or an average height of 35 feet. 
Minimum distance between principal buildings : There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet from an abutting pre-existing residential principal structure regardless of property lines. 
Yards : 
Front and rear yards : 25 feet. 
Side yards : 15 feet. 
Minimum buildable area: A rectangle, excluding required yards , having a minimum dimension of not less than 30 feet by 75 feet. 
Maximum impervious surface coverage: Total building and paved area (parking and walk-ways) shall not exceed 70% of the lot area. 
(e)  Access and parking. 
(1)  Parking: One parking space for the first bedroom, and 1/2 parking spaces for each additional bedroom, rounded to the next higher number if a fraction. All parking spaces shall be located on the same lot , a minimum distance of two feet away from any adjacent residential property, and shall conform to section 29 and the remainder of the General Provisions for Residence Districts in Article IV. 
(2)  Access corridor: A flag or corridor lot shall be connected to a street by an access corridor having a width of not less than 16 feet nor more than 25 feet, and a length not more than 250 feet. The area of the access corridor shall not be included in determining the lot area. 
(f)  Buffering and landscaping. 
(1)  Buffer: Any parking area with three or more cars shall be provided with a planting screen and suitable fence providing year round screening to shield cars from view from surrounding properties, and shall be maintained in good condition. The space between parking and any such planting screen or fence shall be landscaped with grass, shrubs or evergreen ground cover and maintained in good condition. 
(2)  Site perimeter: If residential uses abut the site, any lot line between the residential uses shall be provided with a planting screen and suitable fence providing year round screening, and shall be maintained in good condition. 
Section 33. - Wireless communications in residence districts. 
    Regulation of wireless communications in residence districts shall be subject to the policies and standards of section 49 of this ordinance. 
Section 34. - Keeping of hens. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. This regulation is intended to make provision for the limited keeping of female chickens, henceforth referred to as hens, on certain residential properties for the health, convenience and personal enjoyment benefits afforded by such use, in a manner which preserves the quality of life of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  No more than six (6) hens may be kept on any property located in the following residence zoning districts as a non-commercial accessory use: 
RM-2 
RS-1 
RS-2 
RM-1 
(c)  The use shall be confined to a fenced enclosure of no more than 200 square feet in area, located in a rear yard. The fenced enclosure shall be at least 25 feet from any street line, at least 15 feet from any residential dwelling and at least five feet from any property line. In the instance that more than one distance requirement shall apply, the greater distance requirements shall apply. 
(d)  Any portion of the enclosure located closer than ten feet to a property boundary or directly visible from a street line at any distance shall be screened by either a fence or a landscaped buffer of at least four feet in height. 
(e)  A building shall be required for the hens. Any building used for this purpose shall be located at least ten feet from any lot line. All such buildings shall be constructed and all food products kept so as to prevent offensive odors and the presence of pests and predators. 
(f)  No hens may be kept inside any structure used for residential purposes. 
(g)  No rooster shall be kept on any property. 
(h)  The keeping of hens shall be conducted in a manner consistent with and in compliance with the Health Code of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 9-8-09) 
Sections 35-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 41. - Description and purpose of business and industrial districts. 
    The Business and Industrial districts contained in this zoning ordinance are established to provide for the most rational and orderly separation of land uses according to their function in the city, and to fulfill the other purposes of zoning. The regulations herein adopted are hereby found and declared to be appropriate to New Haven and in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed for the continued vitality and development of the city. The following statements of description and purpose outline the main functions of these districts in the zoning plan. 
    Business A Districts-General Business. These districts serve several functions. They provide central concentrations of convenience goods and services for one or more neighborhoods, supplemented by more scattered stores for such goods and services within the neighborhoods provided for under a special provision of the regulations for residence districts. They provide comparison shopper's goods, specialty goods, amusements and numerous services for less than a citywide market. And they also provide locations for small businessmen with a city-wide market who cannot operate in the downtown area. The predominant purpose of all these functions is retail trade. 
    Business A-1 Districts-Neighborhood Center Mixed Use. These districts serve as the commercial heart of their neighborhood, are of modest scale and pedestrian orientation, and seek to preserve and restore the historic architecture and urban pattern of the city. The emphasis is on neighborhood goods and services rather than comparison shopping , with a preference for smaller pedestrian-oriented, storefront retail, dinning, and other appropriate uses. They are intended as mixed-use districts with a mixture of ground floor retail, small offices, and upper story residential dwellings. Buildings are oriented to the street, parking requirements are reduced and parking maximums established to encourage walkability and community over automotive-related sprawl. New development is required by form requirements and design guidelines to conform to the neighborhood context, to improve the retail character of the street as a neighborhood center, and to promote the health, safety and well being of residents by reducing sources of public nuisance and encouraging physical activity and community interaction and involvement. 
    Business A-2 Districts-Village Center Mixed Use. These districts serve distinct mixed-use communities woven into the larger tapestry of New Haven. Parking is reduced and density is increased to encourage development of neglected or vacant buildings into pedestrian-oriented storefront retail, dining, and other appropriate uses. Upper story residential dwellings are encouraged along commercial strips and ground floor residential dwellings are encouraged on side streets. Height limits are maintained to prevent over-development, but the district otherwise does not restrict property owners' ability to employ a range of architectural styles. 
    Business B Districts-Automotive Sales. These districts follow a deliberate policy which recognizes the importance of automotive sales to the city and further recognizes that such sales can perform their function in the best and most integrated manner by concentration in certain areas of the city. Establishments for the sale of new vehicles, and for the sale of large numbers of used vehicles, are concentrated in these areas, from which non-related uses are excluded in order to assure the maximum development of automobile sales and related uses. 
    Business C Districts-Marine. These districts exist to separate out certain waterfront areas which have-and are encouraged to be-a mix of water-dependent public access, recreational boating, public and private marinas, commercial and recreational fishing, community based, water related activities and waterfront residential environments. 
    Business D District-Central Business. This district comprises the main downtown section of the city, known in planning terms as the Central Business District (CBD). Here are concentrated activities that have primarily a citywide and regional function: large stores offering comparison shopper's goods, specialty stores, business services, banks, offices, theaters, hotels and government buildings. Land use is intensive and this intensity of uses is one of the main determinants of the vitality of the Central Business District. It is the purpose of these regulations to encourage such intensity of use and to exclude activities which have a negative effect upon the proper functioning of the downtown area. 
    Business D-1 Districts-Central Business/Residential. These districts include appropriate downtown areas which have concentrations of historic structures suitable for both residential and commercial use. This district concentrates residential uses at high density mixed with activities that have both a city-wide and district-wide function: small stores offering comparison shopper's goods, specialty stores, business services, offices and entertainment uses. The use of land is intensive, but respects the historic character of existing historic structures. It is the purpose of these regulations to encourage preservation of existing historic structures, conversion of existing structures to residential use, high intensity of use, and to exclude activities that have a negative effect upon the proper functioning of National Register Historic Districts or of the larger downtown. 
    Business D-2 Districts-Central Business/Medical. This district Includes appropriate areas in and around the city's hospitals and medical centers having high density medical institutional uses including hospitals, clinical, laboratory or bioscience research space, patient care medical offices, and supportive accessory uses, with pedestrian-friendly ground floor retail uses in some buildings. The district allows intensive use of land for such uses subject to site plan approval to further the city's policy of encouraging dense development of institutional uses within concentrated areas in and around the Central Business District while maintaining a human-scale streetscape. It is the purpose of these regulations to allow such intensity of hospital, medical, research and medical institutional uses in combination with street-level retail uses encouraging pedestrian connections between the medical areas and adjacent neighborhoods and business districts, and to exclude uses which are incompatible with or would have a negative effect upon the functioning of hospital, medical and research and medical institutional uses. 
    Business D-3 Districts-Central Business/Mixed-Use. These districts in the urban core are reserved for intensive development, including multi-story and mid and high rise buildings. They provide for mixed uses, including hospital outpatient clinics, other medical clinics, biotechnology research centers, high and medium density residences, offices, and commercial uses, including retail shops and restaurants. These districts also connect the city's central business and medical and educational districts with each other and with the city's transportation center at Union Station. The Central Business/Mixed Use districts are pedestrian, bicycle and transit friendly. Uses on the ground floors of nonresidential and mixed use buildings that face public rights-of-way in these districts should include retail and active uses that are in part or in whole transparent from sidewalks and streets. 
    Business E Districts-Wholesale and Distribution. These districts furnish goods and services that are mainly used in support of retail trade for the city and the region. The principal activities located here are wholesaling, warehousing, transportation, heavy business services, distribution, and some incidental processing. Such functions are generally located in such a position that they can support the Central Business Districts and at the same time concentrate their heavy traffic requirements near the main arteries for movement of goods and services. 
    Industry L Districts-Light Industry. These districts, in common with other business and industrial districts, are regulated by a set of performance standards prescribing upper limits for nuisance factors such as noise and smoke. Industries are permitted which keep within those limits, as well as business uses which generally support and are integrated with other uses in such districts. Further development of residences is prohibited from these districts and also from Industry H and Business E Districts, in order to conserve the supply of heavy commercial and industrial land and to prevent residences from being established under strongly adverse conditions. Industry L Districts are characterized in general by less intensive development and fewer outdoor uses than Industry H Districts. 
    Industry M Districts-Light Industry/Marine. These districts are regulated by a series of land use controls and performance measures in areas of the city with both waterfront and industrial characteristics with limited freight transportation connections and/or located in close proximity to a residential neighborhood. Uses allowed within the district are both marine and light industrial in nature. 
    Industry H Districts-Heavy Industry. These districts have many regulations similar to those in Industry L Districts. They are apt. however, to be more intensively developed and to contain older and heavier industries. These districts also contain vacant industrial land with a high potential for development. Fewer business uses are contained in these districts than in Industry L Districts. Less restriction is placed upon outdoor uses, although such uses must conform to the performance standards which apply to other industries. Certain uses, with established functions in the economy but having a well-known nuisance potential, are permitted only in Industry H Districts and there only by special exception. 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 1, 3-20-06; Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, § 3), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1842, Sched. B, 6-4-18) 
Section 42. - Use regulations for business and industrial districts. 
    The following table describes the uses permitted in each business or industrial district. 
    In any case where a use is not specifically referred to by the following table, its status under this section shall be determined by the zoning enforcement officer, by reference to a clearly analogous use or uses that are specifically referred to by the table. When the status of a use has been so determined by the zoning enforcement officer, such determination shall thereafter have general applicability to all uses of the same type. For uses that are not specified and are not clearly analogous to uses specifically referred to in the following table, an application must be made either for an amendment to the zoning ordinance or for a use variance with the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    Accessory uses customarily incidental to uses in the table are permitted in connection with such uses. Such accessory uses may include residences of caretakers and other such persons who must live in the area for the convenience of business or industry, and their dependents. 
    Matters closely related to use are regulated by: 
(1)  Bulk and yards ..... § 43 and § 47 
(2)  Signs ..... § 44 
(3)  Parking and loading ..... § 45 
(4)  Automotive and drive-in establishments ..... § 45 
(5)  Outdoor activities and storage ..... § 46 
(6)  Performance standards ..... § 48 
ZONING DISTRICT ABBREVIATIONS 
BA: General Business BA-1: Neighborhood Center Mixed Use BA-2: Village Center BB: Automotive Sales BC: Marine Commercial BD: Central Business BD-1: Central Business/Residential BD-2: Central/Business/Medical BD-3 Central Business/Mixed-Use BE: Wholesale and Distribution IL: Light Industry IM: Light Industry/Marine IH: Heavy Industry  
INTERPRETATION OF USE TABLE 
R: Permitted as of right SE: Permitted only by special exception under § 63(d) of this ordinance SP: Permitted only by special permit under § 64(e) of this ordinance X: Not permitted  
Parking: Key letters refer to Parking Standards in § 45(a)(1)a. Loading: Key letters refer to Loading Standards in § 45(a)(1)b.  
TABLE 3. USE TABLE 
Key:  R - Permitted As-of-Right SP - Special Permit SE - Special Exception X - Not Permitted NA - Not Applicable In case of conflict between this Table 3 and the text of the Zoning Ordinance, the text shall prevail. Use BA BA-1 BA-2 BB BC BD BD-1 BD-2 BD-3 BE IL IM IH Parking (5) Loading (5) A. Residential Uses 1. Dwelling units in multi-family dwellings located above first stories of structures at a maximum density of one unit per 1000 sq. ft. of gross floor area of entire building and limited to gross floor areas as defined in the New Haven Zoning Ordinance. 
Except that properties subject to Development or Land Disposition Agreements involving the City of New Haven shall not be subject to the above density limitation R R R R SP R R R R X NA X X c y 2. Dwelling units in multi-family dwellings located on first stories only in combination with upper story residential use (if applicable) at a maximum density of one unit per 1000 sq. ft. of gross floor area of entire building and limited to gross floor areas as defined in the New Haven Zoning Ordinance. 
Except that properties subject to Development or Land Disposition Agreements involving the City of New Haven shall not be subject to the above density limitation SP SP R/ 
SP 1 SP SP SP SP SP SP X NA X X c y 3. Dwelling units in existing structures of at least 50,000 sq. ft. gross floor area and no less than two stories in height built prior to 1963, at a maximum density of one unit per 1000 sq. ft. of existing gross floor area and limited to gross floor areas as defined in the New Haven Zoning Ordinance except that a maximum five percent increase in building gross floor area for non-habitable areas of interior circulation (i.e., elevators, stairwells and common hallways) is permitted regardless of site floor to area ratio. 
Commercial Use in such structures or on such properties limited to those permitted in both the IL District by right or Special Permit and either in BA, BA-1, BD-2 or BD-3 Districts by right, Special Exception or Special Permit and excluding all uses listed in Sections M. (Automotive) and O. (Construction and Related Goods and Services) of this table (Table 3) NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA SP NA NA c 4. Custodial care facilities (See § 19) SE SE SE X X SE SE R X X X X X See 
Section 19 y 5. Live-Work Loft Residences Pursuant To Article III Section 18A SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP See 
Section 18A(a)(3) y 6. Live-Work Unit-(Post 1963 and new structures) (See definition) X X SP X X X X X SP X X X X See 
Section 18A(a)(3) y 7. Assisted Living (see definition), Elderly and Disabled Housing R R R X X R R R R X X X X c y B. Transient Lodging Rooming or boarding house. R X X X X R X X X X X X X b none Hotel, Bed Breakfast or Tourist Home, 12 or fewer guest rooms R R R X SP R R R R X X X X a y Hotel, Bed Breakfast or Tourist Home, 13 or more guest rooms R X SP X SE R R R R X X X X a y Motel. R X X X SE R X X X X X X X a y C. Sale of Food, Drink & Pharmaceuticals STORE SELLING ITS GOODS PREDOMINANTLY AT RETAIL ON PREMISES, AS FOLLOWS: Bakery (Wholesale bakery, see § 42 S. Heavy Commercial). R R R X X R R R R R R X X n x Pharmacy or Cosmetic store, including sale of goods and services customarily incidental thereto. R R R X SE R R R R R R X R n x Convenience store R SP X X SP R R R R R X R R n x Food specialty store, including but not limited to following lines: Eggs, fish, meat (excluding slaughtering and eviscerating), poultry (excluding slaughtering), fruits, nuts, candy, teas, coffee, confection, dairy products, health foods, vegetables. R R R X SE R R R R X R X X n x Grocery, Delicatessen, Supermarket or other store carrying a variety of food and related goods. R R R X SE R R R R X R X X n Package Alcoholic liquor, subject to § 42.1. provisions. R SE SE R X R R R R R R X R n x Poultry market, including slaughtering of poultry for sale on the premises (for other slaughtering, see § 42 T.). SE SE X X X SE X X X X X X X n x D. Personal Services Barber shop, beauty shop, reducing salon. R SE R X SE R R R R X R X X n y Laundry, cleaner, dyer, clothing storage establishment (all, including pick-up station), or self-service laundromat, all performing services entirely for retail trade on premises. (For wholesale cleaning, laundering, dyeing, diaper service see § 42 S). R SE SE X SE R R R R X R X X n x Health clubs, gyms, personal training, with associated classes R R R X X R R R R X R X X n x Tailor, dressmaker, shoe shine or shoe repair shop. R R R X X R R R R X X X X n x Repair shop for repairs or adjustments to appliances, watches, locks and similar items. R R R X X R R R R R X X X n x Photographic studio. R R R X X R R R R X X X X n y Travel agency, travel ticket office. R R R X X R R R R R X X X n y Vocational, trade or business school. R SE SE X X R R R R R R X X r y Driving school R SE SE R X X X X R X X X X r y Funeral home. R SE X X X R R R X X X X X p y Gun and weapons repair, firearms training. SE X X X X SE X X X SE SE X SE n y Firing range. X X X X X X X X X X SE X SE n y Pawn shop or swap shop (may include second-hand goods, precious metals purchase or resale), provided no location is within 1,500 feet from the outside entrance to another such use. SE SE X X X SE X X X X X X X n y E. Eating, Drinking Places & Entertainment ESTABLISHMENTS SELLING FOOD OR BEVERAGES FOR IMMEDIATE CONSUMPTION ON OR OFF PREMISES, INCLUDING ESTABLISHMENT WHERE LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IS A PRINCIPAL OR ACCESSORY USE. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS ZONING ORDINANCE A CHANGE FROM ONE CLASSIFICATION OF EATING, DRINKING OR ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT TO ANOTHER SHALL BE CONSIDERED A NEW USE. EATING AND DRINKING PLACES Establishment selling food for immediate consumption on or off premises. R R R R SE R R R R R R SP R p x Restaurant, as defined in Article I, Section 1, selling or serving alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption on or off premises, including accessory entertainment, or permitting immediate consumption of alcoholic beverages on or off premises, including accessory entertainment. SE SE SE SE SE R R R R SE R SP R p x Other establishment selling or serving alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption on or off premises, including accessory entertainment, or permitting immediate consumption of alcoholic beverages on or off premises, including accessory entertainment. SE SE SE SE SE R SE SE R SE R SP R p x Drive-in establishment selling food for immediate consumption on or off premises - more than 250 feet from any residential use. R X X R X R X X X R X X R p x Drive-in establishment selling food for immediate consumption on or off premises - within 250 feet of any residential use. SE X X SE X X X X X SE X X SE p x ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS Adult cabaret less than 1,500 feet from another adult cabaret, bar in the same structure, or adult use as defined in § 42.3 of this ordinance. X X X X X X X X X X X X X p x Adult cabaret more than 1,500 feet from another adult cabaret, bar in the same structure, or adult use as defined in § 42.3 of this ordinance:  With Liquor Service. X X X X X SE X X X SE SE X SE p x  No Liquor Service. X X X X X SE X X X SE SE X SE p x F. Vending Machines > Vending machine selling food or personal articles or services, so placed that it is not beyond any street or building line, not within any required yard, and does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. R X SE R SE SE SE SE SE R R X R NA NA Pedestrian-accessible automatic teller machines (ATM) located in fully enclosed buildings or structures R R R R R R R R R R R R R NA NA G. General Merchandise and Clothing STORE SELLING OR RENTING ITS GOODS PREDOMINANTLY AT RETAIL ON THE PREMISES, AS FOLLOWS: Apparel, including all apparel specialties. R R R X X R R R R X X X X n x Department store (includes sale of specific items mentioned elsewhere in table, if customarily sold in store). R R R X X R R R R X X X X n x Variety store (including sale of specific items mentioned in this table, if customarily sold in store). R R R X X R R R R X X X X n x H. Personal Goods SPECIALTY STORE SELLING OR RENTING ITS GOODS PREDOMINANTLY AT RETAIL ON THE PREMISES, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE FOLLOWING LINES: Books, News Tobacco, Gifts, Cards, Art supplies, Stationery, Pets, Toys, Coins, Flowers, Jewelry, Leather goods, Luggage, Novelties, Sporting goods, Bicycles, Stamps, Hobbies, Art Work, Photo supplies, Music, Musical Instruments, Optical goods, Religious articles. R R R X SE R R R R X X X X n x Gun shops and accessory goods sales including ammunition, subject to § 42.4 zoning ordinance. provisions. X X X X X SE X X X SE SE X SE n x I. Home Goods and Furnishings STORE SELLING OR RENTING ITS GOODS PREDOMINANTLY AT RETAIL ON THE PREMISES, AS FOLLOWS: China, glass, pottery. R R R X X R R R R X R X X n x Antiques and second hand goods, excluding motor vehicles/parts, and excluding materials held only for discard or reprocessing. R R R X X R R R R X R X X n x Fabrics, curtains, linens knitting & upholstery supplies. R R R X X R R R R X R X X n x Furniture, floor covering, appliances. R R R X X R R R R X R X X n x Farm & garden supplies, includes greenhouse, nursery. R R R X X X R X R R R X X n x Hardware, paint, wallpaper. R R R X X R R R R X R X X n x SPECIALTY HOME GOODS & SKILLED TRADES WITH A COMBINATION OF ON PREMISES FABRICATION AND SALES, AS FOLLOWS: Art work, art supplies, baskets, books, candles, curtains, dresses, fabrics, furniture, gifts, glass, jewelry, linens, musical instruments, optical goods, pottery, photography, printing, sporting goods, stationary, toys, upholstery. R R R R R R R R R R SP SP SP s x Music, Film and Recording Studio SP SP SP X X SP SP SP SP R SP SP SP s x J. Financial Services Bank or other credit agency. R R R R X R R R R R R X X n y Broker Investment company. R R R X X R R R R R R X X o y Insurance company or agency. R R R R X R R R R R R X X o y Renumeration, money order, notary establishments SE SE X SE X SE SE SE R SE X X X n y Check cashing or payday loan establishments SP SP X SP X SP SP SP X SP X X X n y K. Office OFFICE - NO STORAGE OF A STOCK IN TRADE (EXCEPT SAMPLES) OR HEAVY MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT, & NO COMMODITIES SALE ON PREMISES, AS FOLLOWS: General, charitable, philanthropic, other professional. R R R X X R R R R X R X X o y Radio or television stations studio and/or offices only. R R R X X R R R R R R X X o y Utility, including exchange. R SP SE SE SE R R R R R R X X o y Wholesale or distribution. R SP SP X X R R R X R R X X o y L. Amusements ESTABLISHMENT SO ARRANGED THAT LIGHTS, NOISE, VIBRATION, AND ALL OTHER POSSIBLE DISTURBING ASPECTS CONNECTED WITH ITS OPERATION ARE ENCLOSED, SCREENED OR OTHERWISE CONTROLLED TO THE EXTENT THAT THE OPERATION OF THE ESTABLISHMENT WILL NOT UNDULY INTERFERE WITH THE USE AND ENJOYMENT OF STREETS OR PROPERTIES IN THE SURROUNDING AREA, AS FOLLOWS: Adult businesses, including adult bookstores, Adult theaters, adult entertainment centers, rap parlors, massage parlors, saunas, subject to § 42.3 provisions. X X X X X X X X X R R X R n x Assembly hall. SE SP SP X X SE SE SE SE SE SP X X p y Bowling alley, billiard or pool hall, indoor amusement center, drug paraphernalia center. SE SE SE X X SE SE X SE SE SE X X q y Fair, carnival. SE SP SP X X X X X X X SE X SE q y Game machines as an accessory use, subject to § 42.2 provisions. R R R R SE R R R R R R X R NA NA Game rooms, subject to § 42.2 provisions. SE SE SE SE X SE X SE SE SE SE X SE q y Miniature golf, golf driving range. SE X X X X X X X X X SE X X q y Music or dancing school. R X R X X R R X R X R X X r y Public access park (passive or action recreation), open space or community garden R R R R R R R R R R R R R NA NA Social club, athletic club, lodge, veterans or fraternal organization, recreation facilities and community centers. SE SP SP X X SE SE SE SE SE SE X X q y State sponsored off-track betting facilities and teletrak facilities, teletheater or other legalized wagering systems, facilities & services. X X X X X SE X X X X X X SE q y Theater, excluding drive-in, 250 or fewer seats. R R R X X R R X R X X X X p y Theater, excluding drive-in, 251 or more seats. R SP SP X X R SE X R X X X X p y Trampoline center. SE X X X X X X X X X R X X q y M. Automotive ESTABLISHMENT CONFORMING TO STATE OF CONNECTICUT REGULATIONS AND § 45, AS FOLLOWS: Sale of automotive accessories, parts, tires, batteries, other supplies. R X X R X R R X X R R X R See 45(b) See 45(b) Gasoline station, as defined by Ch. 250, C.G.S. SE X X R X SE SE SE SE SE SE X SE See 45.B See 45(b) Car wash (a/k/a auto laundry). SE X X R X X X X X X X X X See 45(b) See 45(b) Motorcycles: Sale or rental with inventory, repair. X X X R X X X X X X R X X See 45(b) See 45(b) Automobiles, automobile trailers, and trucks. 1. Repair of such vehicles, no full body paint spraying or body and fender work except replacement. R X X R X SE X X X R R X R See 45(b) See 45(b) 2. Repair of such vehicles, including full body paint spraying and all body and fender work. SE X X R X SE X X X SE R X R See 45(b) See 45(b) 3. Rental of such vehicles with inventory. Inventory within structure shall be permitted by special exception. R X X R X R X SE SE R R X R See 45(b) See 45(b) 4. Sale of such vehicles with inventory when used, where incidental to operation of a gas station or repair garage, and where no more than five used vehicles for sale are kept on premises at one time. SE X X R X SE X X X R R X R See 45(b) See 45(b) 5. Sale of such vehicles with inventory when used, with no limit on quantity of vehicles. X X X R X X X X X X R X R See 45(b) See 45(b) 6. Sale of such vehicles with inventory when new:   a.  Automobiles. X X X R X X X X X X X X X See 45(b) See 45(b)   b. Automobile trailers or trucks. X X X R X X X X X R R X R See 45(b) See 45(b) Sale or rental of any vehicle described above, with no inventory of such vehicles kept on premises, but with incidental show models and demonstrator vehicles permitted in case of sales. R X X R X R R SE SE R R R X n y N. Marine Marina, yacht club with up to four slips. X X X X R X X X X X X SP X u y Marina, yacht club with more than four slips. X X X X SP X X X X X X SP X u Fishing, fish sales (including shellfish). X X X X SP X X X X R X R X n x Sale of boats, boat parts & accessories, fishing equipment, boat fuel & ice, & similar supplies. X X X X SP X X X X R R R R n x Boat rental or charter, boat sightseeing. X X X X SP X X X X R X R R q y Boat building, repair, service and storage:  100 foot length or less. X X X X SP X X X X X R R R s x  Over 100 foot length. X X X X SP X X X X SE R SP R s x Deep-sea shipping facility or Seaplane base. X X X X X X X X X SE R X R s x Salvage or dredging company. X X X X X X X X X X X X R s x O. Construction & Related Goods & Services Home improvement company, interior decorator, upholsterer, furniture repairer, general contractor, special trade contractor or worker, building materials, sign making, fuel or ice, with all storage of goods, materials & equipment (other than off-street parking and loading of vehicles) and all processing and manufacturing kept within a completely enclosed building(s) & the entire establishment occupies 2,000 square feet or less of net floor area. R R R X X R R X R R R R R s See § 45 Same uses as above, with no limit as to floor area or enclosure, except as specified in § 46 & § 47(c). X X X X X X X X X R SP SP R s x Off-site Construction Staging Area:  Less than 1,000 SF total area. R SP X R SP SP SP SP R SP SP R NA NA  1,000 SF or more total. SP X X SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP X SP NA NA Monument sales establishment, with incidental processing to order (excluding shaping of stones & similar processes). R SE SE X X X X X X R R R s x Monument sales establishment or monument works, with no limit as to processes. X X X X X X X X X X R X R s x P. Business Goods ESTABLISHMENT SELLING OR RENTING ITS GOODS PREDOMINANTLY AT RETAIL ON PREMISES, AS FOLLOWS: Office equipment and supplies. R R R X X R R X R R R SP X n x Business machines or scales. R R R X X R R X R R R SP X n x Restaurant or bar supply. R R R X X R R X R R R SP X n x Dental, hospital, beauty, barber, store or lab supply. R R R X X R R R R R R SP X n x Q. 
  Business & Miscellaneous Personal & Public
Services Off premises signs, as regulated by § 44.1:  Mini-panel. SE X SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE X SE NA NA  Poster, Bulletin or Spectacular. R X X R X X X X X R R X R NA NA On premises signs, as regulated by § 44. R R R R R R R X R R R X R NA NA Ambulance service. R SP SP X X R X R R R R X R s y Cat Café X X SE X X X X X X X X X X NA NA Caterer. R R R X X R R R R R R X X s x Cold storage facility renting only individual lockers for home customer storage of food. (For other cold storage facilities, see § 42 S. Heavy Commercial.) R X X X X R X X X R R X R s x Conference Center X X X X SP SP X SP SP X X X X p y Convention Center X X X X X SP X SP SP X X X X p y Commercial kennel or other establishment, where the care, breeding or sale of animals is the principal purpose of the enterprise, with no animals to be located within 500 feet of any residentially zoned property. SE X X X X X X X X X SE X SE s x Delivery service establishment, vehicles limited to one ton capacity (also see § 42 S. Heavy Commercial). R X SE X X R X X X R R X R s x Employment agency. R X SE X X R R R R R R X R o y Internal building cleaning, window cleaning. R R R X X R SE SE R R R X R s y News distribution enterprise. R X X X X R X X X R R X R s x Printing, engraving, or other reproduction services, limited to 2,000 square feet net floor area. R R R X X R SE R R R R R R s none Printing, engraving, or other reproduction services with no limit as to floor area. X X X X X R X R R R R R R s x Public or private pumping station R R R R R R R R R R R R R s y Research or testing laboratory, including research and/or development laboratories which are High Technology Uses, limited to 2000 S.F. net floor area used for laboratory purposes X X SE X R R R R R R R R R s none Research or testing laboratory with no floor area limit, including research and/or development laboratories which are High Technology Uses X X X X X X X R R R R R R s x Other High Technology Uses, High Technology Services and High Technology Equipment Design and Fabrication (see definitions) X X SP X R R R R R R R R R s y Self storage facility. X X X X X X X R X R R SP R i y Special workplace daycare Family Daycare Home, Group Daycare Home, and Child Daycare Center. R R R R SE R R R R R R R R i y Uniform sales or rental establishment. R R R X X R R R R R R X R s x Vending machine operator or repairer. R SE X X X R X X X R R X R s x Veterinarian, pet daycare and pet groomer (excluding establishment where care, breeding or sale of animals is the enterprise's main purpose and/or where animals are boarded overnight) with all facilities within fully enclosed building(s). R R R X X R SE X R R R X X m y R. Transportation On or off-site parking lot or parking structure for employees, customers, or visitors for any business or industrial use, or commercial parking lot or parking structure, also as regulated by § 45 of this ordinance and excluding auto sales, service and rental except as otherwise permitted by this Use Table. R R R R R R R R R R R R R NA NA On or off-site parking lot or parking structure containing between 26 and 200 parking spaces for employees, customers, or visitors for any business or industrial use, or commercial parking lot or parking structure, also as regulated by § 45 of this ordinance and excluding auto sales, service and rental except as otherwise permitted by this Use Table. R SP 2 SP R SP 2 R R R R R R R R NA NA On or off-site parking lot or parking structure capable of containing 200 or more parking spaces for employees, customers, or visitors for any business or industrial use, or any commercial parking lot or parking structure capable of containing 200 or more parking spaces, also as regulated by § 45 of this ordinance and excluding auto sales, service and rental except as otherwise permitted by this Use Table. SP 2 X X SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 SP 2 NA NA Intercity passenger station or terminal, Railroad passenger station, or Heliport. X X X X X R X R SP R R X SE s y Storage of commercial vehicles (where not an accessory use to another permitted use). X X X X X X X X X R R X R NA NA Taxi dispatching station (no vehicle storage). R X X X X R R R R R R X X s y Taxi terminal. X X X X X X X X X R R X X s y Transportation or other right-of-way. R R R R R R R R R R R R R NA NA Truck or rail freight yard or terminal. X X X X X X X X X R R X R s x S. Heavy Commercial Cleaning, laundering, dyeing, or diaper service plant. X X X X X X X X X R R SP R s x Cold storage facility, no limit as to customer type. X X X X X X X X X R R X R s x External building cleaning, disinfecting, or exterminating establishment. X X X X X X X X X R R X R s x Food processing or wholesale bakery. X X R X X X X X X R R R R s x Warehousing, or moving and storage establishment. X X X X X X X X X R R X R s x Wholesaling or distribution, including the handling of stock and incidental retailing. X X X X X X X X X R R SP R s x T. Industrial Manufacturing, processing, storage, or other commercial or industrial use not specifically mentioned, subject to other provisions of this & not analogous to any use specifically mentioned ordinance and in particular § 46, outdoor activities & storage, waste, dumping, quarries and § 48, performance standards. X X X X X X X X X SE SE SP SE s x Antenna or wireless site: 1. On existing structure, subject to § 49 standards. R R R R R R R R R R R X R NA NA 2. On new tower, subject to § 49 standards. SP X SP SP SP SP SP R SP SP SP X SP NA NA Asphalt manufacture or refining or preparation except where incidental to construction. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Celluloid or pyroxylin manufacture or explosive or inflammable cellulose or pyroxylin products manufacture. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Coal tar or mineral dye manufacture or tar distillation (except as by-products of public utility, gas or power manufacture; and the products or by-products of any plant which furnishes gas, gas material or power to a public utility or for public distribution). X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Creosote manufacture or treatment. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Dumping, as defined and regulated by §46(e) and subject to other applicable regulations. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Emery cloth, sand paper, carborundum or pumice manufacture. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Explosive or fireworks manufacture. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Fertilizer manufacture from organic material or its compounding for sale. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Glue or size manufacture or processes involving recovery from fish or animal material. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of Paris manufacture. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Household hazardous waste collection centers, as defined and regulated by § 46(g), subject to other applicable regulations. X X X X X X X X X X SE X SE s x Junkyard, as defined and regulated by § 46, subject to all State of Connecticut and other applicable regulations. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Motor vehicle recycling facility, as defined and regulated by § 46 and subject to all State of Connecticut & other applicable regulations. X X X X X X X X X X X X SP s x Nitrating process. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Outdoor storage of fuels, chemicals or building materials (whether in tanks or other containers), except as incidental to other activities. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Outdoor storage of materials related to boat manufacturing. X X X X R X X X X X X R X NA NA Outdoor storage of up to 500 square feet of materials, customary and incidental to principal use of the property. R R R R R R R X X R R R R NA NA Outdoor storage of more than 500 square feet of material. X X X X SP X X X X X SP X SP NA NA Petroleum refining. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Public sewage disposal plant or incinerator. X X X X X X X X X X X X R s x Quarry, as defined and regulated by § 46(f) X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Slaughterhouse or stockyards, rendering or reduction of animal matter. X X X X X X X X X SE X X X s x Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric, picric or hydrochloric or other corrosive acid manufacture or the manufacture of poison gases, bleaching powder or chlorine, except as incidental to a permitted use. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x Transmitting tower for radio or television station. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s y Waste processing and transfer. X X X X X X X X X SE SE X SE s x Wood or bone distillation. X X X X X X X X X X X X SE s x U. Medical Nursing Homes/Rest Homes/Residential Care Homes as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat. §§ 19a-490 and 19a-521 R SP SP X X SE SE R R X X X X l y General and Special Inpatient Hospitals R SP SP X X SE R R X X X X X k y Home Health Care Agencies/Assisted Living Service Agencies as defined in Conn. Gen. Stat. § 19a-490 R R R X X R R R R X X X X o y Health Practitioners' Office (See definition) R R R X X R R R R X X X X m y Health Care Clinic (See definition) R SP SP X X R R R R X X X X m y Outpatient Surgical Facilities/Ambulatory Surgical Center licensed by the Connecticut Department of Health pursuant to Conn. Gen. Stat. § 49a-493b R SP SP X X R SE R R X X X X m y Recovery Care Centers licensed by the Department of Public Health pursuant to Regs. Conn. State Agencies §19a-495-571 R SP SP X X R SE R R X X X X k y V. Institutional and Public Uses Religious Institutions including parish houses, rectories, convents, and other facilities normally incidental to places of worship but excluding funeral homes and cemeteries. R R R R SP R R R R X X X X g Cultural activities not carried on as a gainful business, including art galleries, libraries and museums. R R R R SP R R R R X X X X h Public and private elementary and secondary schools meeting all requirements of the compulsory education laws of the State of Connecticut, and adult education facilities connected with such schools, including dormitories connected with such schools R R R R SP R R R R X X X X i Public and private colleges and universities, including dormitories connected with such institutions but excluding: fraternities and sororities, trade/or business schools and colleges, and schools and colleges operated as commercial enterprises. R R R R SP R R R R X X X X j Fraternities and sororities located on land owned by an educational institution. R R R R SP R R R R X X X X b Fraternities and sororities located on land not owned by an educational institution. X X X X X R R R R X X X X b W. Public Amenity, Service and Utility Uses Reservoirs, dams, public utility substations and pumping stations, telephone exchanges, police stations, fire stations and post offices. AS 
NEEDED AS 
NEEDED Parks and other public facilities for passive recreation, and public playgrounds. AS NEEDED AS NEEDED  
Notes: 
1 In the BA-2, first floor dwelling units are permitted by Special Permit along Whalley Avenue between Fitch Street and Harrison Avenue. First floor dwelling units are permitted as of Right in other locations. 
2 Parking lots and structures located entirely on parcels subject to a development agreement with the City of New Haven entered into prior to June 1, 2007 require only site plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 8, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 1410, § 2, 3-20-06; Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, § 5), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1553, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 1563, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 1565, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 1614, §1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1665, 10-3-11; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1696, Sched. A, 5-6-13; Ord. No. 1790, Sched. C, 4-4-16; Ord. No. 1804, Attach. C, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1805, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1820, Sched. B, 6-5-17; Ord. No. 1842, Sched. B, 6-4-18) 
Section 42.1. - Restriction on sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: The term shall have the same definition as that term has in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Connecticut, as said Act may be amended from time to time. Said definition at present appears in Section 30-1(3) of the General Statutes of Connecticut. The definition of alcoholic liquor shall in any event always include alcohol, beer, spirits, and wine. 
    PACKAGE PERMIT: The term shall include a package store permit, a package store beer permit, a grocery store beer permit, a druggist liquor permit, or any combination of same, as issued or to be issued from time to time by the State Department of Liquor Control. For the purposes of clarity, the permits referenced herein are at present defined and found in Sections 30-20(a), (b) and 30-36, respectively, of the Connecticut General Statutes. In addition, the term package permit shall include any other permit which shall from time to time be authorized by the Connecticut General Statutes and issued by the State Department of Liquor Control, which permit shall be for the purpose of permitting the sale of any type of alcoholic liquor in sealed containers at retail for consumption off the premises. 
(b)  Measurement of distance between package permits. The distance between package permits shall be measured from outside entrance to outside entrance. However, where a package permit is located within a structure of more than 50,000 square feet, the outside entrance of such location shall be the outer perimeter of the selling area under the permit, as shown on the approved floor plan signed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. 
(c)  Distance restrictions. 
(1)  Distance limit to school. No package permit shall be permitted to locate, relocate or remove to any location where the outside entrance of such location is within 500 feet from the property line of any public or private elementary or secondary school. 
(2)  Distance limit between package permits. No package permit shall be permitted to locate within 1,500 feet of another package permit, except as provided in section 42.1.(d) 
(d)  Relocation or removal of permits. Except as prohibited by the distance restrictions to a school in subsection 42.1(c)(1) above, a package permit may be relocated or removed as follows: 
(1)  Permit relocation limit. A permittee may relocate a package permit within a five hundred (500) foot radius, provided said relocation shall be in accordance with the said Liquor Control Act and the rules and regulations of the State Department of Liquor Control. 
(2)  Removal due to condemnation for public or semi-public use. The relocation distance of a package permit that is removed from such use for a public or semi-public use by condemnation proceedings may be increased to a radius of 750 feet from the present site provided said removal shall be in accordance with the Liquor Control Act and the rules and regulations of the State Department of Liquor Control. 
However, where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the provisions of this subsection 42.1.(d)(2) concerning the removal of any package permit only as a result of condemnation proceedings for public or semi-public use, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, after public notice and hearing in a specific case, waive said provisions provided that the requirements set forth below are met: 
a.  The proposed location shall not be within a radius of 500 feet of another package permit; and 
b.  Sufficient evidence shall be presented to prove that no suitable location is available within a radius of 750 feet of the original location; and 
c.  Said removal shall be in accordance with the said Liquor Control Act and the rules and regulations of the Liquor Control Commission. 
(e)  Renewal of nonconforming package permit allowed. A permittee holding a package permit as a nonconforming use within the aforesaid 1,500-foot radius may continue the nonconforming use (at that location only) when the permit expires and application is made and granted for renewal of the same exact type of permit. 
(f)  Change of permit type prohibited. Any change from one type of package permit to another type of package permit shall not be permitted except in conformance with the distance restrictions of section 42.1.(c). 
(Ord. No. 1780, 8-3-15)) 
Section 42.2. - Game machines and game rooms in business and industrial districts. 
    These provisions exist in order to protect neighborhoods, minimize conflict with adjacent uses and the surrounding area, to assure the health and safety of the general public by providing adequate space for patrons and onlookers, and to provide adequate circulation within and egress from the premises. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    GAME MACHINE: Any machine or device operated by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, or other means of payment for the purpose of amusement, recreation skill, or chance, such as electronic game machines, video games, pin ball, pool tables or other similar devices. The term game machine shall not include a bowling alley or juke box. 
    GAME ROOM: A building or portion thereof whose principal use or intended use is for operation of three or more game machines for use by the general public or specific invitees. 
(b)  General standards: All game machines and game rooms shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  A zoning permit shall be obtained from the zoning enforcement officer. The applicant shall submit a copy of the application for a police department game machine or game room license when applying for a zoning permit. 
(2)  The police department license for each game machine shall be posted over or attached to the front of each machine. 
(3)  An attendant, responsible for orderly conduct within the business establishment, shall be present during all hours of operation of the game machine(s) . Any establishment having 10 or more games shall have one attendant over 21 years of age for each 15 games or portion thereof on the premises, present during all hours of operation of the game machines . 
(4)  Any establishment with three or more game machines shall provide a minimum of three feet clear space from the side of each machine and eight feet clear space from the front of each machine. 
(5)  Permission for any game machine(s) or game room may be revoked after a hearing by the board of zoning appeals, upon a finding by the board that the use generates excessive noise, loitering, littering, or traffic hazards, violates any standards of the zoning ordinance, or a condition of approval of a special exception. The zoning enforcement officer shall request a full hearing by the board if it is determined that any of the foregoing have occurred, after inspection of an establishment, or subsequent to a complaint. 
(6)  Permission to operate game machines as a fundraising activity by any religious, social, fraternal, or government unit for a limited permit, not to exceed seven days by any organization in any year, may be allowed by the zoning enforcement officer in any zoning district. 
(7)  Game rooms shall meet the following additional minimum standards to assure adequate space for patrons and onlookers, circulation within and egress from the premises, and parking for cars and bicycles: 
a.  A minimum net floor area of 1,000 square feet per establishment is required. 
b.  One game machine shall be permitted for each 100 square feet of net floor area of the game room. 
c.  One parking space shall be required for each two game machines , except in the BD District. 
d.  One off-street locking bicycle stall shall be provided for each four game machines either within the establishment or on the same lot, except in the BD District. 
e.  Any game room with ten or more game machines shall have two lavatories open to its customers during all hours of operation. 
(c)  Uses permitted. Game machines meeting the general standards of section 42.2(b) having hours of operation not exceeding those of the principal use, no separate street or outside entrance, and no exterior sign or advertising noting their presence, shall be a permitted accessory use as follows: 
(1)  Accessory use, except within eating and drinking places, shall be limited to two machines in any establishment with less than 1,500 square feet net floor area. Any establishment within 1,500 square feet or larger net floor area may have one game machine per 1,000 square feet gross floor area in the establishment. 
(2)  Accessory use within eating and drinking places shall be limited to two game machines in any establishment with 50 seats or less. Any establishment with 51 or more seats shall be permitted to have one (1) additional game machine for each 50 seats additional capacity. 
Table type game machines which provide no additional seating capacity shall be permitted without limit as to number, and not subject to subsection 42.2(b)(4) of this ordinance. 
(3)  Game rooms meeting the general standards of subsection 42.2(b) shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  A game room in the BE, IL and IH Districts provided no residential use is within a 500 foot radius of the establishment, shall be a permitted use. 
b.  A game room in the BA, BB and BD Districts (or within 500 feet of a residence in the BE, IL and IH Districts) meeting the general standards of subsection 42.2.B and the following additional standards, may be permitted by special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance. 
1.  The board shall determine whether the proximity of the game room to schools, public facilities, places of worship, commercial or residential uses would negatively affect the neighborhood; and 
2.  Adequacy of sidewalk width to accommodate anticipated pedestrian traffic; and 
3.  The safety of pedestrian access to and from the proposed game room, considering the age group of its potential clientele, whether the services are within ten minutes walking distance to the facility, the presence of sidewalks along major thoroughfares along probable access routes, conflict with incompatible uses such as truck traffic, and 
4.  The probability of occurrence of loitering given the character of the surrounding uses, and past history in the immediate area. 
Section 42.3. - Adult businesses. 
    These provisions exist in order to protect neighborhoods, minimize conflict with adjacent uses and the surrounding area, and to assure the health and safety of the public. It is recognized that some uses because of their nature have serious objectionable operating characteristics, particularly when several of these uses are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect on the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area. Adult business uses subject to these controls are as follows: Adult bookstores, adult theaters, adult entertainment centers, massage parlors, rap parlors, and saunas. 
(a)  Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meaning defined below: 
    ADULT BUSINESS: Any premises to which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult materials specified in the definitions in this section. An adult business further includes, without being limited to, adult bookstores, adult entertainment centers, adult theaters, massage parlors, rap parlors, or terms of like import. 
    ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films, video-tapes, compact discs or other mechanical or electronic storage devices for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices, video tape, coin-operated or electronically controlled means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, as defined below, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, for sale to patrons therein. 
    ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER: An enclosed building or part of an enclosed building, no portion of which is licensed to sell liquor, which contains one or more coin-operated or electronically controlled means which when activated permit a customer to view a live person unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals, or the charging of any admission or fee for the viewing of such activity. 
    ADULT THEATER: An enclosed building used regularly and routinely for presenting programs, material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, as defined below, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, for observation by patrons therein. 
    MASSAGE PARLOR: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing massage services. The term shall not include a licensed provider of massage therapy services as defined and licensed under the provision of § 20-206 C.G.S. 
    NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    RAP PARLOR: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing nonprofessional conversation or similar services for adults. 
    SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE: Flagellation or torture by or upon a person nude, clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
    SAUNA: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing (i) a steam bath and (ii) massage services. 
    SEXUAL CONDUCT: Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, her breast. 
    SEXUAL EXCITEMENT: The condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(b)  Location restrictions. 
(1)  Adult bookstores, adult theaters, and adult entertainment centers shall not be operated or maintained within 150 feet of a preexisting: 
a.  Place of worship that has a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Public or private educational facility which serve persons age seventeen or younger. 
c.  Park. 
d.  Residential district as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of New Haven (RS-1, RS-2, RM-1, RM-2, RH-1, RH-2, RO) and predominantly residential Planned Developments). 
(2)  No adult business may be located within 1,500 feet of another adult business. 
(3)  Only one adult business is permitted in a structure. 
(4)  No adult business may be located within a structure containing a bar. 
(5)  Measurement. The distance restrictions shall be measured in a straight line from the main public entrance of said premises to the lot lines of properties in residentially zoned districts without regard to intervening structures or objects, or in the instance of two adult businesses the distance between the main public entrances of each premises without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(6)  Exterior display. Any regulated use existing on October 1, 1996 and all new regulated uses shall comply with the sign requirements herein. No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building. Window treatments shall conform to existing development pattern of the immediate area. 
(c)  Amortization of existing adult businesses. Any adult business lawfully operating on the effective date of this ordinance that is in violation of subsection 42.3(b)(1) shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, or extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. The provisions of this section may have limited enforceability within the parameters of existing state law. 
(d)  Determining nonconformity. If two or more adult business uses are within 1,500 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, only the adult business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is deemed the nonconforming the conforming use and the later-established adult business(es) is (are) non conforming. 
(e)  Waiver of location restriction. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a special exception to waive the location restrictions if the following findings are made: 
(1)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this section (42.3.) will be observed. 
(2)  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a "combat zone". 
(3)  That the establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation or commercial revitalization, nor will it interfere with any program of urban renewal. 
(4)  That all applicable regulations of this section of the Zoning Ordinance will be observed. 
(f)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with any of the provisions of this ordinance amendment for the purpose of governance of adult businesses shall be repealed. 
Section 42.4. - Regulation of gun shops and associated goods sales. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    GUN SHOP: Any establishment or portion of an establishment which sells guns, firearms or associated goods including ammunition and gun sights. 
(b)  Uses permitted. These provisions exist in order to protect neighborhoods, minimize conflict with adjacent uses and the surrounding area, and to assure the health and safety of the general public by providing additional standards for review of a proposed location of a gun shop and to prevent a concentration of such uses. 
Gun shops shall be permitted in the BD, BD-1, BE, IL and IH districts by special exception subject to the review standards of § 63(d), and distance restrictions, supplementary review standards and conditions of approval of this § 42.4. 
(c)  Distance restrictions. 
(1)  Distance limit to schools. No establishment for sale of guns, firearms and associated goods including ammunition and gun sights shall be permitted to locate, relocate or remove to any location where the property line of such location is within 500 feet from the property line of any public or private elementary or secondary school as delineated in § 42.4(c). 
(2)  Distance limit to residential districts. No sale of guns, firearms and associated goods including ammunition and gun sights shall be permitted within 500 feet of a residential district (RS-1, RS-2, RM-1, RM-2, RH-1, RH-2, RO and predominantly residential Planned Developments) as delineated in §42.4(c). 
(3)  Distance limit between gun shops. No gun shop shall be permitted within 1,500 feet of another such use. 
(d)  Measurement of distances. The distance between gun shops shall be measured from property line to property line. However, where a gun shop is located within a structure of more than 50,000 square feet, the distance shall be measured from the outside entrance of such location, as shown on the approved floor plan signed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, to the gun shop, property line of the public or private elementary or secondary school, or boundary of the residential district. 
(e)  Supplementary review standards. Sale of guns, firearms and accessory goods including ammunition has a greater potential impact on surrounding uses and the surrounding area, compared for the public need for them at particular locations. For this reason the supplementary standards herein shall be taken into account, where appropriate, in addition to the standards of § 63(d) of this ordinance. 
(1)  The presence or physical concentration of pawn shops, second hand goods stores, bars, package permits, adult businesses or other such uses. 
(2)  Known locations where loitering, drug sales, violent crime or prostitution have regularly occurred over substantial time periods as documented by the department of police services or other governmental agencies. 
(f)  Additional conditions of approval. Because of the unique safety and security needs of gun shops and the potential impact on surrounding uses and the surrounding area compared for the public need for a gun shop at a particular location, the board of zoning appeals may require any of the following as additional conditions of approval. 
(1)  Secure storage and display areas, including a security system. 
(2)  Security door or window grates. 
(3)  Exterior lighting or site fencing. 
(4)  Limited site access during non-business hours by means of fences, chains or means specified by the board. 
The decision may also incorporate the following provisions of federal and/or state law: 
(5)  No assault weapon as defined in P.L. 93-306 (or latest version) may be sold, bartered or transferred. 
(6)  No guns, firearms and associated goods including ammunition and gun sights shall be permitted to be sold, bartered or transferred to anyone under twenty-one years of age in accordance with C.G.S. §29-34. 
(7)  Each firearm sold, bartered or transferred shall be accompanied by a gun locking device and warning at the time of sale in accordance C.G.S. § 29-37b. 
Section 42.5. - Special provisions for certain uses operating between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
    These provisions exist in order to minimize conflict of businesses with adjacent residential uses and the surrounding area, and to assure the peace, tranquility, health and safety of the public. It is recognized that some uses because of their nature have serious objectionable operating characteristics, particularly when close to residential uses, thereby having a deleterious effect on the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing or limiting late night traffic, noise, loitering, littering and crime in business places which are located adjacent to residential uses. 
(a)  Applicability. The standards contained herein shall be applied to certain uses found in the section 42, Use regulations for business and industrial districts, except if located in a Business D or Business D-1 District: 
(1)  All uses found in section 42.C: Sale of food, drink and pharmaceuticals. 
(2)  Pawn shop or swap shop. 
(3)  All uses found in section 42.B: Transient lodging. 
(4)  Adult entertainment establishments. 
(5)  Gun shops and accessory goods sales. 
(6)  All uses found in section 42.L: Amusements 
(7)  All uses found in section 42.M: Automotive 
(b)  General standards and review of uses to operate between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. A use listed in section 42.5.(a) shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless located in a Business D or Business D-1 District or granted a special exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to section 63(d). Application for a special exception may be made by a current or proposed operator only with written consent of the owner of the property. The special exception, if granted, is not transferable and may only be granted for a maximum of three (3) years. 
(1)  Specific standards: 
a.  The applicant must demonstrate the need to service the community between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
b.  The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed hours of operation will not contribute to illegal activity at or in close proximity to the proposed use. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the presence of loiterers, drugs sales or prostitution or other criminal activities and/or nuisances in close proximity to the location proposed, given the character of surrounding uses and past history in the immediate area as may be presented by the Department of Police Services, neighborhood organizations and area residents and business people; 
c.  The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed hours of operation will not have an adverse effect on abutting or proximate uses, including places of worship, parks, playgrounds, youth services facilities, or residences; and 
d.  The applicant must identify all other uses within 200 feet of the proposed location which are operating between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The Board shall consider the potential clustering of uses in a manner that may be inconsistent or inappropriate for the surrounding area. 
(c)  Special conditions of approval. The Board may impose conditions of approval including but not limited to special lighting, fencing, landscaping, signage, supervised parking, trash receptacles, or outside staff/official and unofficial security for some or all hours of late night operation. 
Section 43. - Bulk and yard regulations for business and industrial districts. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The ratio of the gross floor area to the principal building or principal buildings on a lot to the total lot area. In calculating FAR, the gross floor area of a parking structure shall not be included. 
(b)  Maximum FAR. 
(1)  The maximum FAR permitted in the district(s) specified shall not exceed the following: 
FAR Zoning District 2.0 BA, BA-1, BB, BC and IM 3.0 IL 4.0 IH 6.0 BD, BD-1**, BD-2*, BD-3 and BE *Where a lot in a BD-2 District abuts a residence district along a rear or side lot line, the maximum permitted FAR is 2.5. 
** Where a lot in a BD-1 District abuts an RS-1, RS-2, RM-1 or RM-2 Residence District, the maximum permitted FAR is 3.0.  
(2)  Reserved. 
(c)  Maximum building height. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsections 43(c)(2), (3), (4), (5) and (6), there shall be no direct limit on building height in any business or industrial district (although indirect limits may be produced by floor area ratio and other requirements). 
(2)  In the Business C zone, the maximum average building height shall be 35 feet. 
(3)  No building in a Business D-2 District shall exceed 200 feet above average finished lot grade provided a building shall be entitled ten feet of additional height if such building is registered as a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)-certified building for new commercial construction and major renovation projects, as established by the United States Green Building Council, or an equivalent standard, and the owner or applicant certifies its good faith intent to achieve such standard. 
(4)  In the BA-1, the maximum building height shall be 45 feet. Buildings shall also have a minimum of two stories and a minimum building height of 25 feet. 
(5)  In the BA-2, buildings shall have a maximum of four stories and a maximum building height of 50 feet. Buildings shall also have a minimum of two stories and a minimum building height of 25 feet, provided that the enlargement, expansion or extension of an existing one-story structure shall not be considered an increase in non-conformity for the purposes of Section 67(d). 
(6)  In the BD-3 District, if the average height of a principal building exceeds 100 feet above average finished lot grade and if any portion of the principal building has frontage on College, Temple, Church, or Orange Streets or on Church Street South (between Columbus Avenue and South Frontage Road) Lafayette Street, Washington Avenue or Congress Avenue, then one 15-foot stepback of the upper levels of the building shall be required on the façade that fronts on such street, commencing no later than the point at which the height of the building is the same as the total of the width of the street that the building fronts on. The depth of the stepback need not be uniform, provided that at one point, the stepback is 15 feet from the front of the building façade at the floor immediately below the floor at which the stepback begins, and provided further, that the depth of the stepback area on the roof of the floor below the floor at which the stepback begins must be at least 250 square feet. If the principal building fronts on more than one such street, then only one stepback shall be required. (See Figure 43.1) 
(7)  Where a lot in a BD-1 District abuts property in an RS-1, RS-2, RM-1 or RM-2 Residential District, a maximum building or structure height of 70 feet is permitted. 
(8)  On any lot located in a BD-3 District located south of South Frontage Road, Rte. 34, except for lots: 
a.  directly abutting South Frontage Road. Rte. 34; or 
b.  directly abutting Church Street South between Columbus Avenue and South Frontage Road, or 
c.  directly abutting Lafayette Street, or 
d.  directly abutting Washington Avenue or Congress Avenue between Lafayette and Liberty Streets: 
a maximum building height of 70 feet is permitted. 

(d)  Maximum building coverage. There shall be no direct limit on building coverage in any business or industrial district. 
(e)  Maximum size of courts. Except for the Business D-3 District, the horizontal distance between facing walls of any court in any business or industrial district shall not be less than five feet where neither facing wall has an average height greater than 20 feet, and not less than one foot for each four feet of average height of the two facing walls averaged together where either facing wall has an average height greater than 20 feet. In the BD-3 District, there shall be no required distances between the facing walls of any court for any nonresidential building. For mixed use buildings and residential principal buildings, the horizontal distance between facing walls of a court shall not be less than 20 feet if neither facing wall has an average height greater than 30 feet and not less than one foot for each four feet of average height of the two facing walls averaged together where either facing wall has an average height greater than 30 feet. 
(f)  The following requirements shall apply in all business or industrial districts except for BD, BD-1 and BD-3 Districts (see subsection 43(f)(4), the BA-1 District (see subsection 43(k)), the BA-2 District (see subsection 43(k)), and except where a business or industrial district abuts a residence district (see § 47). These requirements shall apply to both principal and accessory buildings. 
(1)  Front yards: There shall be no front yard required in any business or industrial district. 
(2)  Side yards : There shall be no side yard required in any business or industrial district, except that in any case where a side yard is actually provided such side yard shall be required to be not less than five feet for a building wall having an average height of 20 feet or less, and not less than one foot for each four feet of average height for a building wall having an average height of more than 20 feet. 
(3)  Rear yards: There shall be a rear yard in all business and industrial districts of not less than ten feet for a building wall having an average height of 30 feet or less and not less than one foot for each three feet of average height for a building wall having an average height of more than 30 feet. 
(4)  There shall be no minimum yard requirements in the BD, BD-1 or the BD-3 Districts except that in the BD-3 District there shall be a minimum of 15 feet of unobstructed land from the ground up on which no structures shall be located between the outer face of a building foundation wall at grade of a principal building that fronts on a street and the curb of such street in order to provide for sidewalks, streetlights and landscaped areas between the sidewalk and the curb. Additionally, in the BD-3 District, when a mixed use or a residential principal building which is four stories or less, contains one or more windows that face a nonresidential building on the same lot, there shall be a minimum of ten feet of unobstructed land from the ground up between the nonresidential building and the residential principal building or mixed use building. If such residential principal building or such mixed use building faces a nonresidential building on an adjacent lot or faces an adjacent vacant lot, then there shall be a minimum ten-foot side or rear yard (as the case may be) on the lot on which such residential principal building or mixed use building is located facing the adjacent lot. 
(g)  Structures within required yards. The following rules shall apply to yards provided under § 43(f). 
(1)  No wall of a building shall extend beyond the outer face of a building foundation wall into such a yard for more than six inches. 
(2)  A projection from a building may extend into such a yard for not more than one-half the width of such yard , but in no case more than five feet into such yard for fire escapes, one-story open porches, ramps, loading docks, and steps leading up to the ground floor, or three feet into such yard for all other projections, and in no case to within two feet of any lot line. 
(h)  Usable Open Space/Common Amenity Space for the BC, BD, BD-1, BD-2, BD- 3 and IL Districts. 
(1)  In the BD-3 District, for all nonresidential buildings in excess of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, a minimum of 25 square feet of usable open space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area up to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of usable open space shall be provided on the same lot on which the nonresidential building is located. In the event that any point on such lot is located within a 1,000-foot radius of publicly accessible open space, then a minimum of 13 square feet of usable open space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be required on such lot up to a maximum of 10,000 square feet of usable open space. 
(2)  In the BC, BD, BD-1, BD-2, BD-3 and IL Districts, for all mixed use buildings and residential principal buildings both existing and proposed, a minimum of 50 square feet per dwelling unit of usable open space shall be provided on the same lot on which such building is located. In the event that any point on the lot upon which the mixed use building or the residential principal building is situated is located within a 1,000-foot radius of publicly accessible usable open space, then a minimum of 25 square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit shall be required. 
(3)  In the BC, BD, BD-1, BD-2, BD-3 and IL Districts, mixed use buildings and residential principal buildings both existing and proposed with six or more dwelling units shall provide 50 square feet of common amenity space per dwelling unit in addition to the usable open space required under subsection 43(i)(1)b. above. 
(i)  Principal entrances in the BD-3 District. Buildings facing College Street, Orange Street, Temple Street, Church Street South (between Columbus Avenue and South Frontage Road), Lafayette Street, Washington Avenue, or Congress Avenue shall have a principal entrance facing such streets or on the corner of any of the above listed streets and another street. 
(j)  Transparent and active uses in the BD-3 District. 
(1)  Every nonresidential building and every mixed use building that faces College Street, Orange Street, Temple Street, or Church Street, Washington Avenue, Congress Avenue, Lafayette Street or Church Street South (between Columbus Avenue and South Frontage Road) in whole or in part shall have, at minimum, 60 percent of the first floor façade between two feet and eight feet in height facing such street comprised of clear windows and/or doors that allow views of indoor space and/or product display areas. 
(2)  The first floor of the façade of every nonresidential building and every mixed use building that faces College Street, Orange Street, Temple Street, or Church Street, Washington Avenue, Congress Avenue, Lafayette Street or Church Street South (between Columbus Avenue and South Frontage Road) shall contain uses which are active and involve the movement of persons in such spaces, including but not limited to restaurants, retail stores, art galleries, fitness centers, yoga studios, lobbies, dance or music studios, and personal services businesses. 
(3)  Every nonresidential building and every mixed use building which faces Martin Luther King Boulevard or Legion Avenue/South Frontage Road in whole or in part shall have, at minimum, 30 percent of the first floor façade between two feet and eight feet in height facing such street comprised of clear windows and/or doors that allow views of indoor space and/or product display areas. 
(k)  Additional requirements for buildings in a BA-1 and BA-2 Districts. 
(1)  Yards facing the public right-of-way: Building façades must abut or be located within ten feet of at least 75 percent of the property line abutting the public street (see figure 43.1 below). 
(2)  Side yards: No minimum side yards are required. 
(3)  Rear yards: Minimum ten-foot rear yard. 
(4)  Corner lots: Are exempt from rear yard requirements for the first 50 feet from the street. 
(5)  Doors and Entrances: Buildings must have a primary entrance facing a public sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement. Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-oriented plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses. 
(6)  Transparency: In new buildings, except for buildings or portions of buildings containing residential or religious uses or health care facilities on the first floor, a minimum of 75 percent of the street-facing first floor building façade between two feet and eight feet in height must comprise clear windows that allow views of indoor space or product display areas. The bottom of any window or product display window used to satisfy this standard may not be more than three feet above the adjacent sidewalk. 
(7)  Security bars and Gates: Solid metal security gates, bars, or solid roll-down metal windows shall not be permitted. Link or grill type security devices shall be permitted. If installed on the outside, the coil boss shall be recessed and concealed behind the building wall. 
(8)  Landscaping: All parts of the property visible from the public right-of-way or from residential units contained on the property or adjoining properties shall be adequately landscaped to maximize recreational utility and aesthetic views. Landscape improvements may include pavers or paved surfaces, gravel, trees, shrubs, ground cover, and wherever possible, the retention of existing landscape features. 
(9)  Fencing: Rear yard property lines should be fenced where they abut residential zones. Alleyways should have decoratively designed gates or fences. Fences in front or side yards should not obscure sight lines to increase public safety. Chain link fences are prohibited except for temporary fences for construction. 
(10)  Screening: All trash receptacles, dumpsters, or bins placed outside the building must be screened from view from the public right-of-way and constructed and maintained so as to prevent noxious sights, odors, vermin, or other nuisances. 

Figure 43.2 BA-1 Yard Requirements 
(11)  Design guidelines: The following design guidelines should apply to all buildings in a BA-1 District only. They should to the greatest extent possible, be incorporated into the design of new buildings and the renovation of existing structures. Guidelines shall apply when there are proposed modifications to a building façade to include replacement of windows, replacement of façade materials, or additions to or extensions of a façade. 
a.  General design principles: Emphasis should be on a pedestrian-scaled environment. Buildings should harmoniously blend with the existing neighborhood character. All materials, colors, and architectural details used on the exterior of a building should be compatible with the building style, and with each other. A building designed of an architectural style that normally includes certain integral materials, colors, and/or details should incorporate such into its design. Plans should reflect an attention to detail, the use of quality materials, and good craftsmanship. 
b.  Scale, mass and continuity: Buildings should generally relate in scale and design to the surrounding buildings where such buildings represent quality construction and design associated with historical development of the area. Buildings should reflect a continuity of treatment in the following ways: 
1.  Maintain, when appropriate, the building mass and scale of adjacent buildings. 
2.  Maintain front yard build-to lines. 
3.  Maintain cornice and transition lines in buildings of the same height. 
4.  Primary horizontal and vertical lines in the architectural composition should remain visible or be incorporated into the design. 
c.  Building entrances: All entrances to a building should be defined and articulated by architectural elements of the building. Any such element utilized should be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and details of the building as a whole. 
d.  Fenestration: The arrangement and design of windows and doors in a building should be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the building. Windows should be vertically proportioned wherever possible. To the extent possible, upper story windows should be vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level, including storefront or display windows. All windows should be stylistically consistent with the building and energy efficient. 
e.  Roofs: Roof types should be appropriate to a building's architectural type. Embellishments such as dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys, cupolas, clock towers and other such embellishments are encouraged if appropriate to the building vernacular. Repairs to existing construction should conform to the building vernacular. 
f.  Buildings on corner lots: Buildings on corner lots should be considered important structures because they contain more than one façade that is exposed to the street. These buildings should be enhanced with appropriate architectural embellishments. 
g.  Façades: The architectural treatment of the front façade should be continued, in its major features, around all visibly exposed sides of a building. All sides of a building should be architecturally designed to be consistent with regard to style, materials, colors, and details. Deteriorated materials should be restored to actual function if possible, and if not possible, should be replaced with similar materials that have the same form and surface characteristics without visually changing the façade's character. New buildings should, at street level, have clear glass windows sufficiently transparent to provide views into the interior of the building. 
h.  Storefront façades: Storefronts should be integrally designed as part of the entire façade. Buildings with multiple storefronts should be architecturally uniform throughout through the use of architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings, canopies and marquees. 
i.  Signage and lighting fixtures: Attachments and/or fixtures should complement the architectural design of the façade and should be appropriate in scale to the ornamentation and the design elements of the building. Fixtures and attachments should not obscure historically significant materials, architectural features or decorative details. 
j.  Signage: Signage should be architecturally compatible with style, materials, color and details of the building and neighborhood. 
k.  Awnings, canopies and marquees: Awnings, canopies and marquees are permitted at ground level. Such treatments should be designed to complement the building and should be compatible with the materials, colors, and details of the building and neighborhood. In buildings with multiple storefronts compatible awnings, canopies and marquees should be used as a means to unify the building. Solid, lighted awnings and canopies are not permitted. Vinyl awnings are not permitted. 
(12)  Special permit: All proposed uses of greater than 5,000 net square feet, whether located in new or existing structures, shall require a Special Permit in order to ensure that such relatively large proposals are compatible with and meet the general criteria and standards of the Business A-1 and Business A-2 Districts as described and defined in Section 41. 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 3, 3-20-06; Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, §§ 6, 7), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1696, Sched. A, 5-6-13; Ord. No. 1726, Sched. A, 12-2-13; Ord. No. 1751, Sched. A, § 2, 8-6-14; Ord. No. 1804, Attach. C, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1807, Attach. C, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1820, Sched. B, 6-5-17; Ord. No. 1842, Sched. B, 6-4-18) 
Section 44. - On premises signs. 
    Statement of purpose. It is recognized that signs perform important functions in identifying businesses and in general advertising. It is hereby found and declared, however, that minimum control of signs is necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare by lessening distraction hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, by preserving property values, by preventing unsightly and detrimental development which has a blighting influence upon residential, business and industrial uses, by preventing signs from reaching such excessive size that they obscure one another to the detriment of all concerned, and by securing certain fundamentals of design for the city. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    SIGN, ON PREMISES: Any structure, part thereof, or device or inscription attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, which is located upon any land, or any building , or on the outside or inside of a window, and which displays or includes any numeral, letter, word, model, banner, emblem, insignia, device, trademark, or other representation used as, or in the nature of, an announcement, advertisement, direction, warning, or designation of any person, firm, group, organization, place, commodity, product, service, business, profession, enterprise, or industry. 
But this definition shall not include the flag, emblem, insignia, poster or other display of any nation or political subdivision including traffic or similar regulatory devices; or legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings, signs or tablets which are primarily memorials, or emblems of religious institutions that are attached to buildings . 
    SIGN, AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the display or ;used to differentiate such on premises sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the supports or uprights on which such on premises sign is placed. Where an on premises sign has two or more faces, the area of all such faces shall be included in determining the sign area, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the on premises sign shall be taken as the area of the larger of the two faces. 
    SIGN, BELT: An on premises sign placed flat against the front wall of a building . 
    SIGN, BUSINESS: An on premises sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered, or conducted, other than incidentally, on the premises upon which such on premises sign is located, or to which it is affixed. 
    SIGN, DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED: An on premises sign designed to give forth artificial light directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within such on premises sign including, but not limited to, neon and exposed lamp signs. 
    SIGN, GROUND: A free-standing on premises sign resting upon the ground or attached to it by means of two or more poles or standards. 
    SIGN, INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED: An on premises sign illuminated with a light so shielded that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere than on the lot where said illumination occurs. If such shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign. 
    SIGN, NON-ILLUMINATED: An on premises sign which is not illuminated, either directly or indirectly. 
    SIGN, POLE: A free-standing sign attached to the ground by means of a single pole or standard. 
    SIGN, PROJECTING or BLADE- A sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or wall, generally at right angles to the building, including signs that project into the right-of-way. 
(b)  On premises signs permitted in business and industrial districts. 
(1)  Such signs as are permitted for residence districts, subject to the provisions of section 27 of this ordinance. 
(2)  On premises signs , whether public or private, solely for the control of traffic and parking. 
(3)  Business signs incidental to any permitted use in a business or industrial district, subject to the requirements of this subsection (44)(b)(3) and subsection 44(c) below. 
a.  The total area of all such signs for each establishment shall not exceed four square feet in the case of the Business D District and the Business D-3 District, or three square feet in the case of all other business and industrial districts, for each foot of length of the front building wall (or length of that portion of such wall which is devoted to such establishment) with the following qualifications: 
1.  If such establishment has walls fronting on two or more streets, the sign area for each such street shall be computed separately; 
2.  If any on premises sign or signs of such establishment project more than 12 inches beyond any street line, the maximum area per foot of length of the front building wall (or portion) shall be reduced by one square foot; 
3.  If such establishment does not occupy any floor area on the ground level of the building , other than an entryway, the maximum area per foot of length of the front building wall (or portion) shall be reduced by two square feet; 
4.  If such establishment is operated without a building , or with a building covering less than 100 square feet of lot area, then the maximum total area of all such on premises signs shall be one square foot for each foot of street frontage, computed separately for each street upon which the lot fronts; 
5.  On premises signs painted on or affixed to the inside or outside of windows on the ground floor shall not be included in this computation, unless their combined area exceeds 50% of the area of the window which they occupy; and 
6.  Regardless of the provisions of this subsection 44(b)(3), all business signs shall also be subject to the coverage limit in section 44(c)(7) below. 
(c)  Additional requirements for all signs in business and industrial districts: 
(1)  No such on premises sign shall be so arranged that it interferes with traffic through glare, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks or driveways, through confusion with a traffic control device (by reason of its color, location, shape, or other characteristics), or through any other means. No such signs shall have a rotating beacon. 
(2)  If such on premises sign is a ground sign, it shall be provided with suitable landscaping or other ground covering in the area between such on premises sign and all street lines and residence district boundaries that bound the lot on which such on premises sign is placed, up to and including a distance of 20 feet from such on premises sign , except for any such area that is actively devoted to some other use . 
(3)  If such on premises sign is a ground sign or pole sign, a maximum height of not more than 20 feet shall be permitted. The maximum height of the ground sign or pole sign shall be calculated from the crown of the local street at the closest point to the ground sign or pole sign to the top of the ground sign or pole sign. 
(4)  No on premises sign shall be permitted on the roof of any building more than two stories in height, whether in use or not. 
(5)  Any portion of such on premises sign or a pole or standard for such sign which is in contact with the ground shall be within the lot lines of the property, and shall conform to the yard requirements in § 43 and § 47. 
(6)  Such on premises signs may project across street lines only as permitted by the Building Code And other applicable regulations. Any such on premises sign (other than a banner) placed on a marquee, canopy or awning shall be placed flat against a face of such marquee, canopy or awning, and shall not extend beyond any edge of such face. 
(7)  If such on premises sign or signs are placed flat against a wall or are within five feet of a wall and essentially parallel to it, the total area of all such on premises signs shall not exceed one-third the area of the wall (including window and door area and cornices). No on premises sign placed flat against a wall shall extend beyond any edge of such wall. No on premises sign shall be painted or pasted directly upon any wall. 
(8)  In the Business D-3 District, there shall be no flashing business signs. 
(d)  Variances. In any case where special circumstances concerning the character, arrangement or location of structures warrant a modification of the standards of this § 44 regarding size, placement or height of on premises signs , the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to permit such modification by variance under § 63(c) of this ordinance, if the same has met the standards enumerated within § 44(e) will produce a substantially better design and further the purposes of this section. Variances shall require written findings by the board of zoning appeals as outlined in § 44(e) below. 
(e)  Variance review standards. In addition to the required findings of § 63(c), the board of zoning appeals shall make a written finding that the variance requested: 
(1)  Is necessary to achieve on premises sign visibility due to specific physical constraints of the site or surrounding area. 
(2)  Will not result in visual clutter from an undue concentration of on premises signs . 
(3)  Will be in keeping with the scale and massing of nearby structures and/or geographical features. 
(4)  Will not require substantial alteration of the existing tree canopy in the removal or extensive trimming of trees to achieve a clear view of the on premises sign . 
(5)  Will not have a negative effect on views or vistas from or of Downtown, Long Wharf, East Rock, West Rock, New Haven Harbor, or the upper Quinnipiac River (Oyster Village). 
(f)  Nonconforminguses. For nonconforming uses in all districts, see § 67. 
(g)  Overall sign plans. The City Plan Commission shall have the authority to approve an overall sign plan for on-premises signs, separately or in conjunction with such a plan for off-premises signs pursuant to section 44.1, for any hospital or medical institution in the Business D-2 District to lessen the requirements of this section regarding size, area, placement, height or lighting as necessary for clear Identification of patient care services and functions that directly support those services. 
(Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, § 8), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12) 
Section 44.1. - Off premises signs. 
    Statement of purpose. The purpose of these sign regulations is to: 
•  Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; and 
•  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and New Haven's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; and 
•  Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; and 
•  Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and 
•  Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. 
It is recognized that signs perform important functions in identifying businesses and in general advertising. It has been determined that without adequate controls the number of signs in New Haven may become excessive and unduly distracting to motorists and pedestrians, negatively affect views and vistas, including those from and of important geographic landmarks or landmark structures, and reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. 
It is hereby found and declared that the signs of lesser importance in occupying limited public views available to people within New Haven are those that convey messages for products, services, events, persons, institutions or businesses other than on the premises where the sign is located, or for the sale or rental of such premises. These regulations are also determined to be the minimum necessary to achieve these purposes. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN: See sign, off premises. 
    SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, industry or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted elsewhere than on the premises upon which sign is located, or to which is affixed, and which is sold, offered or conducted on such premises only incidentally if at all. Commonly, but not limited to, standardized steel structures that carry messages. 
Included in this category are the following off premises sign types: 
BULLETIN: An off premises sign oriented to a limited access highway, generally 18 feet × 48 feet and externally lit. 
SPECTACULAR: An off premises sign oriented to a limited access highway, generally 18 feet × 48 feet and internally lit. 
(b)  Off premises signs. Off premises signs , commonly referred to as outdoor advertising, advertising billboard, billboard, bulletin, or spectacular signs, which advertise products or businesses not connected with the site or building on which they are located, are deemed to constitute a separate use. The widespread display of off premises signs is deemed to be inappropriate to the character and sound development of the City of New Haven. Such signs shall be allowed only as follows: 
(1)  Locations permitted. 
a.  Bulletin or spectacular. These signs, oriented to a limited access highway within a BA, BB, BE, IL or IH district, shall be permitted as shown on a map entitled Bulletin and Spectacular Sign Zoning Map Overlay District, on file with the City Clerk and the City Plan Department. 
Table 44.1. SUMMARY OF OFF PREMISES SIGN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. 
Off Premises Signs, By Type Maximum Sign Area (Sq. Ft.) Typical Height × Width (in Feet) Maximum Height (In Feet) Minimum Spacing 3 Permitted Locations Bulletin or spectacular 900 18 × 48 30 2 1,500 feet 3 BA, BB, BE, IL, IH 4  
1 Height above local street. 
2 Height above limited access highway to which the sign is oriented. 
3 Minimum linear spacing in feet between off premises signs on the same side of the limited access highway within the Bulletin and Spectacular Sign Zoning Map Overlay District only. 
4 Within the Bulletin and Spectacular Sign Zoning Map Overlay District. 
_____ 
(2)  Locations prohibited foroff premises signs. 
a.  Within any Residence District (RS-1, RS-2, RM-1, RM-2, RH-1, RH-2, RO) or the BA-1, BC, BD, BD-1, or BD-3 Business Districts. 
b.  On the roof of any building more than two stories in height, whether the building is in use or not. 
c.  Directly painted on a wall of any building . 
d.  On or over a public right-of-way or public property. 
e.  In or within 250 feet of any PARK district; or 
f.  In or within 250 feet of any National Register Historic District or local historic district. 
g.  Within 1,500 feet of another bulletin or spectacular sign, measured from the closest points between such signs on the same side of a limited access highway oriented to the same travel direction; or 
h.  State Route 15 (SR-15); or 
i.  Interstate 95 (I-95) from Howard Avenue easterly to Water Street. 
j.  Interstate 91 (I-91) northbound side from Quinnipac River to Foxon Boulevard (SR-80). 
(3)  Height restrictions. The permitted maximum height shall be calculated from the crown of the local street or limited access highway to which the off premises sign is oriented, to the top of the sign, with the maximum height restricted as follows: 
a.  Thirty feet for bulletins and spectaculars. 
(4)  Design restrictions. Off premises signs shall not contain any of the following: 
a.  Moving parts; or 
b.  Appendages, cut-out letters of figures that exceed 20 percent of the permitted off premises sign area or that protrude more than 12 inches beyond the flat surface of the sign face; or 
c.  Lights that flash, shimmer, glitter or lights that give the appearance of flashing, shimmering or glittering. Exceptions to this restriction include time, temperature and smog index units, provided the frequency of change is more than a five-second interval; or 
d.  Walls or screens at the base of the off premises sign which create a hazard to public safety or provide an attractive nuisance; or 
e.  Copy which simulates any traffic sign in a manner which confuses the public; or 
f.  Devices which emit audible sound, odor or particulate matter. 
(5)  Performance standards. No off premises sign shall be erected unless it complies with the structural requirement of the Connecticut State building Code, as may be amended from time to time, and with the performance standards below. 
a.  Maintenance. All off premises signs and components thereof shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe, neat and clean condition. 
b.  Unsafe off premises signs. . The Building Official may cause to have removed or repaired immediately without written notice any off premises sign which, in his or her opinion, has become insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe, and as such, presents an immediate threat to public safety. If such action is necessary to render an off premises sign safe, the cost of emergency removal or repair shall be at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
c.  Abandoned off premises signs. Any off premises sign located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of two years or more shall be deemed abandoned. An abandoned off premises sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the property. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the off premises sign , the zoning enforcement officer shall give the owner written notice to remove it within 15 days. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the zoning enforcement officer may initiate such action as may be necessary to gain compliance with the provisions herein. 
d.  Lighting. All external lighting shall be indirect and shall be directed onto the display surface only. Direct glare shall not shine onto adjacent properties or public areas. All service wiring in excess of 250 feet length for bulletin and spectacular signs shall be underground. 
e.  Clearance. Off premises signs projecting over a driveway or driving aisle shall have a minimum clearance of 16 feet between the lowest point of the off premises sign and driveway grade and over a pedestrian walkway a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches (8' 6") between the lowest point of the off premises sign and the walkway grade. 
(c)  Variances. In any case where special circumstances concerning the character, arrangement or location of structures warrant a modification of the standards of this § 44.1. regarding size, placement or height of off premises signs , the board of zoning appeals shall have the power to permit such modification by variance under § 63(c) of this ordinance, if the same has met the standards enumerated within § 44.1.(c) will produce a substantially better design and further the purposes of this section. Variances shall require written findings by the board of zoning appeals as outlined in § 44.1.(c)(2) below. 
(1)  Variances from § 44.1.(b)(2) are strictly prohibited. 
(2)  Variance review standards. 
a.  In addition to the required findings of § 63(c), the board of zoning appeals shall make a written finding that the variance(s) requested: 
1.  Will not have a negative effect on views or vistas, including those from or of Downtown, Long Wharf, New Haven Harbor, East Rock, West Rock, or the Quinnipiac River (Oyster Village). 
2.  Will not result in visual clutter from an undue concentration of on premises and/or off premises signs . 
3.  Will be in keeping with the scale and massing of nearby structures, signs and/or geographical features. 
4.  Will not require substantial alteration of the existing tree canopy in the area of the off premises sign or removal or trimming of trees to achieve a clear view of the sign. 
(3)  Supplementary application standards for bulletin and spectacular signs. 
a.  A plan and section at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet (or larger), prepared by a Connecticut licensed surveyor, showing the approaches to the bulletin or spectacular sign location and the following shall be submitted: 
1.  The ground elevation at the base of the bulletin or spectacular sign structure; and 
2.  The highway elevation at the crown of the limited access highway in the travel direction at the point closest to the proposed off premises sign location; and 
3.  The highway elevation at 1,500 and 500 foot linear intervals from the point described immediately above; and 
4.  The location of any significant (8 inch caliper or larger) trees on the proposed off premises sign site which are to be trimmed or removed. 
5.  The location of any off premises sign (s) within 1,500 feet of the proposed location. 
b.  If the board deems it necessary to adequately evaluate the proposal, photos and/or a videotape showing the travel approach to the proposed location which show the following may be required to be submitted: 
1.  A flag shall be posted showing the height of the bottom and top of the proposed billboard panel; and 
2.  Flags shall be staked at the limited access highway edge at the 1,500-foot and 500-foot distances from the proposed billboard location at the points delineated in the plan of § 44.1.(c)(3).a. above. 
(d)  Overall sign plans. The City Plan Commission shall have the authority to approve an overall sign plan for off-premises way-finding signs, separately or in conjunction with such a plan for on-premises signs pursuant to section 44, for any hospital or medical institution In the Business D-2 District. In approving an overall sign plan, the City Plan Commission may lessen the requirements of this section regarding size, area, placement, height or lighting as necessary for clear identification of patient care services and functions that directly support those services. The City Plan Commission shall not lessen the requirements of section 44.1(b)(2)(b) through (f) but may lessen the requirements of section 44.1(b)(2)(a) so long as the proposed off-premises sign is located on property owned by one of the participants in the overall sign plan. 
(Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, § 9), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1847, 3-13-18) 
Section 45. - Regulations for parking, loading, automotive and drive-in establishments. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all uses and zone districts described in section 42 of this ordinance. 
    In any case where provisions of this section 45 are applicable, the plans submitted shall be sufficient in scope and character to determine that all relevant requirements of this section are adhered to. 
    In any case in which the zoning enforcement officer is uncertain as to the applicability of standards or the adequacy of facilities, such questions shall be referred to the department of traffic and parking for an opinion. Where further refinement of the provisions of this section 45 is necessary, reference shall be made to The Traffic Engineering Handbook, Institute of Traffic Engineers, in its latest edition, or to A Policy on Arterial Highways in Urban Areas, American Association of State Highway Officials, in its latest edition. 
(a)  Parking and loading. 
(1)  Off-street parking and off-street loading spaces shall be furnished in the following quantities for new uses and expansion of existing uses except where otherwise indicated in Section 45. 
a.  Quantity ofparking spaces: The quantity furnished shall be in accordance with the following table. For the sake of clarity, the appropriate key letter in the first column below appears with each use in the Table of Use Regulations in section 42. 
Table 45(a)(1)a. 
Key 
Letter General Description of Uses Quantity of parking spaces a Motel, Hotel, Tourist Home, Bed and Breakfast One per unit b Rooming or Boarding House Fraternities and Sororities One per three sleeping rooms c Dwelling, Unit One-half per dwelling unit, except for one per dwelling unit in BA and BA-1 Districts d Assisted Living and Elderly Housing One-third per dwelling unit e Live Work Loft One per unit f Custodial Care See Section 19 g Religious institutions One for each eight seats in the largest place of assembly based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats h Cultural activities including art galleries, libraries and museums One per each eight seats in each place of assembly based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats i Public and private elementary and secondary schools One for each eight seats in each place of assembly commonly having events open to the public, based upon the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats j Public and private colleges and universities Minimum parking: One parking space for each two full-time faculty members or the equivalent (two part-time members equaling one full-time member), plus one parking space for each three employees, plus one parking space for each three non-resident students, plus one parking space for each six beds if residents are allowed to keep automobiles, plus one parking space for each eight seats in each place of assembly (other than classrooms) commonly having one-half or more of its attendance made up of students (and otherwise having one parking space for each four seats) based on the maximum occupancy of both fixed and movable seats k General and Special Inpatient Hospitals Minimum parking: One parking space for each four patient beds (excluding bassinets), plus one parking space for each staff or visiting doctor (based on the average number of such doctors at the hospital or health care clinic at peak times), plus one parking space for each four employees in the largest shift including nurses; plus, in the case of health care clinics, a number of parking spaces for patients equal to twice the number of parking spaces required for doctors l Nursing Homes/Rest Homes/Residential Care Homes One per patient bed m Health Care Clinic Three per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area n Retail sales and services One per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area o General office, including Research Labs and High Technology Services One per 750 sq. ft. of gross floor area p Place of assembly, eating or drinking place, funeral home One per four seats (total capacity) q Indoor Amusement including Game Rooms as defined in subsection 42(f) One per four persons present at such facilities when they are filled to capacity r Vocational, trade or business school One per two students present at one time s Industrial, heavy commercial, transportation, marine, miscellaneous services One per two employees on the largest shift t Game room, as defined in section 42.2 One per two game machines u Marina One per slip  
1.  Exceptions. 
A.  In the business A-1 and A-2 zone the following parking standards shall apply to all properties and buildings: 
1.  All residential uses-In the BA-1 zone, one space per unit. In the BA-2 zone, one half (.5) spaces per dwelling unit. 
2.  In the BA-1 and BA-2 zone, nonresidential uses of 2,000 square feet or less gross floor area-No requirement. 
3.  In the BA-1 and BA-2 zone, nonresidential uses of greater than 2,000 square feet gross floor area-Two spaces per 1,000 square feet. 
4.  In all cases, the off street parking provided on a lot for non-residential uses may not exceed three spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area. 
5.  Mixed use buildings may share parking requirement between residential and non-residential uses. Up to half the residential parking requirement may be counted toward daytime non-residential parking requirements so long as there is a reasonable evidence that such uses will not adversely affect residential tenants. 
6.  Off-street parking shall be located to the rear of the principle building and otherwise attractively screened so as to not negatively impact on the view from the public right-of-way. There shall be no front yard parking. 
7.  Sidewalk curb-cuts should be minimized. Where possible, adjacent lots should share parking access from the public right-of-way. If new curb cuts are required for a development project, pre-existing disused curb cuts must be restored per city standards. 
8.  Drive-in or drive-through establishments are prohibited. 
B.  In the Business D, D-1, D-2 and BD-3 Districts subsection 45(a)(1)a. shall not apply to any except the following uses: 
a.  General and Special and Hospitals. 
b.  Health Care Clinics, Nursing Home or Recovery Care Center. 
c.  Dwellings (including elderly and assisted living and live/work lofts). 
d.  Establishment not meeting the definition of "Restaurant" under Article I, Section 1 of these regulations and selling or serving alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption on or off premises, including accessory entertainment, or permitting immediate consumption of alcoholic beverages on or off premises, including accessory entertainment. (BD and BD-1 Districts only). 
2.  In the ratios above, any fraction of the stated amount of floor area, seats, etc., shall require one parking space , but after the first such parking space , only a fraction of one-half or greater shall require an additional parking space . 
3.  Where one building has two or more distinct uses, such uses shall be measured separately for the purpose of determining the quantity of spaces required. 
4.  In order to be credited to the quantity of parking spaces required for a use, any parking space not on the same lot as such use shall be within 1,000 feet walking distance of such use, except that in the BA and BA-1 Districts such spaces must be within 300 feet of the subject lot. In the BA-2 District, such spaces must be within 650 feet walking distance of the subject lot. All such arrangements shall comply with paragraph 45(a)(5) below. 
5.  The quantity of parking required may be satisfied in whole or in part by transition parking described in subparagraph 13(b)(3)c., if permitted by special exception. 
6.  In order to be credited to the quantity of spaces required, each parking space shall have an area of not less than nine feet by 18 feet in the case of self-service parking, or eight feet by 18 feet in the case of garage or attendant parking, exclusive of adequate driveways and aisles except that in all districts up to 30 percent of required parking spaces may be compact parking spaces. No area shall be credited as a parking space which is in any part also credited or used as a loading space. 
7.  In all districts two required parking spaces may be subtracted from the quantity of parking spaces required for a use or a structure for each carsharing parking space provided in a parking lot or structure containing 50 or fewer parking spaces serving such use or structure, provided, however, that in no event shall the number of parking spaces provided for a use or a structure (excluding carsharing parking spaces) be reduced by more than five percent of the required parking spaces for such use or structure. Five required parking spaces may be subtracted from the quantity of parking spaces required for a use or a structure for each carsharing parking space provided in a parking lot or structure containing in excess of 50 parking spaces, provided, however, that in no event shall the number of parking spaces provided for a use or structure (excluding carsharing parking spaces) be reduced by more than ten percent of the required parking spaces. Fifty percent of carsharing parking spaces at the same location may be compact parking spaces. 
8.  In all districts, for any nonresidential use and residential uses in BA, BA-1, and BA-2 districts the site shall provide two bicycle spaces for the first ten required parking spaces and one additional bicycle space for each additional ten required motor vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof per Table 45(a)(1)a., exceptions in subsection 45(a)(1)a.1. notwithstanding. For any residential use in other nonresidential districts the site shall provide four bicycle spaces for the first ten required parking spaces and one additional bicycle space for each additional ten required motor vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof per Table 45(a)(1)a. 
And 
In any case of a use for which ten or more motor vehicle parking spaces are required one bicycle parking space may be substituted for one motor vehicle parking per each ten required motor vehicle parking spaces or fraction thereof. 
A.  Bicycle parking spaces shall comply with designs approved by the City of New Haven Department of Transportation, Traffic and Parking and at a minimum must provide a bicycle rack that permits the locking of a bicycle frame and one wheel while supporting the bicycle in a stable position that will not damage the bicycle or its components or interfere with pedestrian access to the sidewalk and ingress and egress to buildings or facilities. Required bicycle parking spaces are also subject to the additional following standards: 
1.  Short-term bicycle parking is intended to encourage bicycling for shoppers, customers and visitors by providing convenient bicycle parking located adjacent to main entrances of buildings. It should be located within 50 feet of each main building entrance as measured by the most direct pedestrian access route. 
2.  Long term bicycle parking provides safe and weather protected places for users requiring longer periods of bicycle storage such as residents, employees and students. Specific requirements include: 
a.  Long term bicycle parking must be located on or within 100 feet of the site. 
b.  At least 50 percent of required spaces must be covered. 
c.  The area must be locked or secured. 
3.  Short and long range parking by use. 
a.  Multi-family residential: Short term-10%, long term-90% 
b.  Retail, Restaurant: Short term-66%, long term-33% 
c.  Office: Short term-20%, long term-80% 
d.  Manufacturing and warehouse: long term-100% 
e.  Medical uses: Short term-66%, long term-33% 
f.  Other uses to be determined by City Plan Commission 
b.  Quantity of loading spaces : The quantity furnished shall be in accordance with the following table, provided, however, that the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply to any establishment within the Business D-3 District or to any establishment within the Business D-1 District having a gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet. Any such establishment within the Business D-1 and D-3 Districts having a gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet shall have available to it adequate off-street loading spaces, with centralized joint use of loading spaces permitted. In the Business D-3 District, a nonresidential building or a mixed-use building with a gross floor area of 10,001-200,000 square feet will require one loading space. For each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area of a nonresidential building or the ground floor of a mixed-use building in excess of 200,000 square feet, an additional loading space will be required in the Business D-3 District, provided however that no more than four loading spaces shall be required for any nonresidential building or mixed-use building in the Business D-3 District. In the Business D-3 District, a centralized shared loading space system shall be established for each nonresidential building and for the nonresidential uses in each mixed-use building. For the sake of clarity the appropriate key letter in the first column below appears with each use in the Table of Use Regulations in section 42. 
Key Letter General Description of Uses Gross floor Area (in square feet) Quantity of loading spaces  x Use which is primarily concerned with the handling of goods 2,400-20,000 
20,001-50,000 
50,001-80,000 
each add'l. 45,000 1 
2 
3 
1 additional  y Use which is not primarily concerned with handling goods 2,400-75,000 
75,001-200,000 
200,001-333,000 
each add'l. 150,000 1 
2 
3 
1 additional  
1.  Except in the Business D-3 District, where one establishment has two or more distinct uses, such uses shall be measured separately for the purpose of determining the quantity of spaces required. 
2.  In order to be credited to the quantity of loading spaces required for a use, any loading space not on the same lot as such use shall be in an area immediately adjacent to such lot or (1) connected to it by underground tunnel of sufficient size to accommodate the types of materials intended for loading and unloading and (2) part of a centralized loading space system to provide the regular loading space service to such use. 
3.  Each loading space shall be sufficient in size and arrangement to accommodate trucks of the type servicing the establishment. Aisles in off-street parking areas may be used as loading spaces or maneuver area for entry into loading spaces, if the efficient operation of the off-street parking area is not affected thereby. 
4.  In any case where an off-street loading space or spaces have been established, loading shall thereafter take place in such space or spaces in preference to any public street or sidewalk. 
(2)  All parking and loading areas shall have adequate access to a street or alley, be suitably surfaced and drained, and be provided with bumper or wheel guards where necessary to prevent encroachment of vehicles beyond property lines. Sufficient off-street maneuvering area shall be provided. Required yards may be used for parking, provided all other requirements of this ordinance are adhered to. 
(3)  Except in the Business D-3 District, where property in a business or industrial district abuts a residence district, either directly or across a street or alley, the following requirements shall apply to parking and loading areas on such property in such business or industrial district: 
a.  There shall be a buffer strip of land at least five feet in width within such business or industrial district, between the parking or loading area and such residence district. 
b.  There shall be a suitable fence, wall or evergreen planting at least five feet in height, designed to screen noise, odors, visibility and headlight glare, between the parking or loading area and such residence district (except that such fence, wall or planting shall conform to the sight distance requirement in subparagraph (4)c. below). 
(4)  Free flow of traffic and protection of pedestrian areas: 
a.  Access and egress shall be arranged for the free flow of vehicles at all times, so as to prevent the blocking or endangering of vehicular or pedestrian traffic through the stopping or standing of vehicles on sidewalks or streets. If a reservoir of vehicle standing area on the property is necessary to prevent such blocking of traffic, an adequate reservoir shall be provided. 
b.  Facilities shall be so arranged that no vehicle is allowed to stand or be parked on any sidewalk or other area between the curb and the street line, or on any other area which is privately owned but used by the public as a sidewalk. 
c.  Adequate sight distances shall be maintained for vehicles and pedestrians. 
d.  No access or egress shall be so arranged that vehicles can enter or leave the area only by backing on or across any sidewalk or to or from any street. 
e.  An access or egress driveway shall cross a sidewalk only in such a way that its width at the inner edge of the sidewalk is no greater than its width at the curb (excluding any curved or tapered section known as "curb return"). Any portion of a parking or loading area (or other area for maneuvering or standing of vehicles) abutting a sidewalk at a point other than a permitted driveway shall be provided with suitable copings, wheel stops, bumper guards or other devices to prevent encroachment of parked, standing or moving vehicles upon any sidewalk area not contained within a permitted driveway. 
f.  The construction specifications for curb cuts for driveways (such as line and grade materials) shall be determined by reasonable standards established by the Department of Public Works, and by the City of New Haven Ordinance entitled An Ordinance to Regulate the Laying of Walks, Curbs, Combined Curbs and Gutters, and any amendments thereto. The number, location and length of curb cuts for driveways shall be determined by reasonable standards established by the department of traffic and parking. 
(5)  Any parking or loading space not located on the same lot as the structure or use to which it is assigned, in order to be credited to the quantity of parking or loading spaces required for such structure or use , must be either: 
a.  Owned by or under long-term lease to the owner of such structure or use , with appropriate deed restrictions and long-term leases recorded on the New Haven Land Records; or 
b.  Made available on a long-term basis by a public agency or agencies, with written certification from such public agency or agencies as to such availability. 
(6)  Shared Parking. Where it is proposed that two or more uses for which a parking or loading space or spaces are required make joint use of the same parking or loading space or spaces, such joint use shall not be permitted unless: 
a.  An appropriate contract between the parties concerned, providing for long-term joint use of such parking or loading, is recorded on the New Haven Land Records; and 
b.  A special exception is granted under the provisions of subsection 63(d), upon a finding, among other things, that the proposed joint use of parking or loading will meet the requirements of this ordinance for the two or more uses involved at the time when such uses are in operation. 
c.  In addition to the circumstances set forth in subsections a. and b., in the Business D-3 District, shared parking will be allowed as follows: 
1.  The building is a mixed-use building, and there is evidence established to the reasonable satisfaction of the Department of Transportation, Traffic and Parking, which shall provide a report to the City Plan Commission in connection with a site plan application for the building that one-half of the residential requirement for such building , if counted toward the non-residential parking requirements of the building, will not adversely affect the residential use in the building. 
2.  The on-site parking provided for a nonresidential building is publicly shared parking, in which case the parking requirements for the uses in the nonresidential building shall be reduced by 15 percent. 
3.  Two or more uses and/or structures agree to shared parking, an agreement providing for the shared use of parking executed by the parties involved is filed on the land records of the City of New Haven, and the parking for such uses or structures occur at alternating time periods, which shall be established to the reasonable satisfaction of the Department of Transportation, Traffic and Parking which shall provide a report to the City Plan Commission in connection with the site plan applications for such uses and/or structures. In such case, the number of parking spaces required for each use or structure shall be reduced by 25 percent. 
(7)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to lessen the requirements of this ordinance as to the number of parking or loading spaces required and/or increase the maximum allowable walking distance to such parking spaces , but only upon a finding that either particular circumstance or mitigative measures qualify such action. Particular circumstance may include, but not be limited to availability of public parking, proximity to public transit or significant levels of pedestrian access. Mitigative measures may include, but not be limited to van and/or car pooling, public parking validation programs, flexible work schedules or other transportation demand management measures. All deviations from normal requirements by means of this paragraph (7) shall be considered as special exceptions under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance. In the case of any religious, educational or medical institution which has an overall parking plan for all of its facilities which has been approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals the 300 or 1,000 foot parking distance set forth in this ordinance, including this Section 45, shall not apply. 
(8)  Once any required parking or loading space has been established within the provisions of paragraph (1) above, whether on the same lot as the structure or use to which it is assigned or on a separate lot , such parking or loading space shall not be discontinued if the result would be a reduction below the amount of parking or loading required by this ordinance. Any such discontinuance of a parking or loading space shall constitute a violation of this ordinance, and any existing building permit or certificate of occupancy that could not have been issued without the assignment of such parking or loading space to the structure or use for which it was issued shall become null and void. 
(b)  Automotive establishments. The following requirements shall apply to automotive establishments as indicated regardless of the district in which they are located. Where requirements of State Statutes, the Connecticut Motor Vehicle Commissioner, the Board of Zoning Appeals or some other authority also apply, the strictest of the requirements shall control. 
(1)  Gasoline stations. 
a.  All pump islands shall be located at least 13 feet from any street line. 
b.  The provisions for free flow of traffic and protection of pedestrian areas in paragraph 45(a)(4) above shall apply. In particular, sight distances shall not be obstructed by temporary or permanent signs, racks, displays or other materials or equipment. 
c.  Facilities shall be so arranged that no servicing of any vehicle shall take place on any public street or sidewalk, and no storage of any vehicle shall take place on any sidewalk. Adequate area for parking, storage and servicing of vehicles shall be provided on private property. 
d.  Servicing other than retail sale of gasoline and oil, and minor services customarily incidental thereto, shall be conducted within a building . 
(2)  Repair and limited repair of vehicles. 
a.  The provisions for free flow of traffic and protection of pedestrian areas in paragraph 45(a)(4) above shall apply. 
b.  Facilities shall be so arranged that no servicing or repair of any vehicle shall take place on any public street or sidewalk, and no storage of any vehicle shall take place on any sidewalk. Adequate area for parking, storage and servicing and repair of vehicles shall be provided on private property. 
c.  All repairs other than minor emergency repairs, and all servicing other than customary outdoor services such as tire and chain work shall be conducted within a building . All vehicles which are inoperable by reason of collision shall be stored within a building or be screened in such a manner as to be hidden from view from streets and surrounding properties. 
(3)  Sale of new or used vehicles. 
a.  The provisions for free flow of traffic and protection of pedestrian areas in paragraph 45(a)(4) above shall apply. 
b.  Adequate area for storage of vehicles and for parking of employee and customer automobiles shall be provided on private property. 
c.  Any repairing of vehicles shall conform to paragraph 45(b)(2) above. 
(4)  Car or truck wash (a/k/a Auto laundries). 
a.  The provisions for free flow of traffic and protection of pedestrian areas in paragraph 45(a)(4) above shall apply. Compliance with such provisions shall be assured by adequate design of the establishment, including a reservoir of vehicle storage and standing area on the property, outside the car or truck wash, of at least one-fifth the hourly capacity in vehicles of such facilities. 
(c)  Drive-in establishments. The following requirements shall apply to drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks, drive-in laundries, customer pick-ups, drive-in vending machines, and other facilities serving customers either sitting in their vehicles or stepping out briefly to pick up or deliver goods or conduct other business. 
The provisions for free flow of traffic and protection of pedestrian areas in paragraph 45(a)(4) above shall apply. Compliance with such provisions shall be assured by adequate design of the establishment, with particular attention to provision of sufficient vehicle stacking capacity. 
(Ord. No. 1412 (Rev. Sched. A, § 12), 5-1-06; Ord. No. 1553, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 1665, 10-3-11; Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1696, Sched. A, 5-6-13; Ord. No. 1751, Sched. A, § 3, 8-6-14; Ord. No. 2016-0022, Attach. C, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1820, Sched. B, 6-5-17; Ord. No. 1842, Sched. B, 6-4-18) 
Section 46. - Outdoor activities and storage, waste, dumping, and quarries. 
(a)  General and related standards. Activities and storage in outdoor areas in business and industrial districts also are subject to the standards of the sections of this zoning ordinance specified below: 
(1)  General standards. 
a.  Each application for activities and storage in outdoor areas in business and industrial districts shall be accompanied by a scaled site plan on an A-2 survey base showing storage areas, including locations and types of containers for all volatiles, traffic aisles, and parking for the establishment. 
b.  Additional screening may be required in the granting of a special exception or special permit. 
(2)  Related standards. 
a.  Use Regulations ..... § 42 
b.  Signs ..... § 44 
c.  Parking, Loading and Access ..... § 45 
d.  Automotive & Drive-In Establishments ..... § 45 
e.  Uses abutting Residential Districts ..... § 47 
f.  Performance ..... § 48 
(b)  Outdoor display of merchandise. Display of new or used merchandise for sale at retail (other than motor vehicles) shall be permitted outdoors during business hours only, and such merchandise shall be completely enclosed within a building or other structure at all other times. 
(c)  Outdoor display and consumption of food. Outdoor sale and consumption of food shall be permitted if allowed by applicable health regulations. 
(d)  Junk yards, automobile recycling facilities, and scrap metal processing facilities. Junk yards, automobile recycling facilities and scrap metal processing facilities may be allowed in the IH District by special permit for a maximum of five years. Such facilities are subject to the standards of section 64, the general and related standards of section 46(a) and as specified in this section 46(d). 
(1)  Statement of purpose. This ordinance [Ord. No. 1394, enacted 10-20-05] is enacted for the purpose of establishing minimum health and safety standards for junk yards, automobile recycling facilities and scrap metal processing facilities in the City of New Haven. It is further intended to control their location so as to limit incompatibility with other activities. A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be important to the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of New Haven. 
This ordinance shall apply to all junk yards, automobile recycling facilities and scrap metal processing facilities (also referred to as "facilities") now existing or hereafter proposed in the City of New Haven. No such facility shall be created except in conformance with the standards herein, and all such facilities shall be required to conform to these standards or be removed at the owner's expense. 
(2)  Definitions and scope. 
a.  JUNK YARD. The term " junk yard " means any land, structure or land and structure in combination, used for the storage, baling, packing, sorting, handling, disassembling, purchase, or sale of any material or materials that are used, salvaged, scrapped, or reclaimed but are capable of being reused in some form, including but not limited to, metals, boxes, crates, lumber, machinery, appliances, fixtures, tools, tires, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts. 
b.  AUTOMOBILE RECYCLING FACILITY. The term " automobile recycling facility " means any place where two or more old, secondhand, abandoned, partially disassembled, dilapidated or unlicensed vehicles or parts of vehicles, no longer intended or in condition for legal operation on the public highways, are regularly stored outside for any purpose for a period of six months or more. "Automobile recycling facility" shall also mean any place at which the acquisition or storage of used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, plastic, glass, paper, fiberglass, cordage, or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which has been a part, or intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles regularly takes place. Such terms shall also include any place of business or storage or deposit of motor vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for parts or for use of the metal for scrap and where it is intended to cut up the parts thereof. 
c.  SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITY. The term " scrap metal processing facility " shall include any place of business and any place of deposit which has facilities for preparing and processing iron, steel, and nonferrous metals into a form suitable for remelting by a foundry, steel mill or other remelter, and which does not buy or receive motor vehicles from any person, firm, or corporation, with the exceptions set forth in General Statutes § 14-67w. 
d.  A facility shall be categorized as a junk yard, automobile recycling facility, or scrap metal processing facility based on the primary activity carried on at the facility and no facility shall be required to obtain more than one permit under this section 46(d) for a single facility. 
e.  The existence or holding of a state license to establish or continue a junk yard, automobile recycling facility, or scrap metal processing facility shall not supercede the requirement for a special permit within the City of New Haven in order to engage in the activities regulated by this section 46(d). 
(3)  General standards. 
a.  No person shall establish, maintain, use, or operate a junk yard, motor vehicle junk yard, or scrap metal processing facility without first obtaining a special permit approved pursuant to this section 46(d) and section 64(e) hereof governing special permits and applicable state law. 
b.  No facility or use regulated by this section 46(d) shall be expanded, altered, restored, moved, modified, or replaced, nor shall any existing special permit granted under this section 46(d) be renewed upon expiration, without the prior approval of the City Plan Commission. 
c.  The application shall contain all information required by section 64(e) hereof governing special permits. The applicant shall provide credible evidence to the Commission to demonstrate the ability of the facility and its ancillary elements to comply with all applicable regulations. The evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A site-location map; 
2.  A site plan complying with section 64(f) governing site plans and site plan review guidelines promulgated thereunder and adopted by the City Plan Commission; 
3.  An operating plan indicating types of materials to be accepted at the facility and estimates of the volume and number of trips of incoming and outgoing materials daily and during peak periods; 
4.  A plan for preventing and controlling offensive noises, odors, and rodents and other disease vectors; 
5.  A plan for preventing and controlling fire and explosions occurring at the site; 
6.  A plan and for keeping the area immediately around the facility free and clear of debris; 
7.  A plan for managing dust and debris, and a stormwater runoff plan in compliance with state and/or federal standards. 
d.  No material shall be received at the facility that is not permitted for the facility by special permit as provided in this ordinance or by state statute. 
e.  All materials and activities not within fully enclosed buildings shall be surrounded (except along a wharf used by the facility) by an opaque fence of uniform color, at least eight feet in height, surfaced so as to be resistant to damage from the elements, and maintained in good condition. Any gate in such fence shall be similarly constructed and maintained (except that a view hole may be left in each such gate) and shall be kept locked at all times when the facility is not in operation. 
f.  All materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent the breeding or harboring of rats, insects or other vermin. Where necessary, this shall be accomplished by enclosure in containers, raising of materials above the ground, separation of types of materials, preventing the collection of stagnant water, extermination procedures, or other means. 
g.  No facility shall be used as a dumping or transfer area for refuse or as a place for the burning or disposal of trash. 
h.  A cleared fire lane shall be maintained to facilitate access by firefighting equipment, as approved by the Fire Department. 
i.  Vehicles shall not be stacked more than two high, or, if crushed, no more than 12 feet high; scrap piles shall be limited to the height specified in the facility's special permit, or in the absence of such permit specifications, to a limit of 15 feet. Facilities holding a special permit on the effective date of this ordinance [ Ord. No. 1394] shall be entitled to continue to maintain vehicles or scrap piles at the heights specified in their existing special permit; and such facilities shall not have their permitted pile heights reduced upon permit renewal unless the commission determines that the previously-approved limitations create a public nuisance or cause a threat to public health and safety. 
j.  Batteries shall be removed, and all fuel and other liquids shall be drained from any vehicle prior to storage or disposal. No more than ten gallons of waste oil or fuel shall be stored on site except in approved containers meeting fire standards. Notice shall be provided to the Fire Department of the existence of such substances stored on the site, and their location. 
k.  The facility shall comply with performance standards set forth in section 48 hereof. 
l.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the Commission from imposing additional or more strict conditions pertaining to design, screening, buffering, lighting, soundproofing, signs, or any matter necessary to protect adjacent property, provided that all such conditions are imposed only after the notice and hearing requirements specified in the New Haven Zoning Ordinance have been satisfied. 
m.  The property owner or operator shall at all times assume full responsibility for the use of the property, and shall provide the Zoning Enforcement Officer with the names and addresses of the agent for service of notice as required by law. 
n.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for a special permit in compliance with section 64(e). 
o.  The Commission may, after a public hearing, grant a special permit for a period not to exceed five years. 
(4)  Specific standards-New facilities. All new junk yards, motor vehicle junk yards, and scrap metal processing facilities shall conform to the general standards set forth in this section 46(d)(3) and to the following standards: 
a.  New facilities shall be located no closer than five-hundred feet to an existing public right-of-way, or five-hundred feet to any adjoining property. Locations abutting state highways shall be subject to the provisions of General Statutes § 13a-123e, as amended from time to time. 
b.  New facilities shall not be located within 200 feet from a designated inland wetland or watercourse. 
c.  No new facility or portion of a facility shall be located on a slope exceeding twelve percent in grade, or so situated on a bluff as to be visible from an adjacent public highway or residence located above or below the level of the facility. 
d.  In evaluating an application for special permit for a new facility under this section, the Commission shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare of the public, in general, and the neighborhood, in particular. If the Commission concludes that the proposed use meets the threshold requirement of compatibility, the Commission may grant a special permit with conditions attached thereto for the purpose of assuring compatibility with the neighborhood and protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general. In so determining, the Commission shall consider the following site suitability criteria: 
1.  Traffic and access to the site; 
2.  Potential air and water quality impact; 
3.  Potential for creating a nuisance; 
4.  Facility size; 
5.  Proximity to sensitive receptors including but not limited to schools, community gardens, parks, playgrounds, day care facilities, health care facilities, nursing homes, and residences; 
6.  The effectiveness of screening available or to be provided, visibility from the highway, and the extent to which the operator's plans address health, safety and aesthetic concerns; 
7.  Whether or not vehicles awaiting dismantling or retained for sale or use intact are or will be stored in improved parking areas specifically designated for this use; 
8.  Presence of other potential nuisance sources and evaluation of the cumulative impacts on public health and safety; 
9.  Criteria set forth in Section 64(e), as appropriate. 
e.  The Commission may deny a special permit where the proposed facility would be of such location, size and character that it will not be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the zone or district in which it would be situated, and would be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such properties; or if the proposed facility does not meet the threshold requirements of compatibility with the neighborhood and protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general, based on criteria set forth in sections 46(d) and 64(e) hereof. 
(5)  Specific standards-Existing permitted facilities. 
a.  Existing facilities holding special permits on the effective date of this ordinance shall continue to operate pursuant to such permit and shall re-apply for a special permit upon expiration of the current permit. 
b.  Applications for a special permit to renew existing permits upon expiration, shall include a professionally-prepared site plan as provided by section 64(f) hereof and by the site plan review guidelines promulgated thereunder, and depicting the existing operation and any planned improvements as may be required by this ordinance. 
c.  The plan shall comply with the general standards for operation set forth in section 46(d)(3) hereof, to the maximum extent practical. 
d.  In evaluating an application for special permit for an existing permitted facility under this section, the Commission shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare of the public, in general, and the neighborhood, in particular. If the commission concludes that the proposed use meets the threshold requirement of compatibility, the Commission may grant a special permit with conditions attached thereto for the purpose of assuring compatibility with the neighborhood and protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general. In so determining, the Commission shall consider the following site suitability criteria: 
1.  Traffic and access to the site; 
2.  Potential air and water quality impact; 
3.  Potential for creating a nuisance; 
4.  Facility size; 
5.  Proximity to sensitive receptors including but not limited to schools, community gardens, parks, playgrounds, day care facilities, health care facilities, nursing homes, and residences; 
6.  The effectiveness of screening available or to be provided, visibility from the highway, and the extent to which the operator's plans address health, safety and aesthetic concerns; 
7.  Whether or not vehicles awaiting dismantling or retained for sale or use intact are or will be stored in improved parking areas specifically designated for this use; 
8.  Presence of other potential nuisance sources and evaluation of the cumulative impacts on public health and safety; 
9.  Criteria set forth in section 64(e), as appropriate; 
10.  Whether the existing facility at the time of issuance with its most recently-issued special permit was substantially compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; 
11.  The length of time the existing facility has been operating at the site and its history of compliance with its most recently-issued special permit. 
e.  If, in the opinion of the Commission, circumstances have changed sufficiently to warrant a change in the prior decision, the application for renewal may be denied. 
(6)  Specific standards-Existing nonconforming facilities. 
a.  Applications for permission to continue existing nonconforming facilities operating without a special permit shall, unless the owners thereof have indicated in writing their intention to discontinue operations, be made within six months following the effective date of this ordinance. 
b.  Applications for a special permit to continue operation of existing nonconforming facilities shall include a professionally-prepared site plan as provided by section 64(f) hereof and by the site plan review guidelines promulgated thereunder, and depicting the existing operation and any planned improvements as may be required by this ordinance. 
c.  The plan shall comply with the general standards for operation set forth in section 46(d)(3) hereof, to the maximum extent practical. 
d.  In evaluating an application made under this section for a special permit to continue the operation of an existing, nonconforming facility, the Commission shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare of the public, in general, and the neighborhood, in particular. The Commission may grant a special permit with conditions attached thereto for the purpose of assuring compatibility with the neighborhood and protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general. In so determining, the Commission shall consider the following operational criteria: 
1.  Traffic and access to the site; 
2.  Potential air and water quality impact; 
3.  Potential for creating a nuisance; 
4.  Facility size; 
5.  Proximity to sensitive receptors including but not limited to schools, community gardens, parks, playgrounds, day care facilities, health care facilities, nursing homes, and residences; 
6.  The effectiveness of screening available or to be provided, visibility from the highway, and the extent to which the operator's plans address health, safety and aesthetic concerns; 
7.  Whether or not vehicles awaiting dismantling or retained for sale or use intact are or will be stored in improved parking areas specifically designated for this use; 
8.  Presence of other potential nuisance sources and evaluation of the cumulative impacts on public health and safety; 
9.  Criteria set forth in section 64(e), as appropriate; 
10.  The degree to which the use can economically be made to comply with the requirements set forth in section 46(d)(3) hereof; 
e.  An existing, nonconforming facility seeking a special permit hereunder may provide evidence regarding the degree to which the use can economically be made to comply with the standards set forth herein. The Commission may allow the applicant additional time, up to three years, to comply with the regulations, provided a specific schedule for the same has been approved by the Commission and met by the applicant. In situations where compliance with some of the enumerated standards is impossible, economically impractical, or otherwise unduly burdensome due to physical features of the site or other conditions beyond the control of the applicant, the Commission may waive compliance. However, the additional time or waiver may be granted only if there is no substantial detriment to the public health and safety and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of these regulations. 
(7)  Right of entry. To the extent permitted by law, owners or operators shall authorize agents and employees of the City of New Haven to enter, examine, or survey the premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of compliance inspections, whether or not there is prior evidence of non-compliance. City agents and employees may examine any records related to the installation, maintenance, operation and testing of the facility. 
(8)  Closure. A facility planning to cease operations must submit and receive approval for an operation and closure plan at least six months prior to the date the facility will stop accepting materials; in the case of an unplanned closure with less than six months notice, the facility must immediately stop accepting materials and submit a closure plan within ten days. 
(9)  Permit continuance. Provided that all local notice and hearing requirements are satisfied, the grounds on which the City Plan Commission may deny, revoke, suspend, or modify any permit issued pursuant to this ordinance include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Refusal to permit an agent of the City of New Haven or other government official to reasonably inspect the facility or any records pertaining to the operation of the facility; 
b.  Interference with an agent of the City of New Haven or other government official in the performance of his or her duty, directly or indirectly related to these regulations; 
c.  A criminal conviction of the permit holder relating to the operation of the facility; 
d.  Failure of the permit holder to submit any required documents within the time specified; 
e.  Failure to pay the required permit fees or assessed fines or penalties; 
f.  A determination that the facility presents a nuisance or may cause an adverse impact on the public health or safety; 
g.  The owner and/or operator's substantial failure to comply with these regulations, or otherwise constructing or operating the facility so as to cause a threat to the public health or safety. 
Such action by the Commission may include ordering other appropriate relief, including but not limited to ordering submission of a closure plan. 
(e)  Dumping. Dumping, as defined below and subject to the following regulations (whether inside or outside a building ) shall be permitted only by special exception for a maximum period of two years. 
(1)  DUMPING: The discarding or depositing of any waste, or any material incapable of being reused in some form, other than clean fill such as sand, soil, gravel, rock or clay. 
(2)  All dumping shall be carried on in such a manner as to prevent the breeding or harboring of rats, insects, or other vermin. 
(3)  The dumping area shall be periodically bull-dozed or otherwise treated to cover dumped materials with soil or other such substance. 
(4)  Fire hazards shall be prevented by all necessary measures. 
(5)  No burning shall be carried on in any dumping area except at appropriate locations and times, with proper wind direction and Department of Fire Service written permission. 
(f)  Quarries. Quarries, subject to the § 64. general and related standards and § 46(a) Specific standards may be permitted by special exception for a maximum period of five years. 
(1)  QUARRY: Any property from which stone, gravel, sand, soil, loam or any mineral or similar substance is removed or excavated with the use of power equipment, for the purpose of disposition away from the immediate premises at the present or any future time, with the exception of excavation for construction of a building for which a building permit has been duly issued. 
(2)  Necessary precautions, through fencing or otherwise, shall be taken to prevent injury to the public. 
(3)  At the conclusion of quarrying operations on any part of the property, the operator of such quarry shall re-establish a uniform contour of the ground level and shall provide a suitable ground cover. A bond satisfactory to the zoning enforcement officer and the corporation counsel may be required to assure compliance with this paragraph (3). 
(g)  Household hazardous waste collection centers. Household hazardous waste collection centers shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE COLLECTION CENTER: Any land or structure used for the collection, packing, consolidation, storage, and transfer of any waste materials generated from homes or similar sources that are defined as household hazardous waste by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, including materials that are either hazardous wastes as listed in 40 CFR, Parts 261.33(e) or (f), or wastes that exhibit any of the following characteristics as defined in 40 CFR Parts 261.21-261.24: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, and EP toxicity. 
(2)  A household hazardous waste collection center must meet all applicable requirements of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and may be constructed and operated only with valid permits as required by the DEP solid waste and hazardous materials units and subject to DEP management and monitoring requirements. 
(3)  All discarded and waste materials at a household hazardous waste collection center must be stored within structures, storage tanks, or containers that provide protection from weather, vermin and vandalism. All hazardous waste materials must be stored within enclosed structures which meet all applicable requirements of the department of fire service and the Connecticut DEP for segregation of combustible and incompatible materials, fire rating, containment of leaks and spills, and other safety measures necessary to protect site personnel, surrounding structures, public health, and the environment. 
(h)  Solid waste. Solid waste facilities as defined herein may be allowed in the IH District by special permit for a maximum of five years. Such facilities are subject to the following regulations (whether operations occur inside or outside a building): 
(1)  Statement of purpose. In order to promote, protect and preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of New Haven, it is hereby declared to be in the public interest that the accumulation, collection, transportation, processing, and disposal of solid waste be regulated. The City of New Haven is authorized by General Statutes § 22a-208a to regulate, through zoning, land usage for solid waste disposal. 
Solid waste facilities are disproportionately concentrated in New Haven, particularly in the IH district, adjacent to residential neighborhoods, public recreation areas, food establishments, and small businesses. Concentrations of waste facilities can attract and generate many problems for communities, including objectionable noise, odor, litter and traffic. Diesel fumes and dust can degrade air quality and aggravate allergies and other health problems existing in the affected communities. The problem is compounded by the increasingly-regional nature of these facilities, and the trend towards larger and larger facilities. Accordingly, it is the policy of the City that the burden of fulfilling the need for solid waste facilities shall not fall disproportionately on any community and that the construction of new solid waste facilities as defined in section 46(h)(2) a through i hereof shall not be permitted within the limits of the City of New Haven. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  SOLID WASTE. The term " solid waste " means unwanted or discarded solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, including, but not limited to, demolition debris, tires, material burned or otherwise processed at a resources recovery facility or incinerator, material processed at a recycling facility, and sludges or other residue from a water pollution abatement facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. 
b.  MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. The term " municipal solid waste " means solid waste from residential, commercial and industrial sources, excluding solid waste consisting of significant quantities of hazardous waste as defined herein, land-clearing debris, demolition debris, biomedical waste, sewage sludge and scrap metal. 
c.  SOLID WASTE FACILITY. The term " solid waste facility " means any solid waste disposal area, volume reduction plant, transfer station, woodburning facility, or biomedical waste treatment facility. 
d.  VOLUME REDUCTION PLANT. The term " volume reduction plant " means any location or structure, whether located on land or water, where more than 2,000 pounds per hour of solid waste generated elsewhere may be reduced in volume, including but not limited to, resource recovery facilities and other incinerators, recycling facilities, pulverizers, compactors, shredders, balers and composting facilities. 
e.  SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AREA. The term " solid waste disposal area " means any location, including a landfill or other disposal site, used for the disposal of more than ten cubic yards of solid waste, and as further defined in Chapter 446d of the General Statutes. 
f.  TRANSFER STATION. The term " transfer station " means any location or structure, whether located on land or water, where more than ten cubic yards of solid waste, generated elsewhere, may be stored for transfer or transferred from transportation units and placed in other transportation units for movement to another location, whether or not such waste is stored at the location prior to transfer. 
g.  HAZARDOUS WASTE. The term " hazardous waste " means any waste material that may present a present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly disposed of, treated, stored, transported or otherwise managed, and as further defined in General Statutes § 22a-115, as amended from time to time. 
h.  BIOMEDICAL WASTE. The term " biomedical waste " means infectious waste, pathological waste and chemotherapy waste generated during the administration of medical care or the performance of medical research involving humans or animals and which, because of its quantity, character or composition, has been determined by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection to require special handling, but excluding hazardous wastes, or radioactive materials regulated by the General Statutes. 
i.  BIOMEDICAL WASTE TREATMENT FACILITY. The term " biomedical waste treatment facility " means a solid waste facility capable of storing, treating or disposing of any amount of biomedical waste, excluding any facility where the only biomedical waste treated, stored or disposed of is biomedical waste generated at the site. 
k.  The facilities and operations of the Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority, organized under Conn. Gen. Stat. § 22a-500 et seq., are expressly exempted from the provisions of this section 46(h). 
(3)  General standards. 
a.  Any use not specified in section 46(h)(2) hereof shall be prohibited. Disposal, treatment, storage, transfer or other management of waste by waterborne transportation is not permitted outside of the Port district as defined by Article 2 §15-31. 
b.  No new facilities as defined in section 46(h)(2)a-i hereof shall be permitted within the limits of the City of New Haven, except that the City of New Haven may establish, maintain, and operate solid waste facilities for its own public purposes. 
c.  No person shall maintain, use, or operate a solid waste facility without valid permits issued pursuant to this section 46(h) and applicable state law. Applications for permission to continue operating existing facilities shall, unless the owners thereof have indicated in writing their intention to discontinue operations, be made within six months following the effective date of this ordinance [Ord. No. 1394]. 
d.  No facility or use regulated by this section 46(h) shall be expanded, altered, restored, moved, modified or replaced, nor shall any existing special permit granted under this section 46(h) be renewed upon expiration, without the prior approval of the City Plan Commission. 
e.  An applicant proposing to expand, alter, restore, move, modify, or replace an existing facility or use regulated by this section 46(h), or to renew an existing special permit, shall make application to the City Plan Commission. The application shall contain all information required by Section 64(e) hereof governing special permits. The applicant shall provide credible evidence to the commission to demonstrate the ability of the facility and its ancillary elements to comply with all applicable regulations. The evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A site-location map; 
2.  A site plan complying with section 64(f) governing site plans and site plan review guidelines promulgated thereunder and adopted by the City Plan Commission; 
3.  An operating plan indicating types of waste to be accepted at the facility and estimates of the volume and number of trips of incoming and outgoing materials daily and during peak periods; 
4.  A plan for preventing and controlling offensive noises, odors, and rodents and other disease vectors; 
5.  A plan for preventing and controlling fire and explosions occurring at the site; 
6.  A plan for diverting unrestricted waste; 
7.  A plan for managing dust, debris, and stormwater runoff; 
8.  A traffic study that indicates truck routes to and from the facility on streets, to the extent possible, that are major arterials and highways that do not abut residential neighborhoods along the way, with the objective of minimizing potential adverse impacts on adjacent neighborhoods. 
e.  No material shall be received at the facility that is not permitted for the facility by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, and by special permit as provided in this ordinance. 
f.  The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application in compliance with Section 64(e). 
g.  The Commission may, after a public hearing, grant a special permit to expand, alter, restore, move, modify, or replace an existing facility or use regulated by this section 46(h), or to renew an existing permit, for a period not to exceed five years. 
h.  In evaluating an application for special permit under this section, the Commission shall take into consideration the health, safety and welfare of the public, in general, and the neighborhood, in particular. If the Commission concludes that the proposed use meets the threshold requirement of compatibility, the Commission may grant or renew a special permit with conditions attached thereto for the purpose of assuring compatibility with the neighborhood and protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general. In so determining, the commission shall consider the following site suitability criteria: 
1.  Traffic and access to the site; 
2.  Potential air and water quality impact; 
3.  Potential for creating a nuisance; 
4.  Facility size and existing capacity of other solid waste facilities in the region; 
5.  Proximity to sensitive receptors including but not limited to schools, community gardens, parks, playgrounds, day care facilities, health care facilities, nursing homes, and residences; 
6.  Presence of other potential nuisance sources and evaluation of the cumulative impacts on public health and safety; 
7.  Criteria set forth in section 64(e), as appropriate. 
i.  The Commission may deny a special permit to expand, alter, restore, move, modify, or replace an existing facility or use where the facility is of such location, size and character that it will not be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the zone or district in which it is situated, and will be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such properties; or if the proposed facility does not meet the threshold requirements of compatibility with the neighborhood and protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general, based on criteria set forth in sections 46(h) and 64(e) hereof. 
j.  In considering an application to renew an existing special permit, the commission may consider whether the facility and/or use belongs at the site, in light of circumstances existing at the time the most recent permit was granted. If, in the opinion of the Commission, circumstances have changed sufficiently to warrant a change in the prior decision, the application for renewal may be denied. 
k.  An applicant seeking a special permit hereunder may provide evidence regarding the degree to which the use can economically be made to comply with the standards set forth herein. The Commission may allow the applicant additional time, up to three years, to comply with the regulations, provided a specific schedule for the same has been approved by the Commission and met by the applicant. In situations where compliance with some of the enumerated standards is impossible due to physical features of the site or other conditions beyond the control of the applicant, the Commission may waive compliance. However, the additional time or waiver may be granted only if there is no substantial detriment to the public health and safety and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of these regulations. 
(4)  Specific standards. 
a.  Lot area: Each facility permitted under this section shall have a minimum lot size as set forth in sections 43 and 47 hereof. The site shall be of sufficient size so as to permit the avoidance or reduction of adverse impacts on the character of the neighborhood due to noise, traffic, parking, odors, rodents and other disease vectors, dust, litter, fire hazards, decomposition gases, vehicle and other pollution, or other hazards or objectionable conditions. The Commission may require a lot size larger than the minimum set forth herein, if the Commission shall find on sufficient evidence that such an increase is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public in general, and the neighborhood in particular, giving due regard to the nature of the abutting and/or adjoining uses and the materials permitted to be deposited at the facility. 
b.  Setback: No portion of the facility, including any structure, loading docks and truck bays, storage, transfer equipment, truck parking, or other similar processing equipment and operations, shall be located within 200 feet of a residential property line; 
c.  Bulk regulations set forth in section 43 shall apply. 
d.  Landscaping/buffer area: The facility shall be enclosed on all sides by a fence or wall at least eight feet high. The public view side or the side of the facility facing Residence Districts shall be landscaped and have an opaque screen, fence or wall not less than eight feet high. The site shall be maintained free of litter, trash, and debris. 
e.  Access to site: 
1.  The site shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
2.  Facilities permitted under this section shall be restricted to areas that have public access roads of sufficient width and capacity to carry maximum projected volumes and loads. 
3.  There shall be no truck access or queuing to the site from residential streets. 
4.  On-site roads shall be constructed to handle maximum projected loads, shall have an all-weather surface and shall be maintained so as to be passable by all vehicles accessing the area. 
f.  Parking: All applicable provisions of section 45 shall apply. In addition, the facility shall provide on-site parking and queuing, as follows: 
1.  Space shall be provided on-site to park each commercial vehicle operated by the facility; 
2.  One employee parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the facility; 
3.  If the facility serves the public, all parking and queuing space shall be provided on-site to accommodate projected peak demand; 
4.  No parking, queuing, or standing of trucks will be permitted on residential streets. 
g.  The property owner shall at all times assume full responsibility for the use of the property, and shall provide the Zoning Enforcement Officer with the names and addresses of the agent for service of notice as required by law. 
(5)  Operating conditions. 
a.  An operator certified by the Commissioner of the CTDEP shall be present at the facility at all times during operating hours. 
b.  A sign shall be posted at the entrance to the site stating, at a minimum, the name of the permittee and hours of operation, the authorized users, and required safety precautions. 
c.  A building roofed and enclosed on all sides, or otherwise enclosed to satisfactorily control dust and litter shall be provided for all solid waste other than bulky waste or recyclable materials. 
d.  All solid waste handling activities, including depositing, processing, separation and loading shall be within a fully enclosed building to minimize the adverse impacts due to noise, traffic, parking, odors, rodents and other disease vectors, dust, litter, fire hazards, decomposition gases, wastewater, vehicle and other pollution, and other hazards or objectionable conditions. Scavenging shall be prohibited at the unloading area. 
e.  No solid waste shall be stored within the property boundary for more than 48 hours, unless authorized by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and City Plan Commission. All solid waste shall be stored indoors, except that bulky waste or recyclable materials may be otherwise stored outside. 
f.  All storage of waste or recycled materials shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures that are fully covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for waste or recycled flammable materials shall be approved by the Fire Department. No storage containers outside the facility structures shall be visible above the height of a required fence or wall. Outside storage shall only be permitted for a reasonable period of time and in reasonable quantities to allow for separation, conversion, baling, processing, and shipment of processed and nonprocessed materials; 
g.  Equipment shall be maintained on site by the operator to control fires and explosions and arrangements made with the City Fire Department to immediately acquire services when needed. 
h.  If for any reason the facility is rendered inoperable, an alternative method approved by the Commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection shall be available for processing or transfer and disposal of solid waste. A copy of the alternative plan, as approved, shall be provided to the Commission. 
i.  If the facility is located within 500 feet of a Residential District, it shall not operate between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Hours of operation shall include the arrival and departure of trucks and delivery and removal of materials and equipment. 
j.  The facility shall not operate on Sunday. 
k.  The facility shall comply with performance standards set forth in section 48 hereof. 
l.  Nothing in this section shall preclude the Commission from imposing additional or more strict conditions pertaining to design, screening, buffering, lighting, soundproofing, signs, or any matter necessary to protect adjacent property, and special consideration will be given to protecting residential property from excessive noise and traffic. 
(6)  Right of entry. To the extent permitted by law, owners or operators shall authorize agents and employees of the City of New Haven to enter, examine, or survey the premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of compliance inspections, whether or not there is prior evidence of non-compliance. City agents and employees may examine any records related to the installation, maintenance, operation and testing of the facility. 
(7)  Closure. A facility planning to cease operations must submit and receive approval for an operation and closure plan at least six months prior to the date the facility will stop accepting materials; in the case of an unplanned closure with less than six months notice, the facility must immediately stop accepting materials and submit a closure plan within ten days. 
(8)  Permit continuance. The grounds on which the City Plan Commission may deny renewal, revoke, suspend, or modify any permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Refusal to permit an agent of the City of New Haven or other government official to reasonably inspect the facility or any records pertaining to the operation of the facility; 
b.  Interference with an agent of the City of New Haven or other government official in the performance of his or her duty, directly or indirectly related to these regulations; 
c.  A criminal conviction of the permit holder relating to the operation of the facility; 
d.  Failure of the permit holder to submit any required documents within the time specified; 
e.  Failure to pay the required permit fees or assessed fines or penalties; 
f.  A determination that the facility presents a nuisance or may cause an adverse impact on the public health or safety; 
g.  The owner and/or operator's substantial failure to comply with these regulations, or otherwise constructing or operating the facility so as to cause a threat to the public health or safety. 
Such action by the Commission may include ordering other appropriate relief, including but not limited to ordering submission of a closure plan. 
(Ord. No. 1394, 10-20-05) 
Section 47. - Provisions for transition where business and industrial districts abut residence districts. 
    Where a business or industrial district abuts a residence district, the following regulations shall apply: 
(a)  Yard requirements: 
(1)  Front yards: Same as in section 43, with the following exception: 
a.  Where any lot in an industrial district abuts a residence district across a street or alley, all of the regulations of such residence district for front yards shall apply to such lot along that portion of such street or alley across which such lot abuts such residence district. 

Front Yard Requirements Where R and I Districts abut 
(2)  Side yards: Same as in section 43, with the following exception: 
a.  Where a lot in a business district or industrial district abuts a residence district along a side lot line of such lot, all of the regulations of such residence district for side yards shall apply to such lot along such side lot line. 

Side Yard Requirements Where R and I Districts abut 
(3)  Rear yards: Same as in section 43, with the following exception: 
a.  Where a lot in an industrial district abuts a residence district along a rear lot line of such lot, all of the regulations of such residence district for rear yards shall apply to such lot along such rear lot line. 

Rear Yard Requirements Where R and I Districts abut 
(b)  Parking and loading areas shall be arranged and screened as provided in paragraph 45(a)(3) of this ordinance. 
(c)  No goods, materials or equipment shall be stored out of doors on any lot in a business or industrial district within five feet of any lot line along which such lot district, either directly or across a street or alley. Any goods, materials or equipment stored out of doors on such lot shall be effectively screened from view from such residence district by means of a suitable fence, wall or evergreen planting at least five feet in height. 
(d)  No sign (other than permitted signs solely for the control of traffic and parking) shall be placed at the side or rear of a lot in a business or industrial district at a point where such lot directly abuts a residence district, or on a wall of a building on such a lot (other than a wall facing a street), if the face of such sign is visible from the residence district on which such lot abuts directly. 
(e)  The provisions of this section 47 shall not apply to the Business D-3 District. 
(Ord. No. 1685, Sched. D, 8-6-12) 
Section 48. - Performance standards for business and industrial uses. 
(a)  Nature and administration. 
(1)  The following performance standards establish maximum levels for various nuisance factors. They shall apply to all business and industrial uses, whether located in a business or industrial district or located in a residence district as a nonconforming use or special exception. 
(2)  Measurements to determine present compliance and estimates to determine future compliance may be made by the zoning enforcement officer, or any other public or private agency, firm or person competent to make such measurements or estimates in appropriate cases. The zoning enforcement officer may require the owner or user of the property to furnish such measurements or estimates in appropriate cases. 
(3)  New construction, new facilities and new activities shall not be permitted except in compliance with these standards. 
(4)  Existing uses shall not be required to reconstruct or rearrange their facilities and activities to provide compliance with these standards unless the same can be accomplished without undue cost (relative to the scale of operations concerned) as determined by the zoning enforcement officer, or unless such reconstruction or rearrangement is required through some regulation other than the zoning ordinance. Where existing uses do comply with these standards they shall not be altered so as not to comply, and where existing uses do not comply with the standards they shall not be altered to increase any noncompliance. Any existing machine, structure or other facility which does not comply with these standards shall not be replaced with a similar noncomplying facility unless: 
a.  The facility is essential to the operation of the business or industry; and 
b.  The zoning enforcement officer determines that replacement with a complying facility would be impractical. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Noise. The sound pressure level of any operation (other than the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities, or operations involved in the construction or demolition of structures, or time signals) shall not exceed the decibel levels as stated below. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer that conform to specifications published by the American Standards Association (American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.3-1944, American Standards Association, Inc. New York, New York and American Standard Specification for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, Z24.10-1953, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, New York shall be used.) 
TABLE I 
    The maximum permissible sound-pressure levels between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for smooth and continuous noise shall be as follows (all of the decibel levels stated below shall apply in each case): 
Sound Pressure Level (Decibels re .0002 dyne/cm 2 ) Frequency Band (Cycles per Second) Within any Business District or at its Boundary Within any Residence District or at its Boundary 25-75 79 72 75-150 74 67 150-300 66 59 300-600 59 52 600-1,200 53 46 1,200-2,400 47 40 2,400-4,800 41 34 4,800-10,000 39 32  
    If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is radiated during sleeping hours, one or more of the corrections in Table II below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel levels given above in Table I. 
  
  
  
TABLE II 
Type of Operation or Character of Noise Correction in Decibels Noise occurs between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. -3 Noise occurs less than 5% of any one-hour period. +5 Noise is of periodic character (hum, scream, etc.) or is of impulsive character (hammering, etc.). -5 (In the case of impulsive noise, the correction shall apply only to the average pressure during an impulse, and impulse peaks shall not exceed the basic standards in Table I.)  
(2)  Vibration. Vibration in the form of earth-borne oscillations shall not cause displacement at any lot line exceeding the limits stated in Table III. These limits shall not apply to operations involved in the construction or demolition of structures. 
TABLE III 
Maximum Displacement at Any Lot Line (in inches) Frequency (Cycles per second) Steady State Vibration* Impact Vibration** 10 and below .0008 .0016 10-20 .0005 .0010 20-30 .0003 .0006 30-40 .0002 .0004 40-50 .0001 .0002 50-60 .0001 .0002 60 and over .0001 .0002  
 *Continuous vibration. Discrete pulses occurring at more than 30 per minute shall be considered steady-state vibration. 
**Discrete pulses occurring at or less than 30 per minute. 
_____ 
(3)  Glare and heat. The use shall be so arranged that any glare or radiant heat produced is shielded so as not to be perceptible at or beyond any property line. 
(4)  Air pollution . Air pollutants shall not exceed the limits prescribed by the City of New Haven ordinance entitled An Ordinance Providing for the Regulation and Control of the Emission into the Open Air of Smoke, Dust and Odor, or any amendment thereto, or any other applicable regulation. 
(5)  Sewage. The use and discharge of substances into public sewers shall not violate the provisions of the City of New Haven ordinance entitled An Ordinance Regulating the Use of and the Discharge of Substances into the Public Sewer System of the City of New Haven, or any amendment thereto, or any other applicable regulation. The discharge of substances into rivers and into the ocean shall be subject to regulations of the Connecticut State Water Resources Commission, and to any other applicable regulation. 
(6)  Fire and explosion hazards. The use shall conform to the Fire Safety Code of the State of Connecticut, the regulations of the Department of Fire Service of the City of New Haven, and any other applicable regulation. 
(7)  Ionizing radiation and radioactive materials. the use shall conform to the regulations of the Sanitary Code of the State of Connecticut with regard to sources of ionizing radiation and radioactive materials, and to any other applicable regulation. 
(8)  Electromagnetic Interference. The use shall conform to the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission with regard to electromagnetic radiation and interference, and to any other applicable regulation. 
Section 49. - Regulation of wireless communications. 
    Description and purpose. These regulations exist to protect neighborhoods, minimize conflict with adjacent uses and the surrounding area, and to assure the health and safety of the public. The city recognizes the quasi-public nature of wireless communications systems and finds that these regulations are necessary to protect the ecological, scenic, historical and recreational values of the city and to ensure that adverse visual and operational effects will not contribute to blighting or deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood. More specifically, the purposes are: 
•  To accommodate the need for wireless communications antennas while regulating their location and number. 
•  To minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communications antennas and antennas or wireless site towers through proper design, siting and vegetative screening. 
•  To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antennas or wireless site towers and falling ice through their proper siting and engineering. 
•  To encourage the joint use of any new antennas or wireless site tower. 
•  To reduce the number of antennas or wireless site towers needed in the future. 
(a)  Definitions. When used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meaning defined below: 
    ANTENNA: A device used to collect or transmit telecommunications or radio signals. Examples include panels, microwave dishes and single pole devices known as whips. 
    ANTENNA HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height. 
    WIRELESS SITE: The equipment and structures involved in receiving or transmitting telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to another wireless site, another communications source or receiver, or to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with land-based telephone lines. 
    TOWER: A structure that is intended to support equipment used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications or radio signals. Examples of such structures include monopoles and lattice construction steel structures. 
(b)  Site selection policies. Wireless sites shall be located in the following order of preference: 
(1)  On existing structures such as buildings, communications towers and smokestacks. 
(2)  In locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
On new towers on bare ground in business and industrial districts: 
(3)  With visual mitigation. 
(4)  Without visual mitigation in business and industrial districts. 
In residential districts: 
(5)  On government or institutional structures. 
(6)  On new towers with visual mitigation. 
(7)  On new towers without visual mitigation. 
(c)  Use regulations. 
(1)  Application required. All applications for wireless sites and antennas shall be filed with the City of New Haven and concurrently with the Connecticut Siting Council filing if it is required. 
(2)  The filing shall include a map showing the extent of planned coverage within the City of New Haven, approved locations of the applicant's other wireless sites in the city, and the location and service area of the proposed wireless site. 
(3)  If the antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure and all associated equipment is contained within the structure or on its roof, a full site plan shall not be required. 
(d)  Location constraints. 
(1)  As-of-right. Any antenna that is attached to an existing communications tower, smoke stack, water tower, government or institutional building, or other tall structure is permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following maximum height and other provisions: 
a.  Omnidirectional or whip antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height or seven inches in diameter. 
b.  Directional or panel antennas shall not exceed six feet in height or two feet in width. 
c.  Satellite and microwave dish antennas shall not exceed six feet in diameter and when building or rooftop mounted shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from abutting public streets. 
d.  Materials and colors shall match the exterior of the building or structure, as may be determined by city staff. 
(2)  An antenna may not be located on a building or structure that is listed on an historic register or is within an historic district, except by special permit from the City Plan Commission. 
(3)  Special permit. An antenna that is not mounted on an existing structure or a new antenna or tower is permitted by special permit from the city plan commission in all districts, subject to the general standards of § 49(e) and review criteria of § 49(f). 
(e)  General standards. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Site justification statement, including a description of the narrowing process that eliminated other potential sites. 
a.  If a proposed antenna tower exceeds 200 feet height or is within 20,000 feet of Tweed-New Haven Airport, proof is required that the applicant has filed a notice of proposed construction with the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(2)  Antenna height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. No antenna that is taller than this minimum height shall be approved. 
(3)  Antenna tower setback. If a new tower is constructed (as opposed to mounting the antenna on an existing structure, the minimum distance between the base of the tower and any guy wire anchors or any property line shall be the largest of the following: 
a.  30% of antenna height. 
b.  The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district. 
c.  40 feet. 
(4)  Roof mounted antenna. If the equipment is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment building and other equipment structures shall not occupy more than 25% of the roof area. Setbacks from roof edge shall be 10 feet, or 10% of roof depth (measured from edge facing public street to opposite edge of roof), whichever is greater. 
(5)  Antenna tower safety. The antenna tower shall be designed and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National Standards Institute, ANSI/EIA-222-E manual, as amended. 
(6)  Site soil report. A soil report complying with Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E manual standards, as amended, shall be submitted to verify the design specifications of the foundation for the tower and anchors for the guy wires, if used. 
(7)  Fencing. Unless the antenna is mounted on an existing structure, a fence with a maximum height of eight feet shall be required around the tower and other equipment. 
(8)  Landscaping. To soften the appearance of a wireless site and screen as much of the tower as possible, a fence surrounding the tower and other ground level features such as a building, ground landscaping shall be required. 
(9)  Any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping may be permitted if the same degree of screening as the required landscaping is achieved, as determined by the executive director (or designee) of the City Plan Department. 
a.  An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The screen can be either a hedge (planted three feet on center maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted ten feet on center maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six feet at planting and shall grow to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity. 
b.  Existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. 
(10)  Commercial advertising shall not be allowed on an antenna or antenna tower. 
(11)  Signal lights or illumination shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the Connecticut Siting Council. 
(12)  All other uses ancillary to the antenna and associated equipment (including a business office, maintenance depot, vehicle storage, etc.) are prohibited. 
(13)  Joint use accommodated. To minimize the number of antenna or wireless site towers in the community in the future, the proposed support structure shall be required to accommodate other users, including other wireless communication companies and local police, fire and ambulance companies unless it is determined to be technically unfeasible based on information submitted by the applicant. The city may require independent outside evaluation of such materials at the applicant's expense. 
(14)  The related unmanned equipment and/or building(s) shall not contain more than 750 square feet of gross floor area or be more than twelve feet in height. 
(f)  Standards for special permit approval. 
(1)  Using technological evidence the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed location is necessary to satisfy its function in the company's grid system. Specific locations will be evaluated using the following criteria (not listed in any order of priority). 
•  Availability of suitable structures for antenna mounting. 
•  Topography as it relates to line of sight transmission for optimum service efficiency. 
•  Leasable lands and willing landlords. 
•  Screening potential of existing vegetation, structures and topographic features. 
•  Compatibility with adjacent land uses. 
•  Least number of sites to cover desired area. 
•  Greatest coverage consistent with physical requirements. 
•  Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact. 
•  Availability of sites not within an established single-family community. 
•  Preservation of view corridors, vistas. 
•  Potential for preservation of pre-existing character of site. 
•  Minimal impact on residential areas surrounding commercial or industrial zoned sites. 
•  Selection of sites which lend themselves to visual mitigation. 
•  Availability of road access. 
•  Availability of electric power. 
•  Availability of land based telephone lines or microwave link capability. 
If a tower is proposed the application shall include support materials that show the location of tall structures within one quarter mile radius of the site proposed, that the owners of those locations have been contacted and asked for permission to install the antenna on those structures and denied for other than economic reasons. This would include smoke stacks, water towers, tall buildings, antennas or towers of other wireless communications companies, other communication towers (fire, police, etc.) and other tall structures. 
The City Plan Commission may deny an application to construct a new tower if it is determined that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing structure. 
(g)  Certificate of continued use. The owner of the subject property shall submit to the zoning administrator annually during the month of January an affidavit that the facility is in active use as a wireless site and the owner or operator shall certify that such use will continue for the coming calendar year. 
(h)  Abandonment. A wireless site not in use for six (6) months shall be removed by the service facility owner. This removal shall occur within 90 days of the end of such six-month period. Upon removal the site shall be restored to its previous appearance and, where appropriate, revegetated to blend with the surrounding area. 
Section 50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OTHER DISTRICTS 

Section 51. - Park Districts. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist to set aside and protect areas that are publicly or semi-publicly owned and are designated as public parks and open spaces. 
    Uses; permitted. In a Park District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or used, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Public parks, playgrounds and open spaces and uses incidental thereto. 
(b)  Other public and semi-public uses . 
Section 52. - Cemetery Districts. 
    Description and purpose. These districts exist to set aside and protect areas that have been and are being developed predominantly for cemeteries, which constitute a distinct and unique land use. In instances where land in a Cemetery District is not developed for cemetery purposes, it may be devoted to residences at a low-middle density of 12 dwelling units per acre, or to certain non-residential uses. 
    Uses permitted. In a Cemetery District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or use d, and a lot or structure may be use d, for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  Residentialusesas follows. 
(1)  Such residential uses as are permitted, and in the same manner, as in RM-1 Districts. 
(b)  Non-residential uses as follows. 
(1)  Such non-residential uses as are permitted, and in the same manner, as in RM-1 Districts. 
(2)  As of right: 
a.  Cemeteries, including cemetery chapels, crematories and other accessory structures but excluding funeral homes. 
Section 53. - Airport District. 
    Description and purpose: This district exists for the purpose of designating that area which has been and is being developed by the Tweed-New Haven Airport. The airport represents a distinct land use; not easily classified in any other district, having unique needs for development as an integrated unit to serve the city and the region. 
    Uses permitted. In the Airport District a building or other structure may be erected, altered, arranged, designed or usedd, and a lot or structure may be used for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  A municipal airport, and uses incidental thereto. 
(See also a City of New Haven Ordinance entitled Ordinance Concerning Airport Approach Zones, and a map of approach zones prepared by the New Haven Airport Commission and filed with the City Clerk, regulating the height of structures and trees in approaches to the municipal airport.) 
Section 54. - Historic District. 
    Description and purposes. These districts exist to distinguish and preserve areas of the city which are unique for their historical and architectural values and which therefore promote the educational, cultural, and general welfare of the public through their continued existence. Towards this end, a historic district commission has been established to regulate the manner in which a building or structure may be erected, altered, arranged, restored, moved or demolished within an historic district. Any such action requires the approval of said commission. (See City of New Haven ordinance entitled An Ordinance to Establish an Historic District and an Historic District Commission for the City of New Haven, effective June 11, 1970.) Such values as are present in so designated areas are not readily classified within existing district regulations and are accordingly given a distinct classification in addition to the existing district classifications so as best to serve the interests of the city and the region. 
    Intent. It is the intent of this ordinance to safeguard the heritage of the city, to stabilize and improve property values in such districts, foster civic beauty, promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the City of New Haven through the preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings, places, and districts, associated with the history of or indicative of a period or style of architecture of historic interest within the City of New Haven, and to provide that modification shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the ordinances. Unless otherwise provided, all definitions of terms shall have the meaning set forth in sections 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive as amended, of the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
    Establishment. Pursuant to the provisions of sections 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive as amended, of the General Statutes of Connecticut, there is established an historic district(s) within the City of New Haven and an Historic District Commission, which Commission shall be empowered to exercise all the powers, duties, and functions enumerated in said sections 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive as amended, of the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
    Uses permitted. In an Historic District, uses are governed by the underlying zoning classification. (See Official Zoning Maps, City of New Haven.) Accordingly, the following uses are considered appropriate and no others: 
(a)  Residential uses as follows: Such residential uses as are permitted and in the same manner as in the underlying zone, within the restrictions of An Ordinance to Establish an Historic District and an Historic District Commission for the City of New Haven. 
(b)  Non-residential uses; as follows: Such non-residential uses as are permitted and in the same manner as in the underlying zone, within the restrictions of An Ordinance to Establish an Historic District and an Historic District Commission for the City of New Haven. 
(c)  Administration, expansion and new districts. The Historic District Commission shall administer the provisions of said sections 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive as amended, of the General Statutes of Connecticut, as implemented by this ordinance. Under the same authority, the commission shall perform all of the functions of the historic district study committee relative to the expansion of existing districts and the establishment of new ones. 
(d)  Land use. Nothing contained herein shall supersede the powers of other local legislative or regulatory bodies or relieve any property owner of complying with the requirements of any other state statutes or municipal ordinances or regulations. 
(e)  Historic District Commission. 
(1)  Historic District Commission created. There is hereby created a commission to be called the historic District Commission in order to execute the intent of this ordinance. 
(2)  Membership of commission. 
a.  There shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of New Haven, within 30 days after the effective date of this ordinance, an Historic District Commission consisting of five members and up to five alternate members, who shall be electors of the City of New Haven holding no salaried municipal office. At least one member of the commission shall be an architect or an architectural historian, one member shall be selected from a list submitted by the New Haven Preservation Trust, and one member shall be a resident or owner within the historic district. As each new historic district, if any, is approved, the mayor shall designate a new member or alternate, as the case may be, who shall be an owner or resident thereof. 
b.  The membership permitted to vote on a particular application for a certificate of appropriateness must include a member or alternate from the applicable district unless said member or alternate is unable to vote because of illness or disability or because of conflict of interest or other good cause as stated on the record. In such circumstances a member or alternate from another district may have to be temporarily disqualified, if necessary, in order not to exceed a maximum of five votes on a particular application. 
c.  The mayor shall designate one member to serve until January 1, 1971, one member to serve until January 1, 1972, one member to serve until January 1, 1973, one member to serve until January 1, 1974, and one member to serve until January 1, 1975, thereafter each member and each alternate member appointed to fill a vacancy shall be appointed by the mayor in a like manner for terms of five years. 
Any vacancy created by any reason other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unfilled portion of that term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
d.  All members of the Historic District Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(3)  Rules. Within 30 days after the Historic District Commission is appointed, it shall adopt rules of procedure, regulations, forms and orders, not inconsistent with sections 7-147a to 7-147k, General Statutes, inclusive as amended, which it deems necessary to carry out the intent of this ordinance. 
(4)  Officers. The commission shall elect annually a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a clerk from its own members. In case of inability to act, because of absence, sickness or self-interest, on the part of any member of the commission, his/her place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the chairman. 
(f)  Duties and powers of the commission. 
(1)  Certificate of appropriateness. No building or structure shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished within an historic district until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior architectural features has been submitted to the commission and approved by said commission. 
(2)  Exterior architectural features. For the purpose of this ordinance, exterior architectural features shall include such portion of the exterior of a building or structure as is open to view from a public street, way or place. 
(3)  Outdoor advertising. The style, material, size and location of outdoor business or advertising signs and bill posters within an historic district shall also be under the control of the commission. 
(g)  Considerations in determining appropriateness. If the Commission determines that the proposed erection, construction, restoration, alteration, or razing will be appropriate, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness. In passing upon appropriateness the Commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the type and style of exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, above-ground utility structures, mechanical appurtenances and the type and texture of building materials. In passing upon appropriateness as to exterior architectural features the Commission shall also consider the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design, arrangement, texture and materials of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood. A certificate of appropriateness may be refused when its issuance, in the opinion of the Commission, would be detrimental to the interest of the historic district. 
(h)  Variations; when permissible. 
(1)  Where, by reason of topographical conditions, district borderline situations, immediately adjoining existing developments or because of other unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of sections 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive as amended, would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon the owner of any specific property, the commission in passing upon applications shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said sections or to interpret the meaning of said sections so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variance, modification or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said sections so that the general character of the district shall be conserved and substantial justice done. 
(2)  In granting variations, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, better fulfill the purposes of said sections. 
(i)  Exempted acts. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior feature in the historic district which does not involve a change of appearance or design thereof; nor to control the interior arrangement or use of structures; nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such feature which the building inspector certifies is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition; nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any such feature under a permit issued by the building inspector prior to the effective date of establishment of such historic district. 
(j)  Limits of appropriation. The commission may, subject to the limits of appropriation made by the City of New Haven, employ or utilize clerical and technical assistance or consultants and may accept money, gifts, and expend the same for such purposes. Responsibility of providing such staff assistance shall be made by the building inspector, unless otherwise designated by the commission. 
(k)  Procedures. Application for certificate; hearing, approval. 
(1)  The Commission shall hold a public hearing upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication in the form of a legal advertisement appearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the city not less than seven nor more than 15 days before such hearing. 
(2)  Within not more than 65 days after the filing of an application as required by subsection 54.(k)(1), the Commission shall pass upon such application and shall give written notice of its decision to the applicant. Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission. Failure of the Commission to act within 65 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(3)  The commission shall keep a record of all applications for certificate of appropriateness and all of its doings under §7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive as amended, of the General Statutes. Such a record shall be deposited with the building inspector, who shall insure that it will be open for public inspection at reasonable times. 
(l)  Action by commission to prevent illegal acts. 
(1)  If any action or ruling taken by the commission pursuant to this ordinance, any bylaw adopted hereunder, or the provisions of sections 7-147a to 7-147k, inclusive as amended, of the General Statutes, has been violated, the commission may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, razing, maintenance or use or to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building , structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
(2)  Regulations and orders of the commission issued pursuant to this ordinance shall be enforced by the zoning enforcement officer under the powers granted by law, and who shall be considered an officer of the historic district commission for the purposes of appealing orders by said zoning enforcement officer made pursuant to this subsection. 
(3)  The owner or agent of any building or premises where a violation of any provision of this ordinance or any bylaw adopted hereunder has been committed or exists, or the owner, agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or exists, or the agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part, or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation exists, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 for each day that such violation continues; but if the offense is willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each day that such violation continues. 
(m)  Appeals. Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the Historic District Commission or any officer thereof may, within 15 days from the date when such decision was rendered, take an appeal to the Superior Court for the judicial district of New Haven, which appeal shall be made returnable to such court in the same manner as that prescribed for other civil actions brought to such court. Notice of such appeal shall be given by leaving a true and attested copy thereof in the hands of or at the usual place of abode of the Chairman or Clerk of the Commission within 12 days before the return day to which such appeal has been taken. Procedures upon such appeal, shall be the same as that defined in section 8-8 of the General Statutes of Connecticut. 
(n)  District boundaries. 
(1)  The boundaries of the city's first historic district, known as Wooster Square, include the entire area within the perimeter described in Appendix 54.1. 
(2)  The city's second historic district, known as Quinnipiac River, lies in Fair Haven on both sides of the river between the Grand Avenue and Ferry Street bridges. The boundaries include the entire area within the perimeter described in Appendix 54.2. 
(3)  City Point, which lies in the southwestern section of the City, south of Interstate 95. The boundaries include the entire area within the perimeter described in Appendix 54.3 
APPENDIX 54.1 WOOSTER SQUARE LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT BOUNDARY 
    A line beginning at the midpoint of the intersection of Chapel and Olive Streets; thence running northeasterly along the middle of Olive Street 815 feet, more or less; thence easterly 122 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 109-115 Olive Street, thence northerly 33 feet, more or less, along side property line of 351 Greene Street; thence easterly 29 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 351 Greene Street; thence northerly 41 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 347-345 Greene Street; thence easterly 55 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 347-345 Greene Street; thence northerly 71 feet, more or less, through land of St. Casimir's R.C. Church to rear property line known as 329 Greene Street; thence easterly 52 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 339 Greene Street; thence southerly 16 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 329 Greene Street; thence easterly 72 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 329 Greene Street; thence northerly 152 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 8-10 Hughes Place; thence easterly 156 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 8-10 Hughes Place to the middle of Hughes Place; thence southerly 125 feet, more or less, along middle of Hughes Place; thence easterly 155 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 285 Greene Street; thence northerly 123 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 285 Greene Street; thence easterly 50 feet, more or less, along rear property line of 285 Greene Street; thence southerly 134 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 285 Greene Street; thence easterly 123 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 285 Greene Street; thence southerly 33 feet along side property line of property known as 285 Greene Street; thence easterly 129 feet, more or less, along rear property lines of properties known as 257, 251, 245 Greene Street; thence southerly 3 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 245 Greene Street; thence easterly 21 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 245 Greene Street; thence southerly 50 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 245 Greene Street; thence easterly 103 feet, more or less, along rear property lines of properties known as 237 and 231 Greene Street to the middle of Chestnut Street; thence southerly 146 feet, more or less, along the middle of Chestnut Street to the middle of the intersection of Chestnut and Greene Streets; thence easterly 293 feet, more or less, along the middle of Greene Street; thence southeasterly 544 feet, more or less, along rear property line of Harry A. Conti School; thence southwesterly 154 feet, more or less, along rear property line of Conti School playground to the middle of Chapel Street; thence westerly 315 feet, more or less, along the middle of Chapel Street to the midpoint of the intersection of Chapel and Chestnut Streets; thence southerly 170 feet, more or less, along the middle of Chestnut Street; thence westerly 428 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 82 Chestnut Street and the rear property line of property known as 524, 526-528, 532, 538, 542, 546, 548, 552 and 554 Chapel Street; thence southerly 3 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 556 Chapel Street; thence westerly 89 feet, more or less, along rear property lines of properties known as 556, 558, 560 and 562 Chapel Street; thence southerly 143 feet, more or less, along side property line of Paul Russo Park; thence westerly 117 feet, more or less, along property line of Paul Russo Park on Wooster Street to the middle of Brewery Street, then northerly 115 feet, more or less, along the middle of Brewery Street; thence southwesterly 50 feet, more or less, along rear property line known as 576 Chapel Street; thence westerly 41 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 576 Chapel Street; thence northerly 4 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 576 Chapel Street, thence westerly 75 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 584 Chapel Street; thence southerly 119 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 592 Chapel Street; thence westerly 48 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 592 Chapel Street; thence northerly 155 feet, more or less, along side property lines of property known as 592 Chapel Street, thence westerly 100 feet, more or less, along rear property lines of property known as 600 and 604 Chapel Street; thence southerly 6 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as 604 Chapel Street; thence westerly 74 feet, more or less, along rear property line of property known as 604 Chapel Street; thence southerly 35 feet, more or less, along side property line of property known as St. Paul's Church; thence westerly 146 feet, more or less, along the side property line of property of St. Paul's Church, thence southerly 31 feet, more or less, along side of property line of property of St. Paul's Church; thence westerly 94 feet, more or less, along side property line of property of St. Paul's Church to middle of Olive Street; thence northeasterly 213 feet, more or less, along middle of Olive Street to starting point. 
Ord. of 06-11-70: Map on file at the Offices of the City Plan Department 
APPENDIX 54.2 QUINNIPIAC RIVER LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT BOUNDARY 
    A line beginning at the southern boundary of the Benjamin Jepson School; thence running westerly across Quinnipiac Avenue to the northwest corner of Ferry Street and Quinnipiac Avenue; thence running westerly 95 feet on the north curb of Ferry Street; thence northerly 166 feet along the east side property of 11-29 Ferry Street; thence westerly 131.5 feet and northerly 147 feet along the southerly property line and the west property line of 376 Quinnipiac Avenue; westerly 26 feet and northerly 98 feet plus or minus and 220 feet plus or minus along the southerly boundary of 392 Quinnipiac Avenue; thence westerly 210 feet plus or minus along the edge of the Quinnipiac River to the Ferry Street bridge; thence 800 feet plus or minus along the north side of the Ferry Street bridge to the intersection of River Street; thence crossing River Street and proceeding along the westerly curb line of Ferry Street crossing Houston Street and continuing along the westerly curb of Ferry Street to the center of Chapel Street; thence easterly along the center of Chapel Street to a point opposite the western side property line of 24-26 and 28-30 East Pearl Street; thence along the rear property lines of 32-34, 42, 44, 48, and 54 East Pearl Street; thence crossing Chambers Street to the rear property lines of 58, 60, 62-64, 68, 70, 72, 76, 80, 82, and 88 East Pearl Street; thence crossing Pierpont Street to the rear property lines of 92, 94, and 100 East Pearl Street; thence crossing Exchange Street and continuing along the rear property lines of 102, 108, 112, 116 and 120 East Pearl Street; thence easterly along the north side property line of 120 East Pearl Street crossing East Pearl Street and continuing easterly to join the northerly property line of 113 East Pearl Street; thence along the rear property line of 113 East Pearl Street to a point 30 feet along the rear property line of 109 East Pearl Street; thence easterly along the rear property line of 45, 39 and 29 Exchange Street and on along the southern curb of what was known as Talmadge Street to a point in the center of South Front Street; thence northerly along the center line of South Front Street to the southerly property boundary of 14-20 Grand Avenue; thence 40 feet plus or minus, thence 140 feet plus or minus northerly approximately 15 feet parallel to the westerly property line of 14-20 Grand Avenue; thence along the southerly curb of Grand Avenue crossing South Front Street and continuing along the southern edge of the Grand Avenue bridge, crossing the Quinnipiac River to a point at the eastern side on the Quinnipiac River; thence crossing East Grand Avenue and continuing north along the Quinnipiac River approximately 218 feet plus or minus to the rear property line of 4 East Grand Avenue; thence continuing easterly along the rear property lines of 4, 12, 14-22, 28-30 and 34-36 East Grand Avenue; thence crossing Quinnipiac Avenue to the eastern curb of Quinnipiac Avenue; thence northerly to the southerly property line of 701 Quinnipiac Avenue; thence along the rear property lines of 356-358 Lenox Street and westerly along the southerly property line; thence southerly along the rear property line of 350 Lenox Street and easterly along the southern property line to the center of Lenox Street; thence southerly to a point opposite the southerly boundary of the Pilgrim Congregational Church and 61 East Grand Avenue; thence southerly along the rear property lines of 645, 641, 635 and 629 Quinnipiac Avenue, crossing Welcome Street and continuing along the rear property lines of 621, 609, 603, 595, 591-589, 583-585, 577-579, 571, 565, and 561 Quinnipiac Avenue and continuing across Aner Street; thence continuing along the rear property lines of 553, 547, 543, 539, 537, 535, 533, 529, 525, 517-519, 515, 505-507 and 501 Quinnipiac Avenue; thence crossing Oxford Street to the rear property lines of 489-499, 483-485, 479-481, 475, 467, 453, 431, 425-427, 415, 407, 399 and the Jepson School. 
Ord. of 05-04-70, rev. to 02-02-89: Map on File at the Offices of the City Plan Department 
APPENDIX 54.3 CITY POINT LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT BOUNDARY 
    A line beginning at the centerline of Howard Avenue and the southerly highway right-of-way line of Interstate 95; thence running easterly 39 feet, more of less, on the easterly street line of Howard Avenue, to a point; thence continuing easterly 362 feet, more or less, along 1-95 highway line and north property line of 19 Hallock Avenue, to a point; thence continuing easterly 166 feet, more or less, along 1-95 highway line and north property line of 15 Hallock Avenue, to a point; thence continuing easterly 198 feet, more or less, along said highway line and north property line of 19 Sea Street, to a point; thence turning southerly 118 feet, more or less, along 19 Sea Street, to a point; thence continuing southwesterly 39 feet, more or less, along 19 Sea Street, to a point; thence continuing southerly 227 feet, more or less, along 15 Hallock Avenue, to a point; thence continuing southerly 25 feet more or less, along 15 Hallock Avenue, to a point; thence turning easterly 45 feet, more or less, on the northerly end of South Water Street, to a point; thence continuing easterly 276 feet, more or less, along 17 Sea Street, to a point; thence turning southerly 190 feet, more or less, along 17 Sea Street, to a point; thence continuing southerly 61 feet, more or less, along 17 Sea Street, to a point; thence continuing southerly 30 feet, more or less, along 17 Sea Street, to a point; thence turning southwesterly 62 feet, more or less, along 17 Sea Street, to a point; thence continuing 17 feet, more or less, heading southwesterly along 17 Sea Street, to a point; thence turning easterly 250 feet, more or less, on the New Haven Harbor line, to a point; thence turning southwesterly 92 feet, more or less, along 24 South Water Street, and the Harbor line, to a point; thence continuing southwesterly along 24 South Water Street and the harbor line, 1220 feet, more or less, to a point; thence continuing southwesterly along the Harbor line 99 feet, more or less crossing the end of Howard Avenue to a point; thence continuing 182 feet, more or less along the Harbor line and 98, 100, 108 and a portion of 110 South Water Street, to a point; thence continuing westerly 206 feet, more or less along the Harbor line and 120 South Water Street, to a point; thence turning northerly 432 feet, more or less, along the westerly line of 120 South Water on the southerly street line of South Water Street, to a point; thence turning easterly along the southerly street line of South Water Street and 120 South Water Street, 35 feet, more or less, to a point; thence turning northerly across South Water Street 29 feet, more or less, to a point; thence continuing northerly across South Water Street 25 feet, more or less, to a point, said point being the southwest corner of 123 South Water Street; thence continuing northerly 106 feet, more or less, along 123 South Water Street, to a point; thence turning easterly 37 feet, more or less, along 123 and 121 South Water Street, to a point; thence continuing easterly 39 feet, more or less, along 119 South Water Street to a point; thence turning northeasterly 54 feet, more or less, along 115 South Water Street, to a point; thence turning northerly 40 feet, more or less, along 109-111 South Water Street, to a point; thence turning easterly 45 feet, more or less, along 109-111 South Water Street, to a point; thence turning northerly 100 feet, more or less, along 24-26 and 28 Howard Avenue, to a point; thence turning easterly 40 feet, more or less, along 28 Howard Avenue, to a point; thence turning northerly 60 feet, more or less, along 32 Howard Avenue, to a point; thence turning westerly 40 feet, more or less, along 36-38 Howard Avenue, to a point; thence turning northerly 40 feet, more or less, along 36-38 Howard Avenue, to a point; thence turning westerly 22 feet, more or less along 110 Sea Street Rear, to a point; thence turning northerly 50 feet, more or less, along 110 Sea Street Rear, to a point; thence turning westerly 100 feet, more or less along 116 Sea Street, to a point; thence turning northerly 98 feet, more or less, along 116 Sea Street, to a point; thence turning westerly 6 feet, more or less, along the southerly street line of Sea Street, to a point; thence turning northerly crossing Sea Street, 25 feet, more or less, to a point; thence continuing northerly crossing Sea Street 23 feet, more or less, to a point, said point being the southwesterly corner of 115-117 Sea Street; thence turning westerly across Greenwich Avenue, 28 feet, more or less, to a point on the center line of Greenwich Avenue; thence turning northerly along the center line of Greenwich Avenue, 34 feet, more or less, to a point; thence turning westerly across Greenwich Avenue, 27 feet, more or less, to a point on the westerly street line of Greenwich Avenue and the southwesterly corner of 88 Greenwich Avenue; thence continuing in a northwesterly direction along an Arc 86 feet, more or less, along 88 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence continuing northwesterly 152 feet, more or less, along 88, 94, and 100 Greenwich Avenue and a portion of 106 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence turning northerly 71 feet, more or less, along 106 and 110 Greenwich Avenue, to a point, thence turning westerly 41 feet, more or less, along 116 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence continuing northwesterly 75 feet, more or less, along 116 and 120 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence turning easterly 129 feet, more or less, along 120 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence turning northerly, 68 feet, more or less, along 124 and 128-130 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence turning westerly 4 feet, more or less, along 134 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence turning northerly 60 feet, more or less, along 134 and 138 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence turning westerly 50 feet, more or less, along 142 Greenwich Avenue to a point; thence turning northerly 102 feet, more or less, along 142, 146 and 148-150 Greenwich Avenue, to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate 95; thence turning easterly 151 feet, more or less, along the I-95 Highway line and 148-150 Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence continuing easterly 57 feet, more or less, across the northerly street line of Greenwich Avenue, to a point; thence continuing easterly 300 feet, more or less along the I-95 Highway line and 149 Greenwich Avenue and 108-110 Howard Avenue, to a point on the westerly street line of Howard Avenue; thence continuing easterly to the centerline of Howard Avenue, 39 feet, more or less, along I-95 Highway line to a point and place of beginning. 
Ord. of 02-21-01: Map on file at the Offices of the City Plan Department 
Section 55. - Coastal Management District. 
    Description and purpose. The coastal management district exists to ensure that the development, preservation or use of the land and water resources of the coastal area proceeds in a manner consistent with the capability of the land and water resources to support development, preservation or use without disrupting either the natural environment or sound economic growth and to ensure public access along the city's waterfront and the preservation of a natural viewpoints and vistas. These values are not readily classified within existing district regulations and are accordingly given a distinct classification in addition to existing district classifications so as to best serve the interest of the city and the region. 
    Summary of review process. A coastal site plan review shall be conducted in accordance with this section for all buildings, structures, uses or activities to be located within the coastal management district. The review shall determine whether or not the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities are acceptable under the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, Chapter 444 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
    Statutory authority. The Connecticut Coastal Management Act, also know as Sections 22a-90 to 22a-112 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended from time to time, establishes the Connecticut coastal boundary, defines coastal resources, coastal site plans, adverse impacts on coastal resources and water-dependent uses and specifies the requirements and procedures for municipalities to follow in preparing coastal programs and conducting coastal site plan reviews. 
(a)  Uses permitted. The coastal management district permits such residential and non-residential uses as are permitted and in the same manner as in the underlying zone, provided the coastal site plan review, if required, determines that the potential adverse impacts of the proposed use on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities are acceptable within the meaning of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended. 
(b)  Administration of coastal site plan review: 
(1)  Written certification required: No building permit shall be issued for a building, use or structure located within the coastal management district unless the zoning enforcement officer certifies in writing that such building, use or structure has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended, or is a use exempt from such review as provided in this section. 
State Law reference- Sec. 15(f) Ch. 444 CGS. 
(2)  Application for coastal site plan review: Whenever a nonexempt building , structure, use or activity is to be located within this district, the application for a building permit submitted pursuant to the State Building Code, the application for a variance or special exception submitted pursuant to subsections 63.C and D of this zoning ordinance, and application and general plan and detail plans of planned development districts pursuant to section 65 of the zoning ordinance, shall be accompanied by an application for coastal site plan review upon the forms provided by the zoning enforcement officer. The application shall include: 
a.  A plan in accordance with subsections 11(c) and 12(b) of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended, showing the location and spatial relationship of the coastal resources on and contiguous to the site; 
b.  A description of the entire project with appropriate plans, indicating project location, design, timing and method of construction; 
c.  An assessment of the capability of the resources to accommodate the proposed use; 
d.  An assessment of the suitability of the project for the proposed site; 
e.  An evaluation of the potential beneficial and adverse impacts of the project; and 
f.  A description of the proposed methods to mitigate adverse effects on coastal resources. 
The applicant shall demonstrate that the adverse impacts of the proposed building, structure, use or activity are acceptable and consistent with the goals and policies of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended. 
(3)  Review. The board or official receiving the application for coastal site plan review shall refer the application to the city plan commission for a written report. The commission shall review the application in accordance with the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended, to determine whether the potential adverse impacts of the proposed activity on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities are acceptable. The review shall: 
a.  Consider the characteristics of the site, including location and condition of any coastal resources; 
b.  Consider the potential effects, both beneficial and adverse, of the proposed activity on coastal resources, and future water-dependent development opportunities; 
c.  Follow the goals and policies of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended, and identify conflicts between the proposed use and any goal or policy of the act; 
d.  Applications for development on waterfront parcels shall also consider the following additional standards: 
1.  Protection of the shoreline where there is erosion or the development is likely to cause erosion. 
2.  Degree of water dependency. Projects composed of several elements, some of which are not water dependent and projects not strictly water dependent but enhanced by a waterfront location may be acceptable. 
3.  Preservation of significant natural vistas and points or avenues of views of the waterfront. 
4.  Provision of meaningful public access. 
5.  Insurance of outstanding quality of design and construction to produce an environment that enhances its waterfront location. 
6.  Consistency with the New Haven Coastal Program adopted June 21, 2006 by the City Plan Commission, as amended from time to time. 
(4)  Public hearing. The commission may, at its discretion, hold a public hearing on the application. The written report shall contain the commission's findings, its recommendation and reasons therefor as to approving, modifying, conditioning or denying the building, use or structure proposed in the application. In the event the report recommends approving the building , use or structure proposed in the site plans, the report shall include a finding that the site plan with its recommended modifications and conditions is consistent with the goals and policies of the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended, and incorporates as conditions or modifications all reasonable measures which would mitigate the adverse impacts on both coastal resources and future water-dependent development activities. Upon receipt of the written report by the appropriate board or official, said board or official shall adopt written findings and recommendations, stating its reasons therefor, in accordance with the Connecticut Coastal Management Act, as amended. Upon receipt of the written findings of the final adopting board or commission, the building official shall make the findings a condition of any building permits issued. 
(c)  (1)  Time provisions. 
a.  On any application on which a hearing is required, such hearing shall commence within 65 days of submission of such application and shall be completed within 35 days after such hearing commences. All decisions on such applications shall be rendered within 65 days after completion of such hearing. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified above, provided the total period of such extension or extensions shall not exceed 65 days. When no hearing is required, a decision shall be rendered within 65 days. The applicant may consent to extensions provided the total period of such extension shall not exceed 65 days. 
b.  All applicants shall be notified of the coastal site plan review decision by certified mail. 
c.  Pursuant to the bylaws of the City Plan Commission, the applicant may withdraw any submission or site plan at any time. 
(2)  Duration of approval; lapse of approval; renewal; transferability; and revocation. 
a.  Duration of approval. Pursuant to Section 8-3(i) of the Connecticut general statutes, any site plan approved after June 30, 2011 is valid for a period of five (5) years after the date of decision. Upon petition of the applicant, the Commission may, at its discretion, grant extensions totaling no more than an additional five (5) years to complete all work connected to the original approval. Pursuant to Section 8-3(m) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any site plan approved prior to July 1, 2011 and that has not already expired prior to May 9, 2011 is valid for a period of nine (9) years after the date of decision. Upon petition of the applicant, the Commission may, at its discretion, grant extensions totaling no more than an additional five (5) years to complete all work connected to the original approval. 
b.  Applications for extensions shall be made in writing between not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days prior to the lapse of the original approval. 
c.  Lapse of approval. Consistent with Section 62, the zoning enforcement officer shall determine the status of an approval and make a determination if the approval is valid or if approval has lapsed. 
d.  Transferability. The validity of an approval shall not be affected by changes in ownership. 
e.  Revocation. Pursuant to section 62, the zoning enforcement officer may revoke a plan approval and/or any permit(s) associated with an approved plan that is exercised in violation of said approval. 
(d)  Fees. Each application for coastal site plan review shall be accompanied by a fee of in accordance with the provisions of section 17-22 of the New Haven Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Appeals. Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the board or commission on a coastal site plan review may, within 15 days from the date of such decision, take an appeal to the Superior Court, Judicial District of New Haven at New Haven. 
(f)  Exemptions. The following buildings , structures, uses , or activities are exempt from the coastal site plan review requirements. 
(1)  Minor additions to or modifications of existing buildings or detached accessory buildings , such as garages and utility sheds; 
(2)  Construction of new or modification of existing structures incidental to the enjoyment and maintenance of residential property including, but not limited to, walks, terraces, driveways, swimming pools, tennis courts and detached accessory buildings ; 
(3)  Construction of new or modification of existing on-premise fences, walls, pedestrian walks and terraces, underground utility connections, essential electric, gas, telephone, water and sewer service lines, business signs under 30 feet in height and such other minor structures as will not substantially alter the natural character of coastal resources or restrict access along the public waterfront; 
(4)  Construction of an individual conforming single-family residential structure except in or within 100 feet of the following coastal resources areas: tidal wetlands, coastal bluffs and escarpments and beaches and dunes; 
(5)  Activities conducted for the specific purpose of conserving or preserving soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, wildlife and other coastal land and water resources so long as such activities will not substantially alter the natural character of the coastal resources or restrict access along the public beach; 
(6)  Gardening, grazing and harvesting of crops; 
(7)  Interior modifications to buildings ; 
(8)  Minor changes in use of buildings , structures or properties which are not on property adjacent to or abutting coastal waters; 
(9)  Applications or site plans submitted to the Board of Aldermen, City Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals for permission to construct or conduct any exempt building or activity. 
It is further ordered by the Board of Aldermen of the City of New Haven that on the effective date of these amendments, the order of the Board of Aldermen exempting certain activities within the designated coastal boundary from site plan review as provided by the Coastal Management Act of 1979, approved January 7, 1980, shall be and hereby is repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1355, §§ 1, 2, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 1431, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11) 
Section 56. - Flood Damage Prevention District. 
(a)  Purpose. These districts exist to minimize the public and private losses due to flood conditions by controlling the uses, methods of construction, alteration of natural waterways and barriers, topographical features of land and erection of flood barriers. 
(b)  Authority. Section 7-148 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
(c)  Flood Damage Prevention District maps. The Flood Damage Prevention District is an area of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for New Haven County, Connecticut, dated July 8, 2013, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated July 8, 2013 (Panels 09009C0429J, 09009C0433J, 09009C0434J, 09009C0437J, 09009C0439J, 09009C0441J, 09009C0442J, 09009C0443J, 09009C0444J, 09009C0453J, 09009C0557J), and December 17, 2010 (Panels 09009C0426H, 09009C0427H, 09009C0428H, 09009C0436H, 09009C0461H, 09009C0556H) and other supporting data applicable to the City of New Haven, and any subsequent revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. Since mapping is legally adopted by reference into this ordinance it must take precedence until such time as a map amendment or map revision is obtained from FEMA. The area of special flood hazard includes any area shown on the FIRM as Zones A, AE, and VE, including areas designated as a floodway on a FIRM. Zone VE is also identified as a Coastal High Hazard Area. Areas of special flood hazard are determined utilizing the base flood elevations (BFE) provided on the flood profiles in the FIS. BFEs provided on a FIRM are only approximate (rounded up or down) and should be verified with the BFEs published in the FIS for a specific location. The FIS and FIRM are on file with the City/Town Clerk. 
(d)  Subject activities. No zoning, building or other permit shall be issued for a building, use, structure, or development in the Flood Damage Prevention District unless a floodplain development permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of New Haven, Connecticut. 
(e)  Uses permitted. Such uses as are allowed and in the same manner as the underlying zone shall be permitted in the Flood Damage Prevention District, within the restrictions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of New Haven. 
(f)  Permit procedures. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the Building Inspector, in accordance with the provisions of the New Haven Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. Application shall be accompanied by a FEMA Elevation Certificate. 
(g)  Variances. The New Haven City Plan Commission (hereafter "Commission") shall hear and decide appeals and requests for a waiver from the requirements, in accordance with the standards of the New Haven Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
(h)  Enforcement. The Commission or a designated agent thereof shall have the power to enforce this provision. 
(i)  Fees. Each application submitted to the Commission for a Flood Damage Prevention variance shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City of New Haven in accordance with section 17-22 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven. 
(Ord. No. 1641, 10-14-10; Ord. No. 1712, 7-1-13) 
Section 57. - Inland wetlands and watercourses. 
    Purpose. Inland wetlands and watercourses are an indispensable and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource. The wetlands and watercourses are essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological stability and control of flooding and erosion; to recharging and purification of ground water; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life. 
It is therefore the purpose of the City's regulations for the protection and preservation of inland wetlands and watercourses (hereafter regulations) to protect the citizens of New Haven by making provisions for the preservation, protection, maintenance, and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses within the City. 
    Statutory authority. The City Plan Commission is the designated Conservation Commission of the City of New Haven by ordinance enacted on June 3, 1974, in accordance with Sections 22a-36 to 22a-45 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. The Commission is authorized and empowered to adopt and to implement and enforce the purposes and provisions of the City's regulations regarding inland wetlands and watercourses within the City. 
(a)  Map of inland wetlands and watercourses. An Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, New Haven, Connecticut (hereafter Map) accompanies and is part of the regulations. The official map is on file in the office of the city clerk and the city plan department and designates known wetlands. 
Although official, the map is illustrative only; actual field conditions shall determine wetlands status. 
(b)  Regulations. All activities in or adjacent to (within 50 feet of) inland wetlands or watercourses shall be in accordance with the Regulations for the Protection and Preservation of Inland Wetlands and Watercourses. A copy of the regulations may be obtained at the offices of the City Plan Department. 
(c)  Enforcement. The zoning enforcement officer shall enforce these regulations and the findings and actions of the City Plan Commission pertinent thereto. 
(d)  Who shall apply. All persons proposing activities or uses classified as Permitted or Regulated Activities in or adjacent to within 50 feet of inland wetlands or watercourses involving deposition or removal of material, filling, excavation, dredging, clear cutting, grading, or any other alteration or use not specifically permitted by the Regulations shall require a permit from the Commission. 
(e)  Where to apply. Applications may be secured at the offices of the City Plan Department or the Livable City Initiative Building Division. 
(f)  Where to file; fee. All applications shall be filed with the City Plan Department. Applications shall be accompanied by such fee as is stipulated in section 17-22 of the Code of Ordinances, payable to the City of New Haven. 
(g)  Appeal. This section is not subject to appeal before the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any appeal shall be taken in accord with Section 22a-43 or other relevant sections of the Connecticut General Statutes. 
Section 58. - Soil erosion and sediment control. 
(a)  Purpose: The purpose of soil erosion and sediment control is to minimize land form change that occurs as a result of development, to preserve the nature of a site, to sustain aesthetic, recreational and fish and wildlife habitat and values, to maintain the capability of soil to support vegetation, to reduce sediment entering water bodies and sewers, and to conserve and protect the water, land, air, and other environmental resources of the City. 
(b)  Authority: The provisions of Public Act 83-388, entitled "An Act Concerning Soil Erosion and Sediment Control", and Sections 8-2 and 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended. 
(c)  Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, certain words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings presented in this subsection. All words used in the present tense include the future tense, and the word "used" shall be deemed to include "designed, intended, or arranged to be used". Words not defined in this Section shall be as defined in the most current edition of Webster's New World Dictionary, College Edition. 
    Agricultural activities: Cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including livestock, or the operation, management, conservation, improvement, or maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tool, and equipment. 
    Approval: A signed, written document constituting a finding by the City Plan Commission that a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (SESC) plan complies with the applicable requirements of this Section. 
    Commission: The City Plan Commission of New Haven, Connecticut, or its designated agent. 
    County Soil and Water Conservation District: The New Haven County Soil and Water Conservation District established under Section 22A-315(A) of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut. 
    Date of receipt: The day of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission of an application to the Commission, provided such meeting is no earlier than three (3) business days after submission, or thirty-five (35) calendar days after such submission, whichever is sooner. 
    Development: Includes, but shall not be limited to, any construction or grading activities to improved or unimproved real property. 
    Disturbed area: An area where the ground cover is destroyed or removed leaving the land subject to accelerated erosion. 
    Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
    Forestry: An on-going commercial forestry operation. 
    Grading: Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill), removal, or stockpiling of earth materials or any combination thereof including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
    Inspection: The periodic review of sediment and erosion control measures required by the approved SESC plan. 
    Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion. 
    Soil: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin. 
    Soil erosion and sediment control (SESC) plan: A clear delineation of specific measures that minimize or eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from development. Such plan shall include, but is not limited to, an application form, a narrative, and a map or maps. The narrative shall describe the project, the schedule of major activities on the land, the application of conservation practices, design criteria, construction details and the maintenance program for any erosion and sediment control facilities that are installed. The map(s) shall show topography, cleared and graded areas, proposed area alterations map(s) and the location of and detailed information concerning erosion and sediment measures and facilities. 
(d)  When an application is required: 
(1)  No SESC permit shall be issued for a building, sue or structure unless the building, use or structure is exempted in accord with the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, or has been reviewed and approved in writing by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this section. Projects that do not require a SESC plan or are exempt under subsection (d) below must still conduct soil and erosion control measures consistent with the Connecticut Guidelines For Soil Erosion And Sediment Control (2002 or latest edition). 
(2)  A soil erosion and sediment control plan (hereinafter SESC plan shall be submitted with any application for development when (I) the site of such development is one-half acre or more, unless exempted in subsection 58(e) below; or (II) more than 30% the total lot area will be regarded by more than two feet; or (III) more than 800 cubic yards of soil and/or rock will be moved, removed or added; or (IV) the site contains slopes of greater than 15 percent; or (V) the application pertains to any site within the coastal boundary as defined in Section 22A-94 of the General Statutes. 
(e)  Exempt activities: 
(1)  Single family dwelling exempt. Construction of a single family detached dwelling that is not part of a subdivision or larger development of land shall be exempt, provided that there is no grading or excavation on the lot more than four feet beyond the perimeter of the dwelling itself and the site does not contain slopes of greater than 15 percent within 50 feet of the disturbed area. It is the intent of this ordinance not to allow a fragmented parcel-by-parcel development of a subdivision without required erosion and sediment control provisions. 
(2)  Existing activities exempt. Any regulated activity legally existing as of the effective date of this section shall be exempt therefrom and permitted to continue within any time limits previously established provided that no new or additional regulated activity requiring approval under is conducted after the effective date without such approval. If originally approved time limits expire before completion (not including any extensions of such time limits), approval shall be required for remaining work unless such extensions were approved prior to the effective date. 
(3)  Defined agricultural activities exempt. The following agricultural activities are exempt from this section: (i) cultivation of the soil, dairying, forestry, raising or harvesting any agricultural or horticultural commodity, including livestock; or (ii) operation, maintenance, conservation, improvement, or management of a farm and its buildings, tools, and equipment. 
    The Commission which has jurisdiction or a designated agent thereof shall have the power to determine if an activity is exempt from this section. Such determination shall be in writing and a file of exemptions shall be maintained. For the convenience of an applicant, lender, seller, buyer, or other interested party, a written determination of exempt activity may be requested. Such written request shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City of New Haven in accord with Section 17-22 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  SESC plan requirements: 
(1)  SESC plan. When any person intends to conduct an activity that is not specifically exempted in these regulations a SESC Plan shall be filed. The SESC plan shall include an application form, a narrative, and a map, as described below. 
(2)  Classification and filing fees. Each SESC plan submitted to the Commission for Approval shall be accompanied by a filing fee payable to the city in accord with section 17-22 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven. Staff shall determine the filing fee based on the anticipated level of disturbance from a preliminary review of submitted materials. A SESC plan shall be classified as: 
Class A (minimal impact) 
Class B (significant impact) 
Class C (significant public effect, public hearing required) 
The applicant may appeal the classification to the commission, which shall make a final determination as it may deem appropriate upon a review of the submitted materials, and may adjust the fee in accord with the Schedule of Fees of Section 17-22 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Application form. The application for SESC plan review shall be on a form provided by the Commission. The Commission may prescribe such forms, contents, and rules as it deems necessary for the filing of SESC plans and other matters not specified in this section. All application forms shall include the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; and 
b.  The owner's name (if applicant is not property owner), home and business address, telephone number(s) and written consent to the proposed activity set forth in the application; and 
c.  Applicant's legal interest in the land (i.e., owner, option holder); and 
d.  The geographical location of the property which is to be affected by the proposed activity (Tax Assessor's Map(s), Block(s) and Parcel number(s) of the subject property or properties). 
e.  Certification that the applicant is familiar with all the information provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information; 
f.  Authorization for the members and agents of the Commission, the City Engineer and the Building Department to inspect the property at reasonable times, both before and after a finding has been issued. 
(4)  Narrative. A narrative shall be filed which describes provisions to adequately control erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from stormwater runoff, both on and off site during and after construction based on the best available technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for approval are found in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002 or latest edition). Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior Commission approval, if recommended by the City Engineer. Emphasis shall be placed on prevention of erosion and vegetative or non-structural control measures. The narrative may be included on the site plan map(s), and shall describe the development, including the schedule for grading and construction activities, with: 
a.  Start and completion dates; and 
b.  Sequence of grading and construction activities; and 
c.  Phasing of project, if applicable; and 
d.  Sequence for installation and/or application of SESC measures; and 
e.  Sequence for final stabilization of the project site. 
f.  The construction details for proposed SESC measures and storm water management facilities. 
g.  The installation and/or application procedures for proposed SESC measures and stormwater management facilities. 
h.  The operations and daily maintenance program for proposed SESC measures and stormwater management facilities. 
i.  The individual responsible for monitoring control measures, with office address and telephone number(s) for 24 hour a day contact. 
j.  Provisions for contingency plans if unforeseen erosion or sedimentation problems arise, including emergency situations caused by storms. 
k.  Any features of the site which may be particularly vulnerable to erosion, such as ridge tops, swales, and soil types and control measures specific to these features shall be noted (soil types may be found in the Soil Survey of New Haven County). 
(5)  Map. A map or maps shall be filed to accompany the application required in the SESC Regulations. No map shall be deemed complete unless it shall be in such form and contain such information as the Commission deems necessary for a fair and full determination of the issues. A site visit and field report may be deemed necessary. The map(s) shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  A site plan map(s). The suggested scale of the map is 1 inch = 40 feet with one-foot contour intervals, but may be more or less detailed to meet specific site needs. 
b.  A north arrow, street names, scale, date prepared, and name of preparer. 
c.  Location of the proposed development and adjacent properties, including all buildings within 25 feet of the property line. 
d.  Existing and proposed topography showing one-foot contours, including flood zones, wetlands, watercourses, water bodies, and soil types if pertinent. 
e.  Existing vegetation and natural resources on the site including major trees and proposed changes. 
f.  Existing structures on the project site, including but not limited to paving, fencing, buildings, and archaeological sites. 
g.  Proposed alterations including cleared, excavated, filled or graded areas and proposed structures, utilities, roads and, if applicable, new property lines. 
h.  Location of and design details for all proposed SESC measures and storm water management facilities over the period of construction. 
i.  The construction details for proposed SESC measures and storm water management facilities. 
j.  The Commission may require map preparation by a Connecticut licensed engineer. 
(6)  A-2 survey may be required. The Commission may require a Type A-2 survey. 
(7)  Additional information may be required. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested by the Commission or its designated agent shall be included in the SESC plan. 
(8)  Information binding. All information submitted for review in the SESC plan shall be considered factual, or in the case of an anticipated activity, binding. A failure of the applicant or any agents thereof to provide correct information or to conduct development activities within the levels anticipated in the approved SESC plan shall be sufficient grounds for penalties to be imposed. Each day of violation or deception shall be considered as a separate offense. 
(g)  Minimum acceptable control standards. 
(1)  Minimum standards for individual control measures . The Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002 or latest edition) shall be the standard. The Commission may grant exceptions when requested by the applicant, if the City Engineer presents and recommends technically sound reasons. SESC plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when completed; and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation. 
(2)  Determination of peak flow rates and volumes of runoff. The appropriate method from the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (2002 or latest edition) shall be used unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission, following the favorable recommendation of the City Engineer. 
(h)  Issuance of finding. 
(1)  Issuance of finding required. The Commission which has jurisdiction shall make a finding of approval if the SESC plan as filed, or with conditions of approval it may impose, complies with the requirements and objectives of this section, or denial if the development proposal does not comply with this section. A finding of approval, approval with conditions, or denial shall be made in writing within sixty-five (65) days of the date of Commission receipt of the completed SESC Plan or within 65 days of the close of the public hearing if one is held. 
(2)  Extension of time for approval. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of any period specified herein, provided that the total extension of all such periods shall not be for longer than 65 days, or may withdraw the application. 
(3)  Referral to County Soil And Water Conservation District. Following receipt of an application a copy of any SESC plan submitted to the municipality may be referred to the County Soil and Water Conservation District for review. The District may make recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within 15 days of the receipt of the plan. 
(4)  Referral to city engineer. Following receipt of an application a copy of the SESC plan may be referred to the city engineer, who may return comments on the plan to the Commission within 15 days of receipt of the plan. Such comments shall be advisory only. 
(5)  Optional referrals. The commission may forward a copy of the development proposal to any other commission or review agency or consultant for review and comment. 
(6)  Public hearing may be required. The Commission may, at its discretion, hold public hearings. 
(7)  Notice if public hearing required. Notice of a public hearing shall be published at intervals of not less than two days, the first not more than 15 days and not fewer than ten days, and the last not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the City of New Haven. Notices of hearings shall be sent to the applicant at the address provided. 
(8)  Notices by applicant if public hearing required. The Commission shall give written notice to adjacent owners of record within 200 feet, not less than seven work days prior to the public hearing. A copy of the mailing list and notice shall be filed with the City Plan Department. 
(9)  Public inspection of documents. All applications, maps, and documents relating to a public hearing shall be open for public inspection in the City Plan Department not less than 15 days prior to the day of the public hearing. 
(10)  Hearing continuation. Where possible, public hearings shall be completed in a single session. However, the public hearing may, consistent with the legal deadlines for conducting a hearing, be continued (to a date certain) where necessary for the full development of the evidence, or for the full and adequate participation of the parties, or for such other substantial purposes. In no case shall continuances be used as a device for delay. 
(11)  Completion of hearing. The public hearing must be scheduled within 65 days of receipt of the application and shall be completed within 35 days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on applications within 65 days after completion of the public hearing. 
(i)  Conditions of plan approval. 
(1)  Standard and optional conditions of approval. The Commission with jurisdiction may establish such conditions of approval as binding requirements for an SESC plan as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this ordinance. In addition the following conditions shall apply to all approved SESC plans. 
a.  Performance sureties. The Commission may require a performance bond with sureties or other binding financial instrument in an amount and in a form approved by the Commission as a condition of approval of the Plan, and may cover corrective measures, if required. The bond and sureties shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of this ordinance and conditions of approval of the Plan. 
b.  Public liability insurance certification. The applicant may be required to certify that he or she has public insurance against liability which might result from the proposed operation or use covering any and all damages which might occur within one year of completion of such operations, in an amount to be determined by the Commission commensurate with projected operation and the potential for damage on or off site. 
c.  City held harmless. The applicant shall hold the City of New Haven harmless from damages arising out of the regulated activities. 
d.  Start of work. Site development shall not begin unless the SESC plan is approved and those control measures and facilities in the SESC plan scheduled for installation prior to site development are installed and any required bond is posted. 
e.  Contractors to be informed. The approved SESC plan soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as scheduled and all contractors shall be made aware of the requirements of the approved SESC plan and shall work in accordance with its provisions. 
f.  Measures required to be maintained. All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure compliance with the approved SESC plan. 
(j)  Inspections. 
(1)  Site inspection may be required for approved SESC plan. Site inspections may be made by the Commission during development to ensure compliance with the approved SESC plan. A site inspector shall determine that control measures and facilities are properly performed or installed and maintained throughout the construction period. The applicant, or an agent thereof, shall have the approved SESC plan document readily available at the job site and shall make the document available for inspection upon request. 
(2)  Applicant report. The commission may require the applicant to verify through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been performed or installed according to the approved SESC plan and are being operated and maintained. 
(3)  Additional control measures. If, upon inspection of the site, the site inspector determines that the control measures in place are not adequate to control erosion, additional measures may be required to be immediately installed by the inspector. Any such request for additional control measures shall be made in writing and shall be brought to the attention of the Commission within five working days of the inspection. 
(k)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Delegation of enforcement. The Commission or a designated agent thereof, such as the Zoning Enforcement Officer or staff of the City Plan Department or City Engineer, shall have the power to enforce these Regulations. 
(2)  Violation if plan not filed. Any person engaged in development activities who fails to file a SESC plan in accordance with this section, or who conducts a development activity except in accordance with provisions of an approved SESC plan shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(3)  Violation penalties. Should any person be found to be in violation of this section, a written order may be issued by certified mail to that person to immediately correct the condition causing the violation. The Superior Court of the State of Connecticut, in any action brought by the Commission, the City of New Haven, or any person, shall have jurisdiction to restrain a continuing violation of this section or to issue orders directing that the violation be corrected or removed. 
(l)  Duration of approval; lapse of approval; renewal; transferability; revocation. 
(1)  Duration of approval. Pursuant to Section 8-3(i) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any site plan approved after June 30, 2011 is valid for a period of five years after the date of decision. Upon petition of the applicant, the Commission may, at its discretion, grant extensions totaling no more than an additional five years to complete all work connected to the original approval. Pursuant to Section 8-3(m) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any site plan approved prior to July 1, 2011 and that has not already expired prior to May 9, 2011 is valid for a period of nine years after the date of decision. Upon petition of the applicant, the Commission may, at its discretion, grant extensions totaling no more than an additional five (5) years to complete all work connected to the original approval. 
(2)  Lapse of approval. Consistent with Section 62, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine the status of an approval and make a determination if the approval is valid or if the approval has lapsed. 
(3)  Transferability. The validity of an approval shall not be affected by changes in ownership. 
(Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11) 
Section 59. - Whalley Avenue Overlay District. 
(a)  Description and purpose. This district exists to encourage the revitalization of specific portions of Whalley Avenue, to reinforce Whalley Avenue's role as a viable commercial corridor, and to provide for an appropriate transition to residential neighborhoods located to the north and to the south of the overlay district. 
(b)  Extent of district. The district includes all properties within the Business A District fronting on Whalley Avenue between Ella T. Grasso Boulevard and Sherman Avenue. 
(c)  Uses permitted. Uses permitted in Table 3 of Section 42 in the underlying Business A District are allowed in the Overlay District with the following modifications: 
(1)  Poultry markets with slaughtering are not allowed; 
(2)  Pawn shops are not allowed; 
(3)  Auto racing clubs are not allowed; 
(4)  Drive-in services, to include theaters, restaurants and pharmacies (but not to include banks) are not allowed; 
(5)  Motels are not allowed; 
(6)  Repair of automobiles, automobile trailers, and trucks, no full body paint spraying or body and fender work except replacement requires special permit approval. 
(7)  Rental of automobiles, automobile trailers, and trucks with inventory requires special permit approval. 
(8)  Sale or rental of automobiles, automobile trailers or trucks with no inventory of such vehicles kept on premises, but with incidental show models and demonstrator vehicles permitted in case of sales requires special permit approval. 
(9)  Specialty home goods and skilled trades with a combination of on premises fabrication and sales are allowed under site plan approval. 
(10)  Drug paraphernalia centers are not allowed. 
(11)  Dance Halls are not allowed. 
(d)  Application procedures. The following procedures shall apply to uses within the overlay zone: 
(1)  Applications requiring special permit and special exception approval shall be administered by the city plan Commission. The applicable procedures and standards of section 63 shall apply to the processing of special exceptions by the city plan commission, and the applicable procedures and standards of section 64 shall apply to the processing of special permits by the city plan commission. 
(2)  All uses permitted as-of-right shall also require site plan approval. 
(3)  All uses requiring special permit or special exception approval shall also require site plan approval. 
(4)  Site plan approval may be waived when a proposed building expansion is less than 500 square feet and/or there are no changes to the facade of the building. 
(e)  Special standards. Proposed development within the overlay district shall observe the following standards: 
(1)  Where development is proposed that involves new construction or substantial re-construction, there shall be no parking in the front yard. This requirement may be waived when the commission finds that the lot and/or the building configuration do not allow for alternative parking areas; 
(2)  When a proposed development is to be a mixed use complex, (first floor retail, upper floors residential), a FAR of 2.5 may be allowed. 
(3)  Any proposed new construction in excess of 1,500 square feet shall require a special permit approval. 
(4)  New buildings in the overlay district shall have a zero set back from the prevailing building line. 
(5)  New buildings, where the lot has frontage greater than 50 feet, shall be designed to cover 75 percent of the lot frontage. 
(f)  Design guidelines. The following guidelines shall, to the greatest extent possible, be incorporated into the design of new buildings and the renovation of existing structures. Guidelines shall apply when there are proposed modifications to a building facade to include replacement of windows, replacement of facade materials, or additions to or extensions of a facade. 
(1)  General design principles: Emphasis should be on a pedestrian-scaled environment. Buildings should harmoniously blend in and balance each other. All materials, colors, and architectural details used on the exterior of a building should be compatible with the building style, and with each other. A building designed of an architectural style that normally includes certain integral materials, colors, and/ or details should incorporate such into its design. Plans should reflect an attention to detail, the use of quality materials, and good craftsmanship. Bare cinder block construction is not permitted. Drivet may be used providing that not more than 20 percent of the facade is covered with this material. 
(2)  Scale, mass and continuity: Buildings shall generally relate in scale and design to the surrounding buildings where such buildings represent quality construction and design associated with historical development of the area. Buildings shall reflect a continuity of treatment the following ways: 
a.  Maintain, when appropriate, the building mass and scale of adjacent buildings. 
b.  Maintain front yard build-to lines. 
c.  Maintain cornice and transition lines in buildings of the same height. 
d.  Primary horizontal and vertical lines in the architectural composition should remain visible or be incorporated into the design. 
(3)  Building entrances: All entrances to a building should be defined and articulated by architectural elements of the building. Any such element utilized shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and details of the building as a whole. 
(4)  Fenestration: The arrangement and design of windows and doors in a building shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the building. Windows shall be vertically proportioned wherever possible. To the extent possible, upper story windows shall be vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level, including storefront or display windows. All windows shall be stylistically consistent with the building and energy efficient. 
(5)  Roofs: Roof types shall be appropriate to a buildings architectural type. Embellishments such as dormers, belvederes, masonry chimneys, cupolas, clock towers and other such embellishments are encouraged if appropriate to the building vernacular. Repairs to existing construction shall conform to the building vernacular. 
(6)  Buildings on corner lots: Buildings on corner lots shall be considered important structures because they contain more than one facade that is exposed to the street. These buildings should be enhanced with appropriate architectural embellishments. 
(7)  Facades: The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued, in its major features, around all visibly exposed sides of a building. All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be consistent with regard to style, materials, colors, and details. Deteriorated materials should be restored to actual function if possible, and if not possible, should be replaced with similar materials that have the same form and surface characteristics without visually changing the facade's character. New buildings shall, at street level, have clear glass windows sufficiently transparent to provide views into the interior of the building. 
(8)  Storefront facades: Storefronts shall be integrally designed as part of the entire facade. Buildings with multiple storefronts shall be architecturally uniform throughout and shall be unified through the use of architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings, canopies and marquees, signage and lighting fixtures. Attachments and/or fixtures should complement the architectural design of the facade and should be appropriate in scale to the ornamentation and the design elements of the building. Fixtures and attachments should not obscure historically significant materials, architectural features or decorative details. 
(9)  Signage: Signage shall be architecturally compatible with style, materials, color and details of the building. 
(10)  Awnings, canopies and marquees: Awnings, canopies and marquees are permitted at ground level. Such treatments shall be designed to complement the building and shall be compatible with the materials, colors, and details of the building. In buildings with multiple storefronts compatible awnings, canopies and marquees should be used as a means to unify the building. Solid, lighted awnings and canopies are not permitted. 
(11)  Light fixtures: Light fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with style, materials, color and details of the building. 
(12)  Security applications: Solid metal security gates or solid roll-down metal windows shall not be permitted. Link or grill type security devices shall be permitted. If installed on the outside, the coil boss shall be recessed and concealed behind the building wall. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 1, 6-5-06) 
Section 60. - Stormwater management plans. 
(a)  Purpose and authority. Increased development without proper consideration of stormwater impacts can be a significant source of pollution to Long Island Sound, its tributaries, and other waters of the state. The state's water resources are valuable natural, economic, recreational, cultural, and aesthetic resources. The protection and preservation of these waters is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the City of New Haven. It is, therefore, the purpose of this ordinance to protect and preserve the waters within New Haven from nonpoint sources of pollution through the proper management of stormwater flows and minimization of inputs of suspended solid, pathogens, toxic contaminants, nitrogen, and floatable debris to these flows. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Aquifer: Geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that contains sufficient saturated, permeable materials to yield significant quantities of water to wells and springs. 
    BMPs-best management practices: Techniques or structural devices that are effective practical ways of preventing or reducing pollution. 
    First inch of rain: The first inch of rainfall during a single event. 
    Groundwater: Water found beneath the ground surface that completely fills the open spaces between particles of sediment and within rock formations. 
    Impervious surface: Material or structure on, above, or below the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate directly into the soil. 
    Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site or origin by erosion. 
    Site: A single parcel, together with any adjacent waters, which is the subject of an application for zoning approval, coastal site plan review, or an inland wetlands permit. 
    Trash hood: Feature in a catch basin which traps debris such as litter and keeps it from being discharged from the catch basin. 
    Urban stormwater runoff: Precipitation that falls onto the surfaces of roofs, streets, parking lots, roads, and the grounds of developed areas. Urban precipitation is not absorbed by the ground or retained in its surface, but collects and runs off, carrying a wide variety of pollutants such as oil-based contaminants, heavy metals (copper and lead), nutrients, and bacteria. 
(c)  Application requirements. A stormwater management plan shall be included as a part of any application for zoning approval (including but not limited to special permit and special exception), coastal site plan review, or an inland wetlands permit where: 
(1)  The application pertains to a development or construction disturbing one-half or more acres of total land area on a site; or 
(2)  The application pertains to any site with one-half acre or more of existing and/or proposed impervious cover; or 
(3)  The application proposes new residential development of three or more units; or 
(4)  The application pertains to any new or expanding industrial or commercial use which increases the amount of on-site impervious surface by more than 500 square feet; or 
(5)  The application pertains to any site within the coastal boundary as defined in section 22a-94 of the General Statutes; or 
(6)  The commission which has jurisdiction over the application has required submission of a stormwater management plan pursuant to written findings by that commission that the activity proposed in the application has the potential to cause significant nonpoint source pollution to groundwater or surface water drinking supplies, or to Long Island Sound, or any other waters of the state. 
    If the commission which has jurisdiction determines that the activity proposed in an application may result in significant nonpoint source pollution to groundwater or surface water drinking supplies, or to Long Island Sound or any other waters of the state, it may refer the application, including the stormwater management plan, to the Commissioner of Environmental Protection for a determination as to whether a discharge permit under section 22a-130 of the General Statutes, or other state authorization, is required. 
    The commission which has jurisdiction over the application may, upon request, waive some or all of the requirements of this section if it makes a finding based on the proposed project that such requirements are not necessary to determine the impact of the proposed project on the surface or groundwater of the state. 
(d)  Contents of stormwater management plan. Where a stormwater management plan is required, such plan shall provide, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Soil characteristics of the site. 
(2)  Location of the closest surface water bodies and wetlands to the site, and the depth to any groundwater or aquifer areas on or adjacent to the site. In the case of tidal waters, provide the mean high water and high tide elevations. 
(3)  DEP ground and surface water quality classification of waterbodies on and adjacent to the site. 
(4)  Identification of any waterbodies on and adjacent to the site documented by DEP as not meeting water quality standards. 
(5)  Location and description of all proposed stormwater control BMPs for both construction activities and post-construction, long-term stormwater control. 
(6)  Proposed operation and maintenance manual and a schedule for maintaining any trash hoods, catch basins, or other BMP devices used to prevent runoff, facilitate sheet flow or infiltration, or treat stormwater. 
(7)  Calculations of stormwater runoff rates, suspended solids removal rates, and soil infiltration rates before and after completion of the activity proposed in the application. 
(8)  A hydrologic study of pre-development site conditions. Hydrology studies shall be conducted at a level of detail commensurate with the probable impact of the proposed activity and should extend downstream to the point where the proposed activity causes less than a five percent change in the peak flow rates. 
(e)  Standards and criteria for decision. In order to approve any application for which a stormwater management plan is required, the commission shall find the stormwater management plan consistent with the following criteria: 
(1)  Direct channeling of untreated surface water runoff into adjacent ground and surface waters shall be prohibited. 
(2)  No net increase in the peak rate or total volume of stormwater runoff from the site, to the maximum extent possible, shall result from the proposed activity. 
(3)  Design and planning for site development shall provide for minimal disturbance of pre-development natural hydrologic conditions, and shall reproduce such conditions after completion of the proposed activity, to the maximum extent feasible. 
(4)  Pollutants shall be controlled at their source to the maximum extent feasible in order to contain and minimize contamination. 
(5)  Stormwater management systems shall be designed and maintained to manage site runoff in order to reduce surface and groundwater pollution, prevent flooding, and control peak discharges and provide pollution treatment. 
(6)  Stormwater management systems shall be designed to collect, retain, and treat the first inch of rain on-site, so as to trap floating material, oil, and litter. 
(7)  On-site infiltration and on-site storage of stormwater shall be employed to the maximum extent feasible. 
(8)  Post-development runoff rates and volumes shall not exceed pre-development rates and volumes for various storm events. Stormwater runoff rates and volumes shall be controlled by infiltration and on-site detention systems designed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Connecticut except where detaining such flow will affect upstream flow rates under various storm conditions. 
(9)  Stormwater treatment systems shall be employed where necessary to ensure that the average annual loadings of total suspended solids (TSS) following the completion of the proposed activity at the site are no greater than such loadings prior to the proposed activity. Alternatively, stormwater treatment systems shall remove 80 percent TSS from the site on an average annual basis. 
(10)  Use of available BMPs to minimize or mitigate the volume, rate, and impact of stormwater to ground or surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11) 
Section 60.1. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of exterior lighting standards is to maximize the effectiveness of site lighting, enhance public safety and welfare and conserve energy, while discouraging the installation of lighting fixtures that emit objectionable illumination, avoid unnecessary upward illumination or unwanted illumination of adjacent properties and to reduce glare. 
(b)  Applicability. A lighting plan shall be included as a part of any application for zoning approval (including but not limited to site plan, special permit, special exception and planned developments). 
(c)  Plan contents. A lighting plan shall include a plan sheet identifying the location of all exterior lights and the type of fixture and elevation of such lights. The lighting plan shall also include manufacturer specifications or cut sheets for each exterior lighting fixture. The City Plan Commission may require additional information including a photometric plan. 
(d)  Standards. All exterior lighting shall be designed, located installed and directed in the following manner unless otherwise exempt as provided in subsection (e) below: 
(1)  Prevent or minimize direct glare and light trespass; 
(2)  All parking area lighting shall be full cut-off type fixtures and shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height from the ground to the highest point on the fixture; 
(3)  Up lighting and high pressure sodium light sources are prohibited. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward and not sideward or upward. The lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare and/or light trespass. The lighting must also be, as much as physically possible, contained within the target area. 
(4)  All building lighting for security or aesthetics shall be full cut-off or a shielded type, not allowing any upward distribution of light. Floodlighting is discouraged, and if used, must be shielded to prevent: (a) disability glare for drivers or pedestrians, (b) light trespass beyond the property line, and (c) light above a horizontal plane. 
(5)  Where non-residential development is adjacent to residential property, no direct light source shall be visible at the property line at ground level or above. 
(6)  High pressure sodium and flickering or flashing lights are prohibited. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following exterior lighting shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Lighting required by the Federal Aviation Authority; 
(2)  Temporary lighting associated with an event authorized by the City of New Haven with duration of less than 15 days; 
(3)  Temporary traditional seasonal lighting; 
(4)  Temporary lighting used for emergency purposes by the New Haven Police Department or New Haven Fire Department; 
(5)  National, state and municipal flag lighting; 
(6)  Monument lighting; and 
(7)  Sport stadium and athletic field lighting, not including tennis court, basketball court and similar court games not located in a stadium, provided stadium and athletic field lighting applications must submit a photometric plan demonstrating no light trespass to neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11) 
Section 60.2. - Reflective heat impact from hardscape or paved surfaces. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to reduce the amount of heat reflected by hardscape or paved surfaces, reduce the temperature difference between developed and undeveloped areas and minimize the impact from such differences. 
(b)  Reduction in reflected heat. An applicant shall be required to satisfy the conditions of this section where: 
(1)  The application pertains to any site with one-half acre or more of impervious cover; 
(2)  The application proposes new residential development of three or more units; or 
(3)  The application pertains to any new industrial or commercial use or expansion of an existing industrial or commercial use which expands the amount of impervious surface by more than 500 square feet. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  Applicants shall provide that at least 50 percent of all on site non-roof hardscape or paved areas will be either (1) shaded (based on a five year grow out period for all planned and existing vegetation) or (2) be constructed using a material with a Solar Reflective Index of at least 29 and calculated consistent with ASTM E 408 or ASTM C 1371 and ASTM E 903, ASTM E 1918 or ASTM C 1549. 
(2)  Shade coverage shall be the average value based on shading calculated for 10:00 a.m., 12:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. on the summer solstice. 
(3)  The requirements of this section may be waived by the commission with jurisdiction based on a showing that the applicant cannot achieve the 50 percent level using reasonable methods but has otherwise maximized the percentage achieved and provided that the applicant cannot reach the equivalent level of reduction using high SRI value material on flat roof surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 61. - Summary of administrative functions. 
    In New Haven, the legislative function of enactment and amendment of the zoning ordinance is performed by the Board of Aldermen. Thereafter, administration of the ordinance is carried out by three separate City agencies, each with its own specialized duties, and by the Board of Aldermen in specified instances. 
(a)  Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO). The Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) is charged with enforcing the ordinance through examining plans, inspections, keeping records, and ordering compliance. 
(b)  Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals hears and decides cases in which it is claimed either that some ruling of the Zoning Enforcement Officer was in error, or that special circumstances require a variance from the strict terms of the ordinance, or that certain privileges are justified as special exceptions. 
(c)  City Plan Commission. The City Plan Commission is responsible for a continuous review of the effectiveness of the ordinance, advice to the Board of Aldermen on proposed changes in the ordinance, and advice to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Board of Zoning Appeals and other agencies. 
(d)  Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen is charged with the administrative responsibility of hearing and deciding applications under the circumstances enumerated in the ordinance. 
The functions of each of these agencies are necessary to the smooth and purposeful administration of the zoning program. 
Section 62. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Responsibility. The Director of the Office of Building Inspection and Enforcement (OBIE) shall be the Zoning Enforcement officer (ZEO) and shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The director may deputize one or more staff members as well as members of other city departments who have a particular skill or competence to act for the director, and the term ZEO as used elsewhere in this ordinance shall be deemed to include such deputies, but no order or other enforcement action shall be issued unless approved and signed or countersigned by the director or designated OBIE staff. 
(b)  Interpretation. The Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) shall give information upon request as to the provisions of this ordinance, and shall interpret the meaning of the ordinance in the course of enforcement. 
(c)  Review of construction plans. In all cases where a building permit is required, and in all other cases of construction or use where any provision of the zoning ordinance is involved, appropriate plans shall be filed in duplicate, subject to the provisions of the Building Code and to such other rules as the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) shall prescribe, sufficient in scope and character to determine that all relevant requirements of the zoning ordinance have been met. No building permit shall be issued until the ZEO has determined and certified that such plans comply fully with the zoning ordinance. In cases where the particular skill or competence of some other City Department is relevant to an evaluation of the plans under the zoning ordinance, the ZEO may refer such plans to such department for a report. Other City departments shall take cognizance of the zoning ordinance before issuing permits under their own jurisdiction. 
(d)  Inspections. The Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) is authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected any building or other structure or any land on which work is in progress, and to order the stoppage of any work being done in violation of the zoning ordinance. The ZEO shall inspect or cause to be inspected such premises after work is completed, and shall not issue a certificate of occupancy (C of O) until such final inspection has been made, except that a temporary certificate of occupancy (C of O) may be issued in an appropriate case before work is completed, for a period of not more than six months. 
(e)  Certificates of occupancy. No structure or land or part thereof shall hereafter be occupied or used, in any case of establishment of a new use, extension or alteration of a use, or conversion from one use to another use, until the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO ) shall issue a certificate of occupancy (C of O), certifying that the zoning ordinance has been complied with in full. Upon request of the owner or tenant or any conforming or nonconforming use already established, the ZEO shall issue a certificate of occupancy (C of O) stating the exact status of such use. In the case of other uses already established, the ZEO may carry on such programs of registration of uses and issuance of certificates of occupancy (C of O) as deemed appropriate. 
(f)  Enforcement of regulations before or after issuance of a certificate of occupancy. A violation shall be considered a violation of the Zoning Regulations of the City of New Haven. 
(1)  The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent (a) the unlawful erection, construction, alteration, repair or conversion of any building or structure, or parcel of land; (b) the unlawful erection, construction, alteration, repair or conversion of landscaping, fencing, grading, paving, excavation or other site improvement; (c) a violation of a condition of approval; or (d) use of land or buildings in a manner inconsistent with approved plans in order to restrain, correct or abate such violations; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises. Whenever such acts shall be in contradiction to the provisions of these regulations, penalties shall be as provided by the General Statutes. 
(2)  In addition, any violation or attempted violation of these regulations or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by all applicable remedies pursuant to the laws of the State of Connecticut. 
(3)  The remedies of the City of New Haven shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Issuing a cease and desist order for any and all work in progress where a violation occurs; 
b.  Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the correction of a violation; 
c.  Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties for a violation that can be imposed by such court; 
d.  In the case of a violation that poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the City of New Haven under the applicable provisions of the local and state law for such circumstances; 
e.  Imposing any penalties, including financial and/or criminal penalties, that can be imposed by the City of New Haven; and/or 
f.  Other such remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for or allowed by state law for a violation of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)  Administrative regulations. The Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) shall have the power to adopt such administrative regulations as deemed necessary to the carrying out of these enforcement responsibilities, which regulations shall have general applicability to cases of similar character. 
(h)  Other duties. The Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) may perform such other duties as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this ordinance, and shall have the same powers, duties and privileges, with respect to the zoning ordinance, as are applicable to an officer acting under the State Building Code. The ZEO shall maintain permanent and current records, prescribe such rules and forms as deemed necessary, refer appropriate cases to the Board of Zoning Appeals under section 63, investigate complaints and carry on an inspection program throughout the city, and issue written orders for compliance with the zoning ordinance, subject to the penalties (for owner, agent, lessee, tenant, architect, builder, contractor or other person) prescribed in sections 186 and 187 of the New Haven Charter. The ZEO shall also maintain a current register of nonconforming uses under section 67 of this ordinance, and regulate the registration of nonconforming uses. 
(i)  Appeals. An appeal from an administrative order of the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided in section 63, except that an appeal of an administrative order of the ZEO enforcing the orders and regulations of the Historic District Commission shall be to the Superior Court as provided by section 54 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1416, §§ 1, 2, 5-1-06) 
Section 63. - Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(a)  Establishment. 
(1)  Composition. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall operate under Section 4 of Article VII, of the New Haven Charter and any other applicable provision of such Charter or of the General Statutes of Connecticut. In addition to the three regular members appointed in accordance with Section 1A of Article VII of the New Haven Charter, the Mayor of the City of New Haven shall have the power to appoint two alternate members to the Board, as provided in section 8-5 of the General Statutes. In addition to the two regular members appointed in accordance with Section 1A of Article VII of the New Haven Charter, the Leadership of the Board of Alders, as defined by Section 2-37 of the Code of General Ordinances, shall have the power to appoint one alternate member to the Board, as provided in section 8-5 of the General Statutes. The terms of said appointees shall be five years. The President shall communicate the order approving the Board of Alders' appointment of the regular and alternate Board of Zoning Appeals members to the full Board. Upon communication, said order shall be executed in the same manner as Board and Commission appointments made by the Mayor. 
(2)  Order of appointment. The Mayor and the Board of Alders shall fill vacancies to the Board of Zoning Appeals in an order that ensures the composition prescribed in Section 4 of Article VII of the New Haven Charter, in Section 2-552 of the Code of General Ordinances, and in paragraph 63(a)(1) of this ordinance. 
(b)  Review of administrative orders. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by any order, requirement or decision made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer except for decisions concerning the enforcement of the Historic District Commission's orders and regulations, may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided in section 185 of the New Haven Charter, and the Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify such order, decision or requirement appealed from, and it shall have all the powers of the authority from whose decision such appeal shall have been taken. Normally, such review by the board shall be limited to alleged errors in interpretation of the ordinance. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  Basis. Where there is difficulty or unreasonable hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the zoning ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have power in a specific case to vary the application of any provision of the ordinance, if such variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the ordinance and if the public health, safety and general welfare will be served and substantial justice done. 
(2)  Special treatment of use variances. It is recognized that variances of the use regulations in the zoning ordinance present special problems not occurring in the case of variances of other types, and that the courts have carefully defined the scope of the board's powers with respect to use variances. Therefore, the board shall not grant any use variance under paragraph (1) above unless: 
a.  The zoning regulations allow no reasonable use to be made of the property in question for reasons peculiar to the property and not applicable to the area as a whole; 
b.  The use proposed is the minimum variance necessary in order to allow a reasonable use of the property; and 
c.  The use will not impair the essential character of the area or the objectives of the comprehensive plan of the City. 
(3)  Conditions. In granting any variance under paragraph (1) or (2) above, the Board may attach such additional conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the neighborhood, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Requirement of front, side or rear yards greater than the minimum required by this ordinance; 
b.  Requirement of screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining premises or from the street, by walls, fences, planting, or other devices, as specified by the Board; 
c.  Modification of the exterior features or appearance of any structure, where necessary to preserve property values; 
d.  Limitation of size, number of occupants, method or time of operation, or extent of facilities; 
e.  Regulation of number, design, and location of access drives or other traffic features; 
f.  Requirement of off-street parking or other special features beyond the minimum required by this ordinance or other applicable codes or regulations. 
Failure to comply with any such condition or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
(d)  Special exceptions-Statement of purpose. The development and execution of a comprehensive zoning ordinance is based upon the division of the city into districts, within which the use of land and structures and the bulk and location of structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses and features which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be distinctly classified or regulated in a particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of such uses and features upon neighboring uses and the surrounding area, compared with the public need for them at particular locations. Such uses and features are therefore treated as special exceptions. 
(1)  Where provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, in appropriate cases, after public notice and hearing, grant special exceptions. 
(2)  Where an existing use or feature which is permitted only by special exception is proposed to be extended or substantially altered in a manner which would in any way change the character or intensity of the use or feature, such proposed extension or substantial alteration shall be treated as a special exception under this section. 
(3)  Special exceptions shall be granted only where the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the proposed use or feature or the proposed extension or substantial alteration of an existing use or feature is in accord with the public convenience and welfare after taking into account, where appropriate: 
a.  The nature of the proposed site, including its size and shape and the proposed size, shape and arrangement of structures; 
b.  The resulting traffic patterns and adequacy of proposed off-street parking and loading; 
c.  The nature of the surrounding area and the extent to which the proposed use or feature might impair its present and future development; 
d.  The proximity of dwellings, churches, schools, public buildings and other places of public gathering; 
e.  All standards contained in this ordinance; and 
f.  The comprehensive plan of the City of New Haven, and other expressions of the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
(4)  Time limits may be established by the Board of Zoning Appeals where appropriate. If a time limit is specified elsewhere in this ordinance, no special exception shall be granted for a time period longer than that specified; provided, however, that in any case, whenever the current period has more than half transpired a renewal of said special exception may be granted, up to the maximum period permitted by the terms of this ordinance, measured from the date of renewal, as often as the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that the foregoing standards continue to be met. 
(5)  In granting a special exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attached such additional conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the neighborhood, such as, but not limited to, those listed in paragraph 63(c)(3) of this ordinance. Failure to comply with any such condition or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
(6)  In the following types of special exception cases, which involve more than conventional questions of use and may have a significant impact on surrounding areas and a substantial relationship to the comprehensive plan of the city, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, following its hearing, refer the case including all exhibits to the City Plan Commission, which shall submit an advisory report, on such factors as it may deem relevant, to the board within 30 days after receiving all records and documents in the case. This report of the City Plan Commission shall be taken into account in the decision of the Board. 
a.  Limited expansion of institutions in RS-1 and RH-1 Districts: subsections 11(b)(2)b.; 15(b)(1). 
b.  Convenience stores in residence districts: section 31, as provided for in the district regulations. 
c.  Transition parking in residence districts: subsection 13(b)(3)c. and regulations of other residence districts. 
d.  Accessory retail space in RH-2 Districts: subsection 16(b)(3)c. 
e.  Accessory professional offices in RH-2 Districts: subsection 16(b)(3)d. 
f.  Adjustment for parking and loading requirements: subsections 29(c); 29(h)(2); 29(i); 45(a)(6)b,; 45(a)(7). 
g.  Adjustment of sign requirements: subsection 44(c). 
h.  Planned development units: subsection 65(d)(1). 
i.  A change from one nonconforming use to another that is different in nature and purpose: subsection 67(c)(3)a. 
(e)  Procedures. 
(1)  Notice and hearing; posting of notice of application. 
a.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing in the case of any application for review of an administrative order or for a variance or for a special exception. In addition to published notice, the board shall give notice of any such hearing at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing to the applicant filing the application, to the property owners whose property is located within and including a distance of 200 feet as measured from all boundaries of the property which is the subject of such appeal (if such property is within the city), and to the aldermen of the ward or wards in which the subject property and the properties within and including a distance of 200 feet are located, except that in cases of special exceptions involving areas of unusually large size, the board may give such reasonable notice as it may prescribe. 
b.  A sign of a design approved by the director of the Office of Building Inspection and Enforcement (OBIE) shall be posted by the applicant, not less than 14 days prior to the public hearing, on the property for which application is made, which sign shall be plainly readable from curbside of the addressed street frontage, and which sign shall contain language which provides, but is not limited to, the following information; the date of the hearing; notice that zoning relief has been applied for; an address and telephone number where further information can be obtained regarding the application; and the location of the hearing. Said sign may be obtained from the Office of Building Inspection and Enforcement (OBIE), and may be subject to a deposit not to exceed $50.00, which deposit may be redeemed by returning the sign not more than five working days following final disposition of the application. 
(2)  Other procedures. The Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe such rules and forms as it deems necessary for the filing of applications, postponement, time for exercise, extension of time, rehearing, and other matters. 
a.  Agendas. A copy of the agenda shall be forwarded to such city departments and Neighborhood Planning Agencies as may be designated by the Board. 
b.  City department referrals. The Board shall forward copies of the application forms in all matters before it to the City Plan Department and the Department of Traffic and Parking and shall request that the departments send reports to the board on matters that are of concern to them in connection with their own responsibilities. 
c.  Neighborhood Planning Agency Referral. The Board may also forward copies of the application forms in all matters before it to any neighborhood planning agency of jurisdiction and may request that any such neighborhood planning agency send a report to the board on matters that are of concern to it. 
d.  Report due date. Any such reports shall be due at noon the day before the hearing of the matter by the Board and Copies of filed reports shall be available at the Office of the Clerk of the Board. 
e.  Rehearing. The board shall not be required to hear the same application more than once during any period of 12 consecutive months. 
f.  Filing fees. Each application for a review of an administrative order or for a variance or for a special exception shall be accompanied by such fee as may be stipulated by the Board of Aldermen from time to time in section 17-22 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven, payable to the Treasurer of the City or duly deputized agents, which shall be retained as a separate fund to be paid by the Treasurer to such person and in such amount as is designated by the Secretary of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(3)  Neighborhood planning agency review. Upon receiving a request for a variance, special exception, appeal of an administrative order, planned development unit or district, or zone change the Board of Zoning Appeals, City Plan Commission and the Board of Aldermen, as applicable, may refer said request to any neighborhood planning agency (NPA) of jurisdiction if any exist 
An NPA may review such request and if it so chooses issue an advisory report to the referring agency prior to its final action on said request or indicate by letter to the referencing agency its decision not to issue a report on a reference item. Nothing in this NPA review shall be construed so as to delay the review process or to constrain the sound discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeals, City Plan Commission or Board of Aldermen. 
(f)  Reserved for future use. 
(g)  Waivers of prohibition against building on unaccepted streets. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and determine applications for waivers of the prohibition against building on unaccepted streets contained in Article VI of Chapter 27 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of New Haven as provided therein. In passing on any such applications, the board shall be strictly cognizant of the zoning ordinance, and may attach appropriate conditions and safeguards. Failure to comply within any such conditions or safeguards shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
(h)  Lapse of approval; renewal; transferability; discontinuance, revocation. 
(1)  Lapse of approval. A special exception or variance is void one year after its effective date, except if otherwise specified by the board in its decision, unless: 
a.  The grant of relief has been recorded on the land records of the City of New Haven within 120 days of the date of publication of approval; and 
b.  A valid permit has been issued and construction diligently pursued; or 
c.  A Certificate of Occupancy (C of O) has been issued; or 
d.  The special exception or variance is renewed. 
(2)  Renewal. A special exception or variance may be renewed administratively by the board of zoning appeals if it is determined that findings made and conditions imposed on the original approval still apply. Applications for renewal shall be made in writing between not less than 30 nor more than 60 days prior to the lapse of the original approval. Upon timely application, a renewal may be granted after the expiration. An extension under this section shall be granted one time only and for a period of time of up to a maximum of one year. 
(3)  Transferability. The validity of a special exception (unless specified by the board in its decision) or variance shall not be affected by changes in ownership. 
(4)  Discontinuance. A grant of a special exception or variance shall lapse if there is a cessation of use for a period of one year. 
(5)  Revocation. A special exception or variance that is exercised in violation of a condition of approval or a provision of this title may be revoked, in the same manner required for a public hearing to consider approval. 
(Ord. No. 1419, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1766, 4-6-15) 
Section 64. - City Plan Commission. 
(a)  Continuous ordinance review. The City Plan Commission and its staff shall carry on a continuous review of the effectiveness and appropriateness of the zoning ordinance, and recommend such changes as they see fit. 
(b)  Advice to other agencies. The City Plan Commission and its staff shall give such technical advice as they deem appropriate to the zoning enforcement officer, the Board of Zoning Appeals, and other agencies. 
(c)  Maintenance of zoning map. The City Plan Commission and its staff shall keep up to date the official zoning map, and shall keep the zoning enforcement officer and the City Clerk supplied with a current copy of such map. 
(d)  Amendment of the ordinance. 
(1)  Petitions for amendment of the text of the zoning ordinance or the zoning map shall be filed with the City Clerk for transmission to the Board of Aldermen, and shall thereafter be referred and acted upon by the City Plan Commission and the Board of Aldermen as provided in sections 183 and 184 of the New Haven Charter. All such petitions may also be referred to any Neighborhood Planning Agency (NPA) of jurisdiction as defined in section 1 of this Ordinance which may issue an advisory report on the proposed zoning amendment to the Board of Aldermen prior to final aldermanic action. Any such petition shall contain sufficient information, including maps where necessary, to indicate the exact change or changes which are sought. The zoning enforcement officer shall be kept informed by the City Clerk of pending petitions. 
(2)  In passing upon any such petition, the City Plan Commission shall take into account the various factors favoring and disfavoring a change, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Errors in the existing ordinance, changes that have taken place in the city and in patterns of construction and land use, the supply of land and its peculiar suitability for various purposes, the effect of a map change on the surrounding area, the purposes of zoning and the comprehensive plan of the City of New Haven; 
b.  Whether some other method or procedure under the zoning ordinance is more appropriate; and 
c.  In the case of a map change, the size of the area involved. As a general policy, the City Plan Commission shall not consider favorably any petition which would result in a total contiguous area (separated only by streets, and excluding the area of streets) of less than two acres in the case of a residence district, less than one acre in the case of a Business District, or less than four acres in the case of an Industrial District. 
(e)  Special permits-Statement of purpose. The development and execution of a comprehensive zoning ordinance is based upon the division of the city into districts, within which the use of land and structures and the bulk and location of structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses and features which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be distinctly classified or regulated in a particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of such uses and features upon neighboring uses and the surrounding area, compared with the public need for them at particular locations. Such uses and features are therefore treated as special permits. 
(1)  Special permit defined. A land use permitted when the City Plan Commission finds that the standards for the use as contained within this Ordinance have been met. Only those uses designated as needing a special permit in section 42: Use Table and in Table 1: Permitted Uses in Residential Districts may be permitted by special permit. 
(2)  Finding required. Special permits shall be granted only where the City Plan Commission finds that the proposed use or feature or the proposed extension or substantial alteration of an existing use or feature is in accord with the public convenience and welfare after taking into account, where appropriate: 
a.  Burden of proof. A special permit shall not be considered an entitlement, and shall be granted by the Commission only after the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission that all ordinance requirements are met. 
b.  Ordinance compliance. The proposed use shall comply with all applicable regulations, including any specific standards for the proposed use as set forth in this ordinance. Any accessory use to a special permit must receive express authorization from the commission. 
c.  Comprehensive Plan of Conservation and Development. The commission shall determine if the proposed special permit's use and improvements comply with the City's development plans. 
d.  Natural features. Special permits must preserve trees and other natural site features to the greatest extent possible so as to minimize their impact upon surrounding properties and the district, and must not have an adverse impact on significant scenic vistas or on significant wildlife or vegetation habitat. 
e.  Hazard protection. The proposed use shall not have a detrimental impact upon the use or peaceable enjoyment of abutting or nearby properties as a result of vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, erosion, sedimentation, flooding, fire, noise, glare, hazardous material use, storage, transportation or disposal, or similar conditions. 
f.  Historic preservation. Features of historic significance shall not be significantly adversely affected by the granting of any special permit. If the subject property is within or abuts a historic district, the Commission may request a report from the Historic District Commission regarding those features essential to preserve the historical integrity of a building, district, or site or historical significance. 
g.  Design and architectural compatibility. The operational and physical characteristics of the special permit shall be compatible with the surrounding area and the neighborhood in which it is proposed. Site design and architectural features which contribute to compatibility include, but are not limited to, landscaping, drainage, access and circulation, building style and height, bulk scale, setbacks, open areas, roof slopes, building orientation, overhangs, porches, ornamental features exterior materials and colors. 
h.  Property values. The use and site design shall not have a detrimental effect on the property values in the surrounding area. 
i.  Traffic impact. The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed use will not adversely affect the safety and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian circulation on, adjacent or nearby the site. The commission may require a traffic impact study be submitted to it by the applicant for any special permit use of land. The study shall consider traffic patterns and adequacy of proposed off-street parking and loading resulting from the proposed development. 
(3)  Notice required. Public notice and hearing shall be furnished in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes. 
(4)  Filing fee. Each application for a special permit shall be accompanied by such fee as may be stipulated by the Commission of Aldermen from time to time in Section 17-22 of the City of New Haven Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  Site plan standards and procedures: 
(1)  Purpose. A site plan application is required to aid the City in determining the conformity of a proposed building, use, or structure with specific provisions of the Zoning Ordinance as adopted by the Board of Aldermen. 
(2)  Applicability. Site plan approval shall be required for the following: 
a.  All variance, special permit and special exception applications when required as a condition of approval; 
b.  Any new construction or change in an existing use for three or more dwelling units, whether in a single structure or in multiple structures, whether in new structures or converted space; 
c.  Any new construction or change in an existing use involving 5,000 or more square feet of gross building area; 
d.  Any new construction or change in an existing use involving ten or more parking spaces; 
e.  Any use involving a drive up service window or facility; 
f.  Other uses and applications as specified in these regulations. 
g.  Applications for coastal site plan review, inland wetlands review, and soil erosion and sediment control plan review shall meet the submission requirements of this section. Additional data as required by section 55, coastal management district, section 57, inland wetlands and watercourses, and section 58, soil erosion and sediment control shall be noted on submitted site plans as applicable. 
(3)  Application submission requirements. Applications for site plan approval shall include the following: 
a.  Completed application form and fee in accord with section 17-22 of the Code of Ordinances. Checks shall be made payable to Treasurer, City of New Haven. 
b.  A written narrative describing the proposed use or development in sufficient detail to determine zoning compliance. 
c.  A site development plan complying with section 64(f)(5) of these Regulations. 
(4)  Standards for site plans-General. Site plans shall be prepared by appropriate design professionals (surveyor, engineer, architect, and or landscape architect) licensed to practice in the state and shall bear appropriate registration stamps. All drawings shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet. All site plan drawings shall be in sufficient detail and accuracy, (generally A-2), to enable the construction of all site improvements shown and approved on the drawings. Four copies of the site plan, application, narrative and all supporting materials shall be submitted. One copy of the site plan at 8.5 by 11 inches shall also be submitted. 
(5)  Site plan contents. Site plans shall include the following: 
a.  Title block in the lower right hand corner with project name, address of property, name and address of developer, property owner, and applicant; north arrow, scale of not more than 1?:40', plan date with revision dates, seals and signatures, names and addresses of all appropriate design professionals; 
b.  A location map at the scale of not less than 1? to 600' showing the proposed project and the nearest street intersection; 
c.  Boundary survey of site including distances with angles or bearings, building/setback lines, and street lines; and right-of-way lines; 
d.  Locations and descriptions of all existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way; 
e.  Zoning classification of property; 
f.  Area of lot; 
g.  Buildings and improvements on abutting parcels within 25 feet of property lines to include the name of adjacent owners and zoning classification of their property; 
h.  Existing and proposed contours or spot grades at or more than two-foot intervals; 
i.  Locations of existing and proposed buildings with dimensions, area, elevations and number of stories and distances between all buildings and property lines; 
j.  Locations of other improvements and structures to include signs, fences, and walls; 
k.  Existing and proposed sanitary and storm water drainage facilities with elevations; 
l.  Existing and proposed water lines and hydrants; 
m.  Existing and proposed sidewalks, curbs and curb cuts, and adjacent streets; 
n.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by section 58; 
o.  Coastal zone management areas and/or flood zones as applicable; 
p.  Inland wetland and watercourse areas as applicable; 
q.  Drainage design for roof area, parking lot and driveways; 
r.  Existing and proposed landscaping including a listing of all trees and shrubs to be planted, by common and botanical names, size (caliper, height, time until maturity) at planting, and height and spread at maturity; 
s.  Layout of all off street parking areas showing details and dimensions of aisles, driveways, each parking space, all loading and unloading areas, pavement markings, location of directional signs and ADA-compliant spaces; 
t.  Exterior Lighting Plan as required by Section 60.1; 
u.  Fire lanes and traffic control signs as required by government authorities; 
v.  Outside storage areas with proposed screening; 
w.  Location of outside recycling and refuse storage area and proposed screening; 
x.  A construction staging plan indicating the site logistics for all phases and the estimated time for construction of each stage and staging-related site improvements together with any public right-of-way encroachments; 
y.  A table denoting and comparing the density, bulk and yard, parking, and loading standards required by the Zoning Regulations with the density, bulk, parking, and loading standards proposed in the site plan; 
z.  Plan certification: Notation on site plan that plan's preparer certifies to the best of his/her knowledge, belief, and ability, and after research and inquiry, that the proposed plan meets all of the standards of the New Haven Zoning Ordinance except as might be otherwise noted in such certification; 
aa.  Copy of preliminary application for access to state highways, to state-owned storm drainage facilities, and for DEP Coastal Permits where such state permits are required; 
bb.  Copy of Board of Zoning Appeals decision letter with proof of recording, if zoning relief has been granted; 
cc.  Stormwater Management Plans as required by Section 60; 
dd.  Reflective Heat Impact Calculations as required by Section 60.2. 
(6)  Other site plan requirements. 
a.  Engineering data: 
1.  Any improvements which are proposed to become owned, operated, or maintained by the city shall have documentation that such improvements have been designed in accordance with accepted engineering practices and will be in compliance with all applicable City Codes and regulations governing such areas as pipe size, flow lines, invert and top of grate elevations, existing and proposed elevations, and construction practices and materials. 
2.  Applications must document appropriate storm water system designs. Quantity and velocity calculations, profiles, cross-sections, and other engineering documentation may be required for the City Engineer's review. 
b.  Structural plans: 
1.  One copy of the plan of all proposed buildings, structures, signs, including floor plans and exterior elevations. 
c.  Other information or exhibits: 
1.  Applicants may submit such other information or exhibits which the applicant believes address material site plan issues. All such submissions become the property of the city and are public information unless exempted by the laws of the State of Connecticut. 
2.  Other requested information and exhibits submitted under this section shall be submitted no later than five working days prior to the meeting scheduled for the application. Such information and exhibits shall be open for public inspection. 
(7)  Administration. 
a.  The Commission may, upon application of the applicant, waive or limit the requirement to provide information on any specific site plan when, in its opinion, the information is not necessary to reach a decision. Such waiver shall be based upon the particular character or limited nature of the proposal or due to special conditions peculiar to a site. The Commission may also request additional information that it determines is necessary for proper administration and enforcement. 
b.  It is strongly recommended that for large projects or for projects with significant site constraints, a pre-application review of the submission be undertaken with the City Engineer and/or the City Plan Department. 
c.  The Commission may hold a public hearing regarding any site proposal if, in its judgment, the specific circumstances require such action. Notice of public hearings and procedures shall be as prescribed by statute. 
d.  All abutting property owners and other property owners within 200 feet of the property borders shall be notified by the applicant of the date, place, and time of the public hearing along with a summary of the proposal being considered at the hearing. That notification shall be on a form provided by the City Plan Department and shall be mailed to said property owners by regular mail no more than 14 nor less than seven days prior to the date of the public hearing. The applicant shall provide the Department with a copy of mailing labels of all property owners within 200 feet and certify that notification has been given in accordance with this section. 
e.  The plan may be forwarded to any city or state agency or department for comment. 
f.  When minor changes to approved site plans are requested which do not require revised vehicle/pedestrian access, do not require additional parking spaces, do not impact on necessary landscaping, or which may be required by field conditions, site plan approval may be granted by the City Plan Staff. An application, fee and plans shall be filed in the City Plan Department and Staff shall report all such approvals to the Commission at its next meeting. 
g.  City Plan Department staff may determine that a proposed site plan does not meet threshold requirements of site plan review and may therefore be approved administratively, without formal Commission review. See Section 64(f)(10). 
(8)  Decision procedures. 
a.  The Commission shall receive complete site plan applications at the next meeting after submission or within 35 days of filing with the City Plan Department, whichever is shorter. The Commission shall render a decision upon the plan within 65 days of an application's receipt unless the site plan accompanies an application that requires a public hearing. Applicant may grant an extension of up to 65 days within which to act upon a site plan. 
b.  The Commission's failure to render a decision on a completed site plan within the time limitations set above shall indicate approval of said site plan. 
c.  Denial or modification of any site plan must be based upon Zoning Ordinance or other city standards. All denials or modifications of a site plan shall state specifically the reasons for said action. 
d.  A copy of a final decision shall be mailed by certified mail to the applicant and property owner within 15 working days of the decision and a notice of said decision shall be published within 15 days of the decision in a newspaper with general circulation in New Haven. 
e.  The applicant shall record a final decision on the City's Land Records, and shall present proof of such recording the City Plan staff, prior to issuance of building permit. 
f.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a site restoration bond, if required by the City Plan Commission, shall be posted. 
(9)  Maintenance and enforcement. 
a.  The maintenance of the site before and after issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. 
b.  Lack of maintenance in a proper, neat and habitable condition shall be construed to be a violation of these regulations and subject to enforcement pursuant to section 62 of this ordinance and other penalties as provided by law. 
(10)  Administrative site plan review. For proposed activities which do not meet the threshold for site plan review by the City Plan Commission as contained in section 64(f)(2) of this Ordinance, but still require a building permit and/or staff level zoning review, an administrative site plan review by the City of New Haven is required. Prior to commencement of any site activity, including but not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, footings and/or foundations work, the applicant shall submit a site plan for review and approval consistent with guidelines approved by the City Plan Commission. 
(11)  Effective date. This subsection (f) shall govern development activity initiated or proposed on vacant property, improved property or as otherwise applicable following enactment of Ord. No. 1416, as established by the effective date. 
(g)  Motor vehicle uses. The City Plan Commission shall hear and determine applications for certificates of approval of location (CALs) for vehicle uses as provided for by the General Statutes of Connecticut. In passing upon any such application, the Commission shall be strictly cognizant of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, and may appropriate conditions and safeguards. Failure to comply with any such condition or safeguard shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
(h)  Duration of approval, lapse of approval, renewal, transferability, and revocation. 
(1)  Duration of approval. Pursuant to Section 8-3(i) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any site plan approved after June 30, 2011 is valid for a period of five years after the date of decision. Upon petition of the applicant, the Commission may, at its discretion, grant extensions totaling no more than an additional five years to complete all work connected to the original approval. Pursuant to Section 8-3(m) of the Connecticut General Statutes, any site plan approved prior to July 1, 2011 and that has not already expired prior to May 9, 2011 is valid for a period of nine years after the date of decision. Upon petition of the applicant, the Commission may, at its discretion, grant extensions totaling no more than an additional five years to complete all work connected to the original approval. Applications for extensions shall be made in writing between not less than 30 nor more than 60 days prior to the lapse of the original approval. 
(2)  Lapse of approval. Consistent with Section 62.D, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine the status of an approval and make a determination if the approval is valid or if approval has lapsed. 
(3)  Transferability. The validity of an approval shall not be affected by changes in ownership. 
(Ord. No. 1416, § 3, 5-1-06; ord. No. 1419, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 1662, 9-19-11 
Section 65. - Planned developments. 
(a)  Objectives. The provisions of this section are to be applied in instances where tracts of land of considerable size are developed, redeveloped or renewed as integrated and harmonious units, and where the overall design of such units is so outstanding as to warrant modification of the standards contained elsewhere in this ordinance. A planned development, to be eligible under this section, must be: 
(1)  In accordance with the comprehensive plans of the city, including all plans for redevelopment and renewal; 
(2)  Composed of such uses, and in such proportions, as are most appropriate and necessary for the integrated functioning of the planned development and for the city; 
(3)  So designed in its space allocation, orientation, texture, materials, landscaping and other features as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character, complementing the design and values of the surrounding neighborhood, and showing such unusual merit as to reflect credit upon the developer and upon the city; and 
(4)  So arranged as to provide a minimum of 250 square feet of usable open space per dwelling unit on the tract, except 125 square feet in the case of elderly housing units, subject to the specific minimum standards enumerated in section 15(a)(1)g. of this ordinance. 
(b)  Tract. The tract for which application is made must have the following minimum and maximum areas: 
(1)  For a Planned Development Unit under paragraph (d)(1) below, between one-half and two acres in the case of dwellings only, and between one and two acres in all other cases. 
(2)  For a Planned Development District under paragraph (d)(2) below, over one acre in the case of dwellings only, and over two acres in all other cases. 
(c)  Who may apply. An application may be filed by (1) the owner or owners or lessee or lessees of all land and structures included within the tract, or (2) any governmental agency including the New Haven Redevelopment Agency. The holder of a written option or contract to purchase or lease land and/or structures shall, for purposes of such Application, be deemed the owner or lessee of the land and/or structures covered by such option or contract. 
(d)  Application and general plans. Each application shall state the proposed modifications of existing zoning, and shall be accompanied by general plans, including contoured site plans. The general plans shall show the improvements to be erected upon the tract, the open spaces to be provided, the nature and location of the proposed use or uses, the relationship of the proposed development to surrounding properties, and other pertinent information. 
Traffic impact study. All applications filed pursuant to this section shall be referred to the Department of Traffic and Parking for an advisory report on the traffic impact. The traffic impact study shall show the amount and direction of traffic to be generated by the proposed development and shall estimate the effect of such traffic on the roadway capacity and safety. 
The Application and General Plans shall be sufficient in scope and character to determine that the objectives stated in subsection (a) above will be met. Any proposed division of the tract into separately owned and operated units shall be indicated. The Application and General Plans shall be filed and acted upon in the following manner: 
(1)  Where the proposed modifications of existing zoning concern only the bulk and placement of structures and the size and shape of lots (regulation of lot area, average lot width, distance between buildings, size of courts, yards, gross floor area, building height, and/or building coverage ), or involve a reduction of lot area per dwelling unit of no more than 33%, such Application and General Plans shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals and acted upon as a special exception under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance. If such Application and General Plans are approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals, upon specific findings that each of the objectives stated in subsection (a) above will be met, such approval shall be construed to modify provisions contained elsewhere in this ordinance insofar (and only insofar) as specific deletions, additions and changes are made which are related to land and structures in the tract, and the tract shall be designated a Planned Development Unit within the existing zoning district, provided that the requirements of subsection (e) below are met. 
(2)  In any other case, the Application and General Plans shall be filed with the Board of Aldermen and acted upon as a proposed amendment to this ordinance. If such application and General Plans are approved by the Board of Aldermen, following a favorable recommendation by the City Plan Commission and after an advisory report from the Department of Traffic and Parking regarding the traffic impact study, upon specific findings that each of the objectives stated in subsection 65(a) above will be met, such approval shall be construed to amend this ordinance insofar (and only insofar) as specific deletions, additions and changes are made which are related to the land and structures in the tract, and the tract shall be designated as a separate Planned Development District provided that the requirements of subsection 65(e) below are met. 
(3)  All applications filed under this section may be referred by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the case of Planned Development Units, and by the Board of Aldermen in the case of Planned Development Districts, to any Neighborhood Planning Agency (NPA) of jurisdiction as defined in section 1 of this ordinance, which may issue an advisory report on the proposed zoning designation to the Board of Zoning Appeals or Board of Aldermen, as appropriate, prior to final action by these boards. Nothing in the npa review shall be construed so as to delay the review process or to constrain the sound discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeals, City Plan Commission or Board of Aldermen. 
(e)  Subsequent performance. All official zoning maps shall carry a notation of the location and boundaries of any planned development approved as above, giving a reference to a file in which full information concerning the provisions applying to the same may be found. 
(1)  After the approval of the Application and General Plans, the applicant shall file detailed plans for review by the City Plan Commission, showing the details of the proposed development as fully as possible and including elevations and perspectives of proposed construction. If the applicant later wishes to change any of the details of the proposed development, further detailed plans shall be filed for review by the City Plan Commission. No building permit for the proposed development or any part thereof shall be issued until the City Plan Commission has determined that the pertinent Detailed Plans are in accordance with the Application and General Plans as approved and with the objectives stated in subsection (a) above. If any Detailed Plans are not acted upon by the City Plan Commission within 60 days after they are submitted to it, they shall be deemed to be approved. 
(2)  Within three months after the approval of the Application and General Plans, a certified copy of such Application and General Plans shall be filed by the applicant at their own expense in the office of the city/town clerk. 
(3)  If construction of improvements is not begun and diligently prosecuted to completion within a reasonable time established by the City Plan Commission at the time of approval of detailed plans, and if an extension of time is not given by the City Plan Commission for good cause shown, then the modifications or amendments of this ordinance provided for in subsection 65(d) above shall become null and void, and the tract shall revert to all the requirements of its previous zoning. No certificate of occupancy (C of O) shall be issued until a detailed report is submitted by the applicant to the City Plan Commission showing the outcome of construction and the City Plan Commission certifies that all the requirements of this section 65 relating to planned developments have been met. 
(4)  Parking Plan amendments to a planned development. Any amendment of 20 or more parking spaces to an Overall Parking Plan which covers an area including a planned development must be submitted for approval to the body that approved the original planned development: the Board of Alderman for a PDD; the Board of Zoning Appeals for a PDU. If an Overall Parking Plan covers an area that includes both a PDD and PDU, then changes shall be submitted to the Board of Aldermen for review and approval, provided, however, that the Board of Aldermen may elect to refer such amendment to the Board of Zoning Appeals for action. If an Overall Parking Plan covers an area of 150 or more acres, then (a) changes involving 100 or more parking spaces shall be submitted for review and approval to the Board of Aldermen, and (b) changes of less than 100 spaces shall be submitted for administrative review by the City Plan Department. Any request to change the borders of the area covered by an Overall Parking Plan must be submitted to the Board of Aldermen for review and approval, provided however that no parking plan shall cover two or more non-contiguous areas, excepting satellite lots that may service the primary area. Increased parking demand generated by employees working on temporary construction projects shall not require an application to amend an Overall Parking Plan, but shall be included in the application for city approval of the project. The proposed parking plan amendment shall include an account of all available parking and its use; an account of all parking fees charged and revenues collected; an account of current demand management efforts such as public transit subsidies, car pools, bicycle storage, satellite parking lots with shuttle service and others; a census of potential parkers, per section 12(b), with five-year and ten-year projections based on the applicant's expansion plans, if any; a detailed study of the utilization of on-street parking in the surrounding area; and such other information as the Board of Aldermen deems necessary. Any Overall Parking Plan that is or becomes out of compliance with conditions required by a city board or commission shall be updated and submitted for review/approval within 30 days of the effective date of this ordinance or within 30 days of the date of non-compliance. 
A current Overall Parking Plan must have been approved pursuant to this Section (unless such OPP is comprised only of a PDU and does not contain a PDD), notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Ordinance to the contrary, and notwithstanding any Overall Parking Plan approved prior to the effective date of this section, prior to the approval of any new application proposing zoning map amendments, zoning regulation amendments, Variances, Special Exceptions, Special Permits, or Site Plan review for any project within the City of New Haven which is submitted by an entity which is subject to an Overall Parking Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1358, §§ 1, 2, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 1788, 1-19-16) 
Section 66. - Deviations prohibited. 
(a)  No land or structure shall be used or occupied, and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in conformity with all the terms of this ordinance. (For nonconforming uses, structures and lots, see section 67.) 
(b)  No reduction of lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot area per sleeping room, lot area per square foot of gross floor area, lot area per square foot of building coverage, average lot width, yards, usable open space, parking, loading, or any other requirement of this ordinance, shall be made by subdivision, conveyance, alienation or any other means. 
(c)  No part of the required lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, lot area per sleeping room, area per square foot of gross floor area, lot area per square foot of building coverage, average lot width, yards, usable open space, parking, loading, or any other requirements of this ordinance, used for or credited to one lot, shall be used for or credited to any other lot, except that joint use may be made of parking and loading within the provisions of sections 29(h) and 45(a)(6). 
Section 67. - Nonconforming uses, structures and lots. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. 
(1)  A nonconforming use , structure or lot is one which existed lawfully, whether by variance or otherwise, on the date this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto became effective, and which fails to conform to one or more of the applicable regulations in the Zoning Ordinance or such amendment thereto. 
(2)  Such nonconformities are incompatible with and detrimental to permitted uses , structures, and lots in the zoning districts in which they are located; they cause disruption of the comprehensive land use pattern of the city; they inhibit present and future development of nearby properties; and they confer upon their owners and users a position of unfair advantage. 
(3)  It is a fundamental principal of zoning law that nonconformities are not to be expanded, and that they should be abolished or reduced to conformity as quickly as the fair interests of the parties will permit. This principle is declared to be the intent of this ordinance. 
(4)  It is the further intent of this ordinance that existing nonconformities shall not cause further departures from the Zoning Ordinance, and therefore the existence of any present nonconformity anywhere in the city shall not in itself be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance for any other property. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, a nonconforming use , structure or lot as defined by subsection 67(a) above may be continued, except as otherwise specified in this section 67. 
(2)  No nonconformity shall be deemed to have existed on the date this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto became effective, unless: 
a.  It was in being on a continuous basis and to its fullest extent on such date; and 
b.  If such nonconformity is a use , such use had not been abandoned within the meaning of section 67(c)(6). 
Provided that, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure on which actual construction was lawfully begun in good faith prior to such date, provided such construction is diligently prosecuted to completion within two years following such date. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials so that they are in a permanent position and fastened to the earth in a permanent manner. 
(3)  In order to assure that the fair interests of the parties will be protected, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require discontinuance of a nonconformity because of mere changes of title or possession or right of possession of property, except in the case of nonconforming lots under section 67(e)(1). 
(c)  Nonconforminguses. 
(1)  No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged, extended or altered, and no structure or part thereof devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, or structurally altered, except in changing the use to one which is permitted in the district in which such use is located. No nonconforming use of a structure shall be extended to occupy land outside such structure or space in another structure. 
(2)  No nonconforming use of land shall be moved to another part of a lot or outside the lot , and no nonconforming use of a structure shall be moved to any part of the structure not manifestly arranged and designed for such use at the time the use became nonconforming, and no structure containing a nonconforming use shall be moved, unless the result of any moving described in this paragraph (2) is to end the nonconforming use . 
(3)  Change of use . 
a.  No nonconforming use of land or of a structure shall be changed to any use which is substantially different in nature and purpose from the former nonconforming use , except such uses as are permitted in the district in which they are located, unless a special exception is granted under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance, upon a finding, among other things, that the new use will have a lesser impact upon the surrounding area than the old one. 
b.  Where any change is proposed to be made to a use that is permitted in the district only by special exception, such change may be made only through a special exception granted under subsection 63(d) of this ordinance. 
c.  When a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use , it shall not thereafter be changed to any use not permitted in the district in which the use is located. 
d.  When a nonconforming use has been wrongfully changed to any use which is substantially different in nature and purpose from the former nonconforming use , such change shall be deemed to constitute abandonment of the former nonconforming use under subparagraph 67(c)(6)b. of this ordinance. 
(4)  In order to assure that structures containing nonconforming uses will be maintained in safe and decent condition for so long as such nonconforming uses continue, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prohibit: 
a.  Work in any period of twelve consecutive months on ordinary repairs and replacement of existing materials with similar materials placed in the same manner, to an extent not exceeding 20% of the current replacement value of the structure (excluding the value of land, the cost of preparation of land and the value of any foundation adaptable to a conforming use ) as determined by the zoning enforcement officer (ZEO); or 
b.  Any work required by the codes and ordinances of the city or ordered by any city official charged with protecting the public health, safety or welfare, if such work does not enlarge or extend a nonconforming use or otherwise increase any nonconformity. 
(5)  In order to assure that the fair interests of the parties will be protected, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prohibit the restoration of any structure and its use where such structure has been destroyed by any means out of the control of the owner to an extent of 50% or less of its replacement value (excluding the value of land, the cost of preparation of land and the value of any foundation adaptable to the conforming use ) at the time of destruction, provided the restoration of such structure and its use in no way increases any former nonconformity, and provided further that restoration of such structure is begun within one year of such destruction and diligently prosecuted to completion within two years following such destruction. But whenever such a structure has been destroyed by any means out of the control of the owner to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement value (excluding the value of land, the cost of preparation of land and the value of any foundation adaptable to a conforming use ) at the time of destruction, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO), or by any means within the control of the owner (except as provided in paragraph 67(c)(4) to any extent whatsoever, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with all the regulations of the district in which such structure is located, including regulations as to use . 
(6)  Abandonment of nonconforming uses : 
a.  Any nonconforming use which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be re-established. Any structure or land, or structure and land in combination, which was formerly devoted to a nonconforming use which has been abandoned, shall not again be devoted to any use other than those uses which are permitted in the district in which the structure or land, or structure and land in combination, is located. 
b.  The term abandonment, as used therein, shall mean the voluntary discontinuance of a use , when accompanied by an intent not to re-establish such use . Any one of the following shall constitute prima facie evidence of intent to abandon: 
1.  Any positive act indicating such intent; or 
2.  Any conscious failure to take all necessary steps to resume the nonconforming use with reasonable dispatch in the circumstances, including advertising of the property for sale or for lease; or 
3.  In the case of a structure or of a structure and land in combination, discontinuance of the nonconforming use for nine consecutive months, or for a total of 18 months during any three-year period; or 
4.  In the case of land only, discontinuance of the nonconforming use for 90 consecutive days, or for a total of six months during any one-year period. 
(7)  In any residence district, uses of land only, and outdoor uses whether of all or part of a lot , which are nonconforming at the date this section 67 becomes effective or becomes nonconforming at any future date, shall either be made to conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located, or be discontinued and removed within three years from the date this section 67 becomes effective or from the date they become non-conforming, whichever date is later. Under this paragraph (7) shall be included junk yards , storage yards, outdoor sales areas, quarries, and other such uses , where the principal activities on the lot are not carried on within a structure or are carried on within a structure which is adaptable to a conforming use , or where the outdoor use is independent of or unnecessary to activities carried on within any structure on the lot . 
(8)  Advertising signs located in residence districts, other than on a property devoted also to some other business or industrial use , shall be discontinued and removed within three years from the date this section 67 becomes effective or from the date they become non-conforming or from the date such other business or industrial use is discontinued, whichever date is latest. 
(9)  A nonconforming use carried on within a structure may have business signs, if such signs are of the belt type, non-flashing and non-rotating, not located above the ground floor, and of a size not exceeding 10% of the area of ground floor wall surface on which such signs are located, including window and door area. 
(10)  No use shall be deemed a nonconforming use if located within a district in which a special exception may be granted for such a use under this ordinance. Subsection 63(d) shall govern as to the expansion or substantial alteration of such uses , as well as section 31 in the case of convenience goods and services in residence districts. 
(11)  Lack of required lot area per dwelling unit , parking, loading, or yards , and excessive building bulk or coverage, shall not in themselves be deemed nonconforming uses under this subsection 67(c); such nonconformities are governed by subsection 67(d). However, lack of required screening or other safeguards, improper use of outdoor areas, excessive area occupied by a use , improper arrangement of parking, loading or driveways, and similar deviations shall be deemed nonconforming uses under this subsection 67(c). 
(12)  All nonconforming uses shall be subject to the same regulations for arrangement and operation as those that would apply if they were conforming uses , unless such regulations conflict with other applicable regulations. (See especially section 46 concerning outdoor areas, and 48 concerning performance standards.) 
(d)  Nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Structures failing to meet any requirement of this ordinance other than use , including lack of required parking or loading, shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or altered, if the result would be an increase in nonconformity. See also Sections 66, 29(j), and 45(a)(8) of this ordinance. 
(2)  Signs of a size or type not permitted in the district in which they are situated, or which are improperly located or illuminated, or nonconforming in any other way, shall be considered nonconforming structures under this subsection 67(d), and any increasing in size, illumination or flashing of such signs shall be deemed to be an enlargement or extension producing an increase in nonconformity. 
(3)  No structure described in paragraph 67(d)(1) or paragraph 67(d)(2) above shall be moved unless the result of such moving is to reduce or eliminate its nonconformity. 
(e)  Nonconforming lots. . 
(1)  If two or more adjoining lots of record, one or both of which fail to meet the requirements of this ordinance with regard to lot area and/or average lot width, have continuous frontage and are in single ownership at any time after the application of the provisions of this ordinance to such lots , and if such lots taken together would form one or more lots , each meeting the requirements of this ordinance with regard to lot area and average lot width, such lot or lots shall no longer be considered nonconforming, and must be use d in compliance with the lot area and average lot width requirements irrespective of subsequent changes in ownership. 
(2)  If a lot which is of record at the time of the application of the provisions of this ordinance to such lot is insufficient as to lot area or average lot width, a single-family dwelling may be constructed on such lot regardless of the requirements of this ordinance with regard to lot area and average lot width, but conforming to all other regulations of the district in which such lot is located. Any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, in any case where a variance is sought for construction on such a lot other than as allowed in this paragraph 67(e)(2), no variance shall be granted for a structure of a size or shape not allowed on the lot under the zoning regulations pertaining to the lot at the time the lot was reduced to its present dimensions. 
Section 68. - Separability. 
    It is hereby declared to be legislative intent that: 
(a)  If a court of competent jurisdiction finds any provisions of this ordinance to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all the other provisions of this ordinance shall continue to be separately and fully effective. 
(b)  If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision or provisions of this ordinance to any lot, building or other structure , or tract of land to be invalid or ineffective in whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the person, property, or situation immediately involved in the controversy, and the application of any such provision to other persons, property, or situations shall not be affected. 
Section 69. - Effect on other requirements. 
    The previous provisions of the New Haven Zoning Ordinance are repealed as of the effective date of this revision. It is not intended that the requirements of any other law or ordinance be repealed or otherwise made ineffective by this ordinance, and in case of conflict the strictest of the relevant provisions of this and other laws and ordinances shall apply. 
Section 70. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this revision shall be June 5, 1995. 
ZONING ORDINANCE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table contains a listing or ordinances amending the New Haven Zoning Ordinance subsequent to its 2004 republication. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 1355  6- 7-04 1, 2 55(c) 3 58(h) 1357  9- 7-04 1, 2 65(b), (e) 3 29(i) 1367 12- 6-04 1 1 1368  2- 7-05 1, 2 1 3, 4 12(b)(1)d., h. 5 13(b)(3)b. 6 19 7 Art. III, Table 1 8 Art. IV, Table 3 1377  5-16-05 1 15(b), Art. III, Table 2 1394 10-20-05 46(d), (h) 1410  3-20-06 1 41 2 42 3 43 1412  5- 1-06 1 2 2 Art. III, Table 2 3 41 4 42 5 Art. V, Table 3 6 43(c) 7 43(b)(1) 8 44(g) 9 44.1(d) 10 45(a)(1) 11 45(a)(1)a.1. 12 45(a)(1)b.2. 1416  5- 1-06 1, 2 62 3 64(f) 1419  6- 5-06       Rpld 63(f)       Added 64(g) 1420  6- 5-06 1 59 1431 12-18-06 55 1443  3-5-07 1, 2 2.b, c. 1553  6- 4-07 42, 45 1563 12-17-07 1 42 1565  4- 7-08 18, 42.A 1598  9- 8-09 1 34 2 12(b)(1)c. 1614  3-10-10 1 1, 2, 19, 41, 42, 43, 44.1, 45 1641 10-14-10 56 1662  9-19-11 29, 45, 55, 58, 60-60.2, 64 1665 10- 3-11 1, 42-45 1685  8-6-12 Sched. D       Amd 1, 2, 12(b)(1)h.       Rnbd 18       as 18A       Added 18B       Amd 19(b)(4), Art. III, Table 1 29, 41, 42-44.1, 45, 47 1696  5- 6-13 Sched. A 42, 43(i), 45(a)(1) 1712  7 1-13 56 1726 12-2-13 Sched. A       Amd 1, 11-17, Table 1, Table 2       Rpld 22       Amd 23, 28 29       Rpld 30       Amd 43 1751  8- 6-14 Sched. A, § 1 1 Sched. A, § 2 43(b), (c) Sched. A, § 3 45 1752 11- 6-14 Sched. A 18A, 18B 1766  4- 6-15 63(a) 1780  8- 3-15       Rpld 42.1(g) 1788  1-19-16 Sched. C 42 1790  4- 4-16 65(e)(4) 1804  8- 1-16 Attach. C 42, 43 45 1805  8- 1-16 Attach. C 42 1807  8- 1-16 Attach. C 43 1820  6- 5-17 Sched. B 1       Rpld 16(a)(1)i. 42, Table 3 43       Rpld 43(b)(2) 43(c)(5) 43(d) 43(f) 43(f)(1)       Added 43(f)(4) 43(g) 43(h) 43(i)       Added 43(j), (k) 45 45(a)(1) 45(a)(1)a. 45(a)(1)a.1., 4. 45(a)(1)a.6.-9.       Rpld 45(a)(3)c. 1842  6- 4-18 Sched. B 41 42 42(Use Table)       Rnbd 43(c)(5)-43(c)(7)       as 43(c)(6)-43(c)(8)       Added 43(c)(5) 43(f), (k), (k)(11), (k)(12) 45(a)(1)a.1., (a)(1)a.4., (a)(1)a.8. 1847  3-13-18 44.1(b)  
