Adopted September 25, 1972
Effective September 28, 1972
As Amended through August 1, 2019
TOWN OF PLAINFIELD,
CONNECTICUT
PLANNING
AND ZONING
COMMISSION
1
Table of Contents
Section Page
1 Preamble, Enacting Clause, Short Title and Definitions 2
2 Establishment of District, Zoning Map, District Boundaries and Scope of Controls 17
3 Aquifer Protection Overlay District 19
4 Wetlands 22
5 Floodplain Management 22
6 Erosion and Sediment Control 23
7 Residential Districts 26
8 Commercial Districts 33
9 Industrial Districts 38
10 Industrial Park District 43
11 Planned Development District 46
12 Special Permits 53
13 Liquor Uses, Gasoline Service Stations, Parking Requirements, Signs and
Billboards, Existing Junkyards 91
14 Non-conforming Buildings, Lots and Uses, Abandonment 97
15 General Requirements 99
16 Administrative Provisions, Interpretation, Enforcement and Zoning Board of Appeals 103
17 Separability and Effective Date 107
18 Amendments 108
19 Site Development Plan 110
20 Application Fee Schedule 115
21 Conservation Subdivisions 116
2
SECTION 1 - Preamble, Enacting Clause, Short Title, and Definitions
1.0 Preamble
These zoning regulations are designed to further the purposes set forth in Chapter 124, Section 8-2
of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of the area of the lot that may
be occupied; the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density of population and the
location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence and other
purposes; and the height, size and location of advertising signs and billboards within the limits of
said town; to divide said town into districts of such manner, shape and area as may best be suited
to carry out the purposes of such act; to regulate the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration or use of buildings or structures and the use of land in accordance with a comprehensive
plan designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to promote health and general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements, and
with full consideration for the character of the districts and their particular suitability for particular
use, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate
use of land throughout town.
All references to the Connecticut General Statutes refer to revision of 1958, as amended.
1.1 Enacting Clause, Short Title
The Plainfield Planning and Zoning Commission, acting under authority of Chapter 124 of the
General Statutes of the State of Connecticut, hereby adopts and enacts these regulations as the
“Zoning Regulations of the Town of Plainfield.”
1.2 Definitions.
For the purposes of these regulations certain terms and words used herein shall be used,
interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section.
1.21 A “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an unincorporated
association; “shall” is always mandatory; a “building” includes a “structure”; a building or
structure includes any part thereof; “uses” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include words “intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.”
1.22 The “Town” is the Town of Plainfield in the County of Windham, State of Connecticut, the
“Planning and Zoning Commission” and the “Zoning Board of Appeals” are respectively the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Plainfield.
ACCESSORY. A building or use which is clearly incidental or subordinate to, and customarily in
connection with, the principal building or use and is located on the same lot with such principal
building or use. Any accessory building attached to a principal building is deemed to be part of
such principal building in applying bulk regulations to such building.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT. A second dwelling unit contained within a single-family residence
building and which is clearly subordinate to the main dwelling unit.
3
AGRI-TOURISM. (Z-2014-0439) (May 1, 2014) The act of visiting a farm for the purpose of
enjoyment, education or active involvement in the activities of the farm or operation. Agri-tourism
uses may include but are not limited to corn mazes, petting zoos related to farm animals, hay rides,
and educational programs. Accessory uses to the agri-tourism enterprise may include refreshments
and concessions being served, sale of farm or agricultural related products not produced on site.
Any business wishing to utilize the regulations of agri-tourism must be registered as a farm with
the State of CT and have a minimum of twenty (20) working acres.
AQUIFER. A geological unit capable of yielding usable amounts of water.
AQUIFER PROTECTION ZONE. The primary and secondary recharge areas of designated
aquifers. The aquifer protection zone is shown on an overlay to the zoning map.
ARCADE. Indoor facilities operated commercially for the playing of billiards, pool, ping-pong,
electronic games, and/or other such games and amusements. For the purposes of these regulations
any facility operated solely for one of these purposes or a facility operated in conjunction with
another permitted commercial use, which contains a combination of 6 or more game tables or
electronic games shall constitute an arcade.
AUTO RECYCLING FACILITY. (Z-2015-0671) (08/01/2015) A business or place of operation
of a business for the efficient, environmentally responsible processing of motor vehicles for
reusable components and materials, which shall include: (i) the receipt of unregistered motor
vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways ; (ii)
removal of batteries and fluids, refrigerants, hazardous substances and precious metals from such
vehicles in an environmentally compliant manner; (iii) dismantling such vehicles for parts which
dismantling must occur within a structure or structures containing at least seventy-five thousand
(75,000) enclosed square feet, at least twenty percent (20%) of which shall be devoted to such
dismantling process; (iv) internal and external warehousing of such vehicle parts for wholesale
sale, refurbishing or remanufacturing; and (v) the wholesale sale of such warehoused parts.
AUTOMOBILE JUNKYARD. (Z-2015-0671) (08/01/2015) Any business and any place of
storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, which has stored or
deposited two or more unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition
for legal use on the public highways; or used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass,
paper, cordage or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which has been a part of, or
intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in
bulk to two or more motor vehicles. Shall also include any place of business or storage or deposit
of motor vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for parts or for use of the
metal for scrap and where it is intended to cut up the parts thereof. An Auto Recycling Facility
shall be excluded from this definition of Automobile Junkyard.
BASEMENT. The portion of the building that is partly underground which has more than half of
its interior height measured from floor to finished ceiling above the average finished grade of the
ground adjoining the building.
BILLBOARD. See SIGN, ADVERTISING.
4
BOARDING HOUSE (Z-2014-0413) (2/11/2014) A home or facility with more than four (4)
unrelated individuals sharing a dwelling unit, which does not meet the definition of a Family or
Group Home.
BREWERY I (Z-2017-1126) (7/01/2017) A small-scale facility emcompassing no more than
10,000 square feet where beer is manufactured, stored, bottled and sold whether wholesale or
retail in sealed containers for consumption off-premises, with a tasting room.
BREWERY II (Z-2017-1126) (7/01/2017) A facility where beer is manufactured, stored, bottled
and sold whether wholesale or retail in sealed containers for consumption off-premises that may
also contain a tasting room.
BREWPUB (Z-2017-1126) (7/01/2017) A facility where beer is manufactured, stored, bottled
and sold whether wholesale or retail in sealed containers for consumption off-premises, and sold
to be consumed on premises in a room that is ancillary to the production of beer, with or without
the sale of food.
BREWPUB/RESTAURANT (Z-2017-1126) (7/01/2017) A facility where beer is manufactured,
stored, bottled and sold whether wholesale or retail in sealed containers for consumption offpremises,
and sold to be consumed on premises in conjunction with a restaurant establishment.
BULK. The size and shape of buildings and non-building uses and the physical relationship of
their exterior walls or their location to lot lines and other buildings or other walls of the same
building, and all open spaces required in connection with a building. Bulk Regulations include
regulations dealing with floor area ratio, building height, lot area per dwelling unit, lot frontage,
lot width, required yards, courts, usable open space, spacing between buildings on a single lot, and
length of buildings in a row.
BULK, NONCONFORMING. That part of a building or non-building use which does not
conform to one or more of the applicable Bulk Regulations of these regulations, either on their
effective date or as a result of subsequent amendments thereof.
BULKY WASTE means land clearing debris and waste resulting from demolition activities,
furniture, rugs, mattresses, carpeting and other household and commercial wastes unable to be
accommodated at waste-to-energy facilities and authorized by the Connecticut Department of
Environmental Protection to be disposed of at facility sites for which a solid waste permit has been
issued. (Effective date 5/15/05)
CELLAR. A story having more than half of its clear unobstructed height below the average
finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER (TA-2007-06) (11/01/2007)- a program of supplementary care for
related or unrelated children outside their own homes on a regular basis for a part of the 24 hours
in one or more days in the week.
5
CLOTHING DONATION BIN (Z-2016-0849) (04/01/16) - Clothing donation bin shall mean any
enclosed container or receptacle held out to the public for the donation of clothing and the
temporary secure storage of donated clothing.
COMMERCIAL. A use involving the barter, sale, or exchange of things of value.
COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. (Z-2014-0436) (May 1, 2014)
Any building 5000 square feet or greater, or series of buildings located on a property that together
equal 5000 square feet or greater, that are used for any of the following:
• Shelter for more than 500 fowl,
• Indoor horticulture,
• Processing, packaging, or storage of products produced on site, with the exception of hay
storage provided that the hay was produced by the property owner or purchased for use by the
property owner and not purchased for resale.
(Added 3-22-05) (CZ-2004-09)
COMPREHENSIVE ENTERTAINMENT AND AMUSEMENT FACILITY Any single facility,
or any group of facilities, acting in concert, which provide entertainment, amusement, athletic or
sporting venues in order to provide entertainment or recreational enjoyment to the general public
either on a for-profit or not-for-profit basis; including theme parks, amusement parks, arcades,
centers for the performing arts, concert halls and miniature golf courses, and any other commercial
uses which are proven by the Applicant to be substantially similar in scope, nature and impact to
the uses listed above, compatible with surrounding uses, and approved by a majority vote of the
Commission.
COMPUTER DATA CENTER. (Added 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02) Area containing computer
servers and not computer work station areas.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS means unwanted or discarded materials from
construction, remodeling and demolition of buildings, utilities, structures and roads, including
incidental wastes such as packaging, strapping and scrap materials not salvaged from the same.
(Effective date 5/15/05)
CONVALESCENT HOME. (a) Home for the Aged; (b) Rest Home with nursing supervision;
(c) Chronic and Convalescent Home; (d) Chronic and Convalescent Home with authorization to
care for persons suffering from harmless chronic mental unsoundness; (e) Children’s Nursing
Home, and (f) Children’s Nursing Home with authorization to care for persons suffering from
harmless chronic mental unsoundness. Above terms are defined in the “Public Health Code of the
State of Connecticut,” as amended.
DOG KENNEL. (See Kennel) Amended 3-1-17
DUSTLESS SURFACE. Adequately covered with screenings, stone, gravel, concrete, asphalt, or
bituminous products, or adequately treated with oil, calcium chloride, or similar dust-inhibiting
substances.
6
DWELLING UNIT. A building, or part thereof, containing complete housekeeping facilities for
one family.
FAMILY. (Z-2014-0413) (2/11/2014) One or more persons closely related by blood, marriage, a
committed relationship, adoption or fostering, occupying a dwelling unit and living together as a
single housekeeping unit, or a maximum of four (4) unrelated individuals living together as a
single housekeeping unit and sharing in the use of any conveniences available, provided further
that within a single dwelling owned and occupied by a family closely related by blood, marriage
or adoption. This provision shall be construed so as not to prohibit the renting of rooms without
housekeeping facilities for use not by more than two (2) unrelated persons.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME (TA-2007-06) (11/01/2007) - consists of a family home caring for
not more than six children, including the providers own children not in school full time, where the
children are cared for not less than three or more than twelve hours during a twenty-four hour
period and where care is given on a regularly recurring basis.
FARM. At least five acres of land with buildings which are mainly used for and incidental to
farming.
FENCE. Any structure erected to serve as a barrier or property line divider, excluding stonewalls.
FILM STUDIO. (Added 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02) Facility to produce films containing offices,
computer data centers, stages, film editing, green rooms, mill, paint shop, commissary, studio
residences, and other uses that are incidental to the film studio. No artistic productions shall be
produced which motion picture industry standards would consider pornographic.
FILM STUDIO RESIDENCES. (Added 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02) Residences within a film
studio, occupied on a non-permanent basis by people associated with the film studio.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the area (horizontal) of every floor of a building measured
from the exterior faces of the walls or from the center line of part or common walls separating two
buildings, including (a) basement space; (b) attic space whether or not a floor has been laid, over
which there is structural headroom of 7 1/2 feet or more; (c) floor space used for mechanical
equipment with structural headroom of 7 1/2 feet; (d) roofed porches, breezeways, interior
balconies and mezzanines; (e) any roofed space such as a garage or carport for off-street parking
accessory to a single-family or two-family dwelling not located in a cellar. However, floor area
does not include: (a) cellar space (except that cellar space used for a retail sales use shall be
included for the purpose of calculating requirements of such use for accessory off-street parking
spaces and accessory off-street loading berths; (b) elevator and stair bulkheads, accessory water
tanks and cooling towers; and (c) terraces, unroofed open porches and steps.
FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE. The floor area of a residence which is adequately protected by heat
and assured of the availability of light and ventilation. It may include finished basement or attic
space, enclosed porches. However, livable floor area does not include garage space, a cellar,
terraces, unroofed open porches and steps.
7
FLOOR AREA RATIO. The floor area in square feet of all buildings on a lot, divided by the area
of such lot in square feet.
GARDEN APARTMENT. A building formed by four or more attached dwelling units which has
no main central hallway and rises no more than two stories above the ground level, or 35 feet.
GROUNDWATER. Water below the land surface in the saturated zone.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA. That area from which water is added to the saturated
zone by natural processes such as infiltration of precipitation or by artificial processes such as
induced filtration.
GROUP HOME (TA-2007-06) (11/01/2007), (Z-2014-0413) (2/11/2014) A home or facility
licensed by the State where a program of supplementary care for not less than seven (7) nor more
than sixteen (16) related or unrelated children or adults on a regular basis;
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any virgin or waste substance which because of its physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics poses an actual or potential hazard to human health or
drinking water quality when improperly managed. The material may be toxic, flammable,
corrosive or reactive. Included are petroleum and petroleum products and substances, wastes and
chemicals listed as hazardous under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Authorization Act
(SARA); Section 101 (14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA); the Resources Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) 40 CFR part
261; Section 311 of the Clean Water Act; and Section 22a-448 of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished
grade along the wall of a building to the highest point of such building.
HOME OCCUPATION. A professional or business use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit
by the residents thereof, and not more than 2 non-resident employees, which use is subordinate
and secondary to use of the unit for dwelling purposes. Such use shall not change the residential
character of the dwelling structure, and no stock in trade, raw materials, fixtures or equipment or
other evidence of the conduct of the occupation, except for an identification sign permitted by this
ordinance, shall be visible from the exterior of the dwelling structure. A “home occupation” shall
not be conducted in an accessory building. Occasional sales shall be permitted of goods crafted on
the premises only.
Expressly permitted uses include, but are not limited to, the following: offices of physicians,
dentists, lawyers, engineers, architects, accountants and other professionals; real estate and
insurance practitioners requiring Connecticut licensure; offices and studios of musicians, artists,
sculptors, and dancers, provided that students receiving instruction, if any, shall not exceed eight
(8) within any common period; day care of children limited to six (6) children within any calendar
day; hair care and cosmetology services; tailoring, dressmaking and similar activities; skilled
crafts and handicrafts, provided that students receiving instruction, if any, shall not exceed eight
(8) within any common period and that the frequency of classes shall be limited to two (2) per
8
week; furniture upholstering and refinishing cabinet making; dog grooming; and breeder kennels
class I.
Uses expressly not permitted include massage and martial arts services and instruction;
restaurants; taverns; tourist homes; nursing or convalescent homes; funeral homes; animal care;
motor vehicle repair; and animal hospitals.
The above subsections enumerating expressly permitted uses and uses expressly not permitted are
not intended to be all-inclusive lists of said permitted and nonpermitted uses.
Notwithstanding compliance with any or all of the above, a “home occupation” shall not involve
or require processes or practices which are, or may become, hazardous, noxious or offensive to
surrounding uses and the neighborhood by reason of generation or emission of odor, dust, smoke,
fumes, noise, vibration, electrical interference, refuse or other effects detectable to the normal
senses in excess of levels normally associated with dwellings, or which involve or require use or
storage of any type or quantity of flammable, toxic or explosive materials or heavy equipment,
vehicles, machinery and building materials not normally found or permitted in dwellings. In the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises.
A home occupation permit shall be applied for on the prescribed form through the office of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. A home occupation permit shall be issued by the ZEO if the use
applied for is one which is a specifically enumerated permitted use as defined in this section. If
the use applied for is not one of those specifically enumerated permitted uses, the ZEO shall deny
the permit and the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The ZBA shall have no
jurisdiction to grant a home occupation permit to an applicant whose intended use is one which is
an expressly prohibited use as defined in this section. In the event that an application for a home
occupation permit is made for a proposed use as defined herein, then the ZBA shall have
jurisdiction to grant a home occupation permit upon a finding that the use applied for is materially
and substantially similar to a use which is an expressly permitted use a defined herein.
If the use for which the home occupation permit is granted lapses for a period of twelve (12)
consecutive months, the home occupation permit shall be deemed to have lapsed and shall be
considered null and void. A new home occupation permit must be issued before the premises can
be used again for any home occupation purpose. A home occupation permit shall be deemed not
to be a covenant running with the land and shall not inure to the benefit of the heirs, successors
and assigns of the holder of a home occupation permit. A home occupation permit shall be valid
only for the applicant and their immediate families.
HOSPITAL. A facility licensed by the State of Connecticut for the treatment and care of patients.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL. A facility licensed by the State of Connecticut for the treatment and care
of animals.
HOTEL. A building which has a common entrance or entrances and contains living and sleeping
accommodations for hire for 10 or more persons.
9
INDOOR EQUESTRIAN RIDING ARENA. (2/01/09) (TA-2008-07) An equestrian riding rink
within an enclosed structure.
INDUSTRY. Any process whereby the nature, size and shape of articles is changed, or where
articles are assembled or packaged in quantity.
JUNKYARD. (Z-2015-0671) (08/01/2015) Any place in or on which old material, glass, paper,
cordage or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which has not been a part, or is not
intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle, is stored or deposited. It includes also any business
and any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, which has
stored or deposited two or more unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in
condition for legal use on the public highways, or used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal,
glass, paper, cordage or other waste or discarded or secondhand materials which has been a part,
or intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in
bulk to two or more motor vehicles. Said terms shall also include any place of business for
storage or deposits of motor vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for
parts or for use of the metal for scrap and where it is intended to burn material which are parts of
motor vehicles or to cut up parts thereof. An Auto Recycling Facility shall be excluded from this
definition of Junkyard.
(3-1-17)(Z2016-1033)
KENNEL, BREEDER CLASS I. Any owner or keeper of a kennel who breeds more than two
litters annually. No more than six (6) dogs over six (6) months of age. No outdoor kennels,
fenced runs or training courses. Dogs shall be kept within the house except for exercise and relief.
KENNEL, BREEDER CLASS II. Special Permit Required (See Section 12.33). An increase over
a Breeder Kennel Class I to allow for more than six (6) dogs over the age of six (6) months (this
includes non-breeders with more than 6 dogs over the age of six months), outdoor kennels, fenced
dog runs, and training courses.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Special Permit Required (See Section 12.33a). Allows for uses
contained in Breeder Kennels Class I and II, boarding and training, dog day care and other similar
uses.
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
LIGHT TRESPASS. Light from a site that shines onto adjacent properties.
LOT. One of more contiguous parcels of land under single ownership or control, designated by its
owner, at the time of filing an application for building permit, as a tract to be used, developed, or
built upon as a unit. It may or may not coincide with the deed description thereof filed for record
or the boundaries of the same as shown on map thereof filed for record or otherwise, and it may be
subsequently subdivided into two or more lots, provided all such lots conform to all regulations of
the district.
LOT CORNER. A lot whose street lot lines have an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
10
LOT FRONTAGE. (Amended 5/01/08, TA-2008-03) The horizontal distance between lot
sidelines measured along a Town or State Right-of-Way. Lot frontage must be capable of
supporting a driveway that enters from a Town or State Right-of-Way, providing access and
parking to the dwelling.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot without frontage on a street except for a right-of-way.
LOT LINE. A boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. The line of a street on which a lot abuts.
LOT LINE, REAR. Any lot line, other than another front lot line on another street, which is the
farthest lot line from the street.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not a front or rear lot line, bounding a lot and extending from the
street toward the rear in a direction approximately perpendicular to the street.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two streets.
LOT WIDTH. The average distance between side lot lines measured along two lines parallel to a
line connecting the end points of the front lot line and drawn through those two points of the
principal building closest to and farthest from the street.
MASSAGE THERAPY. “Massage therapy” means the systematic and scientific manipulation
and treatment of the soft tissues of the body, by use of pressure, friction, stroking, percussion,
kneading, vibration by manual or mechanical means, range of motion and nonspecific stretching.
Massage therapy may include the use of oil, ice, hot and cold packs, tub, shower, steam, dry heat,
or cabinet baths, for the purpose of, but not limited to, maintaining good health and establishing
and maintaining good physical and mental condition. Massage therapy does not encompass
diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, nor any
service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, naturopathy, physical
therapy, or podiatry is required by law. This definition shall be amended in accordance with any
future amendments to Connecticut General Statute 20-206a (d).
MOBILE HOME. A detached dwelling unit designated (1) for long-term occupancy and
containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet and a tub or shower bath and kitchen facilities,
and having both plumbing and electrical connections for attachment to outside systems, (2) to be
transported on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailer or detachable wheels, and (3) to be
placed on rigid supports at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for
occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and connection to
utilities systems.
MOTEL. A building or a group of buildings in connected units designed as individual living and
sleeping quarters with individual entrances, for hire. A motel includes every type of similar
establishment designated as auto court, tourist cabin, etc.
11
NON-BUILDING USE. A principal use of land to which the buildings on the lot, if any, are
accessory, such as a trailer park, junk yard, public parking lot, or an open storage yard for
materials.
NONCONFORMING BULK. See BULK, NONCONFORMING.
NONCONFORMING USE. See USE, NONCONFORMING.
NURSING HOME (Z-2014-0413) (2/11/2014) A facility licensed by the State that meets the
State definition for any of the following: Cronic and Convalescent Nursing Home, Rest Home
with Nursing Supervision. Or Residential Care Home.
OPEN SPACE. Space (a) unoccupied by buildings above the finished grade level, (b) not devoted
to streets, driveways, parking, or loading areas, and (c) devoted to recreation, gardening,
landscaping, conservation, or other like uses. In all calculations of open space, land lying within
ten (10) feet of any structure, street, driveway, parking area, or loading area shall not be
considered open space. In general, the smallest accountable open space shall contain at least ten
thousand (10,000) square feet and shall average not less than seventy-five (75) feet in its least
dimension, although smaller areas may, at the Planning and Zoning Commission’s discretion, be
counted as open space if topography or lot configuration precludes larger open space, or if smaller
areas are especially suitable to serve the needs of residents.
PARKING, OFF STREET. Parking space as required for specific uses which is located off a
public right-of-way.
PHARMACY (11/13/15) (Z-2015-0783). A retail establishment where prescription medication is
dispensed by, or under the direction of a Licensed Pharmacist. No administering of medication is
permitted on the premises with the exception of vaccines.
PREMISES. A lot and all the buildings and uses thereon.
PUBLIC GARAGE. A building used for the storage of more than three registered motor vehicles
owned by persons other than the owner or occupants of the premises or in which accessory repairs
are made upon motor vehicles for profit.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT. A lot used for the storage of motor vehicles which contains space
available to the general public by the hour, day, week, month or year.
RECHARGE AREA, PRIMARY. The area immediately overlying the stratified drift aquifer and
adjacent areas of stratified drift in which groundwater flows directly into the aquifer. The
boundary of the primary recharge area is the contact line between the stratified drift and adjacent
till or bedrock.
RECHARGE AREA, SECONDARY. Till and bedrock areas adjacent to the primary recharge
area which provide direct groundwater inflow to the primary recharge area.
12
RECREATIONAL CAMPGROUND. A parcel of land used for the parking of recreational
vehicles or camper units or the establishment of overnight living quarters, primarily occupied by
family groups engaged in travel, recreation or vacation. Such Recreational Campgrounds shall
meet all applicable building and health code requirements before it is open to the public.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle commonly referred to as a camper, trailer bus, boat
trailer, motor bus used for recreational purposes.
“R” DISTRICT. All residential areas including categories such as: RA-60, RA-40, RA-30, RA-
19.
RESIDENCE. One or more dwelling units for permanent occupancy.
RESIDENCE, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or part thereof containing three or more dwelling
units.
RESIDENCE, SINGLE FAMILY. A building on a lot occupied for residential purposes by one
dwelling unit only.
RESIDENCE, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A single family residence which is separated
from lot lines or other buildings by open space.
RESIDENCE, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A single-family residence having one or more
two party walls on side lot lines.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public right of access to approach or enter property.
SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITY. An establishment having facilities for processing
iron, steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes only. Does not include automobiles
or automobile parts which constitute more than two total cars.
(9/01/07) (TA-2007-04) - (6/01/17) (TA-2017-1069)
SELF SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. A structure or structures or designated parking area for
outside storage of motor vehicles, boats or recreational vehicles, with controlled access, containing
separate, individual private storage spaces of varying sizes, leased or rented, on individual leases
for varying periods of time, serving residential and commercial establishments, for the storage of
goods or possessions specifically excluding hazardous or flammable materials.
SEPTAGE. Sludge produced by domestic wastes that is pumped from septic tanks.
SHOPPING CENTER. Five (5) or more retail stores, service stores, service establishments or
offices, often built as a unit, with a public vehicle parking area shared in common. (Approved
4/9/96).
13
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SIGN. Any structure or part thereof, or any device attached to a building or structure or painted or
represented thereon, which displays or includes letters, words, symbols, trademarks, or any other
graphic representation which is in the nature of an announcement, direction, advertisement or
other device used to attract the attention of the public for commercial purposes or otherwise;
similarly, any natural object, such as a tree, stone, or the earth itself, which is painted or arranged
so as to represent or display any of the aforesaid graphic representations; any building feature,
including roof or other special illumination, special colors or effects, or building or roof lines
which serve to identify the use or occupancy of any building or site through a recognized motif or
symbol. The term “sign” shall include sculptures and similar works of art designed or intended to
attract the attention of the general public to commercial or industrial uses.
SIGN, ADVERTISING. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SIGN, AREA OR FACE. The plane defined by one continuous perimeter of that rectangle,
triangle, or circle having the smallest area which encompasses all the lettering, wording, design, or
symbols together with any background different from the balance of the surface on which it is
located, if such background is designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. Such
perimeter, however, shall not include any structural elements lying outside of the limits of such
sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, BUSINESS. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SIGN, GROUND. Any sign supported by upright structural components, placed or located upon
the ground and not attached to any part of any building
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SIGN, FLASHING. Any sign in which or upon which artificial light is not maintained stationary
and constant in intensity and color at all times; (excluding time or temperature signs as permitted
by these regulations).
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SIGN, MOVING. Any sign or any portion of any sign, which is not fixed or stationary, or which
is capable of any movement whatsoever; excluding barber poles and clocks.
14
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING ON/OR OFF–PREMISES. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-
0854)
SIGN, OVERHANGING. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
SIGN, POLE. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
SIGN, PUBLIC. (ADDED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854) Any sign installed or placed by local, state
or federal government for purposes such as direction, traffic safety, public information, etc.
SIGN, PYLON (ADDED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854) A sign structure exceeding 20 feet in height.
SIGN, ROOF. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SIGN, SKY. Any sign suspended in the air by means of balloon or other lighter-than air-device.
SIGN, TEMPORARY. (AMENDED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854) Any sign which is easily removed
and carried away and displayed for 60 days or less.
SIGN, TRESPASS. (DELETED 04/01/06) (Z-2016-0854)
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SIGN, WALL. Any sign painted, posted, or otherwise affixed to any portion of a vertical surface
or plane that forms the wall of a building.
(12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
SKYGLOW. Rays of light emitted from a property that beam above the horizon, creating a murky
glow in the sky.
SOLID WASTE. Unwanted or discarded materials including solids, liquids or containing gaseous
materials.
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES TRANSFER STATION. A central collection point for
the solid waste and recyclables generated within a municipality or a group of municipalities,
where solid wastes and recyclables received are transferred to a vehicle for removal to another
solid waste or recyclables processing facility. Shall also include any location or structure where
recyclable wastes, such as wood, are reduced in volume by means of pulverizers, compactors,
shredders, or balers. Such a facility may be permitted by the State as a “Volume Reduction
Facility”.
SPECIAL FUNCTION FACILITY (CZ-2005-0004). Special function facility means any indoor
or outdoor facility to be used for banquets, weddings, receptions, or similar functions.
SPECIAL PURPOSE LANDFILL FACILITY means a specially designed facility, including a
double-lined landfill and related improvements, for the disposal of Special Waste, Bulky Waste
15
and Construction and Demolition Debris, and for the separation of recyclable materials. (Effective
date 5/15/05)
SPECIAL WASTE means the following wastes, so long as they are not hazardous waste pursuant
to Section 22a-115 of the Connecticut General Statutes or radioactive material subject to Section
22a-148 of the Connecticut General Statues: (1) scrap tires; (2) asbestos; (3) residue, including
residue from combusted wastes; and (4) other materials that are or may from time to time be
defined, by DEP regulation, interpretation or ruling to be Special Wastes. (Effective date 5/15/05)
STRATIFIED DRIFT. Predominantly sorted sediment deposit by glacial meltwaters consisting of
gravel, sand, silt or clay in layers of similar grain size.
STREET. Any existing state or town highway, or a street shown (a) on a subdivision approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, or (b) on a subdivision duly filed and recorded in the office
of the Town Clerk of the Town of Plainfield prior to September 1971, provided such street shall
have been suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Planning and Zoning Commission after
September, 1971.
STREET, CENTER LINE. A line equidistant from each street line, or if no street line is
established, the center line of the existing pavement, or if the street is unpaved, the center line of
the existing traveled way.
STREET LINE. The right-of-way line of a street.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, including a building which has a permanent
location on the ground or anything attached to something having a permanent location on the
ground but excluding fences, flagpoles or ornamental wells.
SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more parts or lots for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding
development for agricultural purposes, includes resubdivision.
TERTIARY RECHARGE AREA. The upstream drainage area of stream that traverse the primary
recharge area. Rain that falls in this area moves first into a surface water body and then, by
induced filtration into the aquifer. In many cases, included infiltration from the stream may be the
principal source of water for high-capacity wells.
TOURIST HOME. DELETED (Z-2014-0413) (2/11/2014)
USE. The term employed to refer to any purpose for which buildings or other structures or land
may be occupied.
USE, NONCONFORMING. A use of a building or land or both which does not conform to the
applicable Use Regulation of these regulations either on their effective date, or as a result of
subsequent amendments thereof. It may or may not involve any principal building or land use.
16
Any use which is permitted in a district by a valid variance or special permit shall be considered a
conforming use.
(Added 3-22-05) (CZ-2004-09)
UTILITY PLANT. Any facility for the production, generation, treatment or renovation of electric,
telephone, cable television, water or sanitary sewerage, whether publicly or privately owned;
provided, however, that any privately owned utility plant may only be developed pursuant to these
Regulations as an accessory use to a use otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions of these
Regulations.
YARD, REQUIRED. Open and unobstructed ground area of the lot extending inward from a lot
line for the distance specified in the regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, REQUIRED FRONT. A required yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between the two side lot lines.
YARD, REQUIRED REAR. A required yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line
between the two side lot lines.
YARD, REQUIRED SIDE. A required yard extending along a side lot line from the required
front yard (or from the required lot line if there).
17
SECTION 2 – Establishment of District, Zoning Map, District Boundaries and
Scope of Controls
2.1 Establishment of Districts (Amended 5/05)(CZ-2005-05)
The Town of Plainfield is hereby divided into the following districts, the respective symbol for
each type of district being set forth opposite its title:
Symbol Title
RA-60 Residence A-60 District
RA-40 Residence A-40 District
RA-30 Residence A-30 District
RA-19 Residence A-19 District
C-1 Commercial District
C-2 Commercial District on Municipal Sewer
C-3 Design Commercial Development District
C-4 Urban Commercial District
HC Highway Commercial District
I-1 Industrial 1 District
1-2 Industrial 2 District
IP Industrial Park District
Each such district may be designated on the Zoning Map referred to in Section 2.2 and elsewhere
in the text of these regulations by its symbol only.
2.2 Zoning Map
The areas and boundaries of such districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled,
“Zoning Map, Town of Plainfield”, and as specified in Section 2.3. Such map, referred to herein
as the “Zoning Map,” together with everything shown thereon, is hereby made part of these
regulations. An original of the Zoning Map and any amendments thereof shall be maintained on
public display in the office of the Town Clerk.
2.3 Boundaries on Zoning Map
2.31 Along Rights-of-Way.
Where a district boundary is shown following a street or a public right-of-way, or a line
located midway between the main tracts of said railroad, and such boundary shall be
deemed to be changed automatically whenever the center line of such street, or public
right-of-way, is changed or said main railroad tracks are changed, if the new center line is
no further from the old center line than 50 feet at any point.
2.32 Map Dimensions.
Where a dimension is indicated on the Zoning Map such dimension shall control.
However, in the absence of a specific dimension being indicated on the Zoning Map, the
dimension shall be determined by using the map scale.
18
2.33 Physical Markers.
Where a street highway, railroad or other physical monument or marker on the ground by
which a boundary is determined varies from that as shown on the Zoning Map, the on-theground
physical monument or marker shall control.
2.4 Scope Of Controls
After the effective date of these Regulations all new construction or development, and every
change, enlargement, or relocation of use, and every reconstruction or structural alteration of a
building or non-building use, and every change in bulk, shall conform to the use and bulk
regulations of these Regulations. All new buildings, and all newly developed land and nonbuilding
uses, may be used for any purpose permitted or required by the regulations of the
appropriate district. All existing nonconforming uses and nonconforming bulk may continue
subject to the regulations in Section 14.
19
SECTION 3 – Aquifer Protection Overlay District - Amended 12/11/90
3.1 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this regulation is to protect and preserve groundwater quality within stratified drift
aquifers which are existing or potential public drinking water supplies. These groundwater
resources have been shown to be easily contaminated by many land uses and activities. It is
therefore necessary that specific controls over land use be exercised within these areas to protect
groundwater quality.
3.11 Applicability
The Aquifer Protection District is hereby established as an overlay district. All land uses within
the District must conform to this regulation and those of the underlying zoning district.
3.12 Boundary
The Aquifer Protection District consists of the stratified drift aquifer and its primary and
secondary recharge areas. Such District is shown on a map titled “Town of Plainfield, Aquifer
Protection District.” Such map may be amended from time to time, as information becomes
available, in accordance with Section 18 of these Regulations.
3.13 Prohibited Uses
All uses which are permitted in the existing zoning districts by right or by Special Permit are also
permitted in the Aquifer Protection District, except that the following uses are prohibited, except
as provided in Section 3.19 Nonconforming Uses.
a. Any industrial, commercial or other use in which the manufacture, use, storage,
transfer,transport, process or disposal of hazardous materials or waste is a principal
activity.
b. Road salt storage and loading facilities
c. Solid and hazardous waste disposal sites, septage lagoons and treatment facilities for
municipal or industrial wastes
d. Junkyards, salvage yards, truck terminals
e. Automotive sales, service and repair shops
f. Heavy construction equipment rental
g. Engine repair and machine shops
h. Dry cleaners, industrial launderers
i. Furniture strippers
j. Fuel oil dealers
k. Recreational vehicle and boat dealers and repair
l. Chemical, science or research labs
m. Golf courses
n. Resource recovery facilities, solid waste transfer stations and recycling processing
centers
o. Underground storage tanks, underground distribution systems and pipelines for fuels
and other hazardous materials.
p. Above ground storage of fuels and other hazardous materials in quantities greater than
associated with normal use, other than fuel storage for space heating
q. Automobile Recycling Facility (Z-2015-0671) (08/01/2015)
20
3.14 Permitted Uses
The following uses, where permitted in the underlying zoning districts by right or by Special
Permit, are also permitted in the Aquifer Protection District subject to site development plan
review under Section 19 of these Regulations. Such uses are also subject to the additional
requirements and performance standards outlined in Sections 3.15 and 3.16 below.
a. Dog kennels
b. Lumber, hardware and other building materials yards
c. Commercial nurseries
d. Agriculture
e. Radio, television and appliance repair
f. Furniture repair
g. Medical, dental or veterinarian offices, public sewer required
h. Beauty salons, public sewer required
i. Print shops, public sewer required
j. Photo processing labs, public sewer required
k. Car washes, public sewer required
l. Laundromats, public sewer required
m. Funeral parlors and crematories, public sewer required
3.15 Additional requirements
The following written and mapped information shall be required:
a. Description of the proposed use
b. A complete list of the types and volumes of all hazardous materials (including fuels) used,
stored, processed, handled or disposed of, other than those associated with normal household
use
c. Description of the types of wastes generated and method of disposal. This applies to solid
waste, hazardous waste, sewage and non-sewage wastewater discharge facilities
d. Location of private drinking water supply wells within 200 feet of all property lines
e. Location of public drinking water supply wells within 1000 feet of all property lines
f. Hazardous materials loading, storage, handling and process areas, floor drains, process vents,
sewage disposal, waste storage and disposal areas
g. Other additional information as may be required by reviewing agencies regarding the proposed
use, its potential impact to water quality, hydrogeologic informations, monitoring, and
mitigation measures
h. Necessary permits secured from the state Department of Environmental Protection and other
state, regional and local agencies
3.16 Performance Standards
The following performance standards are intended to prevent or minimize potential contamination
of groundwater supplies by prohibiting or controlling waste disposal and other high risk activities;
preventing direct and accidental releases of hazardous materials; and providing for inspection and
emergency response. An alternative standard may be approved if it is clearly demonstrated to
provide equivalent or better protection than that listed.
a. All parking, storage and loading areas shall be paved.
b. The use of drywells or leaching structures for disposal of stormwater runoff is prohibited.
21
c. A maintenance plan shall be provided for all stormwater treatment structures (basins,
separators, etc.).
d. No floor drains shall be connected to drywells, subsurface leaching structures or surface
waters. Floor drains may be connected to public sewers with approval from the DEP and the
Plainfield Water Pollution Control Authority.
e. All areas and facilities where hazardous materials are stored used or handled shall be designed
and constructed to prevent groundwater contamination, including provisions for the control of
inadvertent or accidental spills, leaks or other discharges.
f. Venting systems for evaporation or distillation of hazardous materials shall be designed with a
recovery system to prevent the discharge of contaminated condensate or drippage.
g. Loading or transfer activities shall be conducted on impervious surfaces, roofed and diked to
capture and control any spills or leaks. The dike shall be designed by a professional engineer.
h. Manufacturing, processing or other activities using hazardous materials shall only be
conducted on flooring impervious to the materials being used and shall be within a building or
structure.
i. A plan and procedure shall be submitted that identifies security and inspection measures to
control vandalism or accidents; procedures to contain and clean up spills or leaks of hazardous
materials; procedures for notification of local and state officials; procedure to control
hazardous materials release in case of total structure loss because of fire.
3.17 Site Plan Review Considerations
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall take into account the public health, safety and welfare
in its review of an application. It may stipulate reasonable conditions and safeguards to ensure
that the quality of the groundwater will not be adversely affected. Decisions shall be based upon
the conformity of the proposed use or activity to the criteria established under these regulations as
well as the requirements set forth in the applicable underlying district.
3.18 Application Procedures
The Commission shall approve, modify and approve or deny the site plan within sixty-five (65)
days from the official date of receipt in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
3.19 Nonconforming Uses
All existing uses which do not conform to this regulation upon the effective date shall be
considered a legal nonconforming use. No such use shall be enlarged, expanded or changed
unless in compliance with these Regulations.
22
SECTION 4 – Wetlands
4.1 No building, structure, on-site sewage disposal system, grading, excavations or dumping of fill or
other material shall be allowed with 100 feet of any wetland shown of the Official Wetlands Map
of the Town unless a permit for such activity has been issued by the Plainfield Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Commission.
SECTION 5 – Floodplain Management
5.1 All applications for zoning permits or special exceptions for new development greater than five
acres shall include with such applications, base flood (100-year flood) elevation data for that
portion of the development located within Zone A of the Town’s Flood Hazard Boundary Map.
5.11 On the basis of any available base flood (100-year flood) elevation data, it is required that within
Zone A on the Town’s Flood Hazard Boundary Map, that: all new construction and substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including the basement)
elevated to or above the base flood level and all new construction and substantial improvements of
non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated or floodproofed
to or above the base flood level.
5.12 Prior to issuing a zoning permit for new development within Zone A on the Flood Hazard
Boundary Map, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review plans for such development
and determine that it will be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the floodprone
area, and that: (1) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and (2) adequate
drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazard; (3) new or replacement water supply
systems and/or sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters; and (4) on-site waste disposal systems are located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. (These determinations may be made by the
Commission after referral to the local water and/or sewer authority or the health officer.)
5.13 Applicants for development partially or totally within Zone A on the Town’s Flood Hazard
Boundary Map shall submit with their applications assurances that the flood-carrying capacity of
any watercourse will be maintained within any altered or relocated portion of that watercourse.
5.14 The Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities
and the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (Water Resources Unit), prior to
approving any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and shall submit copies of such notices to
the Federal Insurance Administrator.
23
SECTION 6 - Erosion and Sediment Control Adopted 8/13/85; Effective 9/1/85
6.1 A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted with any application for development
when the disturbed area of such development is cumulatively more than one-half acre.
6.11 A single family dwelling that is not part of a subdivision of land shall be exempt from these soil
erosion and sediment control regulations.
6.12 The Planning and Zoning Commission shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment
control plan, as filed, complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation or deny
certification when the development proposal does not comply with these regulations.
6.2 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
6.21 To be eligible for certification, a soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain
proper provisions to adequately control accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce
the danger from storm water runoff on the proposed site based on the best available
technology. Such principles, methods and practices necessary for certification are found in
the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985) as amended.
Alternative principles, methods and practices may be used with prior approval of the
Commission.
6.22 Said plan shall contain, but not be limited to:
a. A narrative describing:
1. the development
2. the schedule for grading and construction activities including:
a. start and completion dates,
b. sequence of grading and construction activities,
c. sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control
measures,
d. sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
3. the design criteria for proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures and
storm water management facilities.
4. the construction details for proposed soil erosion and sediment and control
measures and storm water management facilities.
5. the installation and/or application procedures for proposed soil erosion and
sediment control measures and storm water management facilities.
6. the operations and maintenance program for proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measures and storm water management facilities.
b. A site plan map at a sufficient scale to show:
1. the location of the proposed development and adjacent properties;
2. the existing and proposed topography including soil types, wetlands, watercourses
and water bodies;
3. the existing structures on the project site, if any;
4. the proposed area alterations including cleared, excepted, filled or graded areas and
proposed structures,utilizing roads, and if applicable, new property lines;
24
5. the location of and design details for all proposed said erosion and sediment control
measures and stormwater management facilities;
6. the sequence of grading and construction activities;
7. the sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control
measures;
8. the sequence for final stabilization of the development site.
c. Any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the applicant or requested
by the Commission or its designated agent.
6.3 Minimum acceptable standards
6.31 Plans for soil erosion and sediment control shall be developed in accordance with these
regulations using the principles as outlined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Connecticut
Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Soil erosion and
sediment control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion and
sedimentation during construction: is stabilized and protected from erosion when
completed: and does not cause off-site erosion and/or sedimentation.
6.32 The minimum standards for individual measures are those in the Connecticut Guidelines
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. The Commission may grant
exceptions when requested by the applicant if technically sound reasons are presented.
The appropriate method from Chapter 9 of the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control (1985), as amended, shall be used in determining peak flow rates and
volumes of runoff unless an alternative method is approved by the Commission.
6.4 Conditions Relating to Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
6.41 Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as extending the time limits for the
approval of any application under Chapters 124, 124A or 126 of the General Statutes.
6.42 Prior to certification, any plan submitted to the municipality may be reviewed by the
Windham County Soil and Water Conservation District which may make
recommendations concerning such plan, provided such review shall be completed within
thirty days of the receipt of such plan.
6.43 The Commission may forward a copy of the development proposal to the wetlands
commission or other review agency or consultant for review and comment.
6.44 Site development shall not begin unless the soil erosion and sediment control plan is
certified and those control measures and facilities in the plan scheduled for installation
prior to site development are installed and functional.
6.45 Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed as
scheduled according to the certified plan.
6.46 All control measures and facilities shall be maintained in effective condition to ensure the
compliance of the certified plan.
25
6.5 Inspection
Inspections shall be made by the Commission or its designated agent during development to
ensure compliance with the certified plan and that control measures and facilities are properly
performed or installed and maintained. The Commission may require the permittee to verify
through progress reports that soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities have been
performed or installed according to the certified plan and are being operated and maintained.
26
SECTION 7 - Residential Districts
7.1 Bulk Table (Modified 12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
The following table of bulk requirements shall be applicable to all lots and uses situated in RA
Districts.
RA-60 RA-40 RA-30 RA-19
Minimum Lot Area (sq ft) 60,000 40,000 30,000 19,000
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 FT 125 FT 125 FT 100 FT
Minimum Front Yard Depth 50 FT 40 FT 40 FT 25 FT
Minimum Side Yard Width 40 FT 30 FT` 30 FT 15 FT
Minimum Rear Yard Depth 40 FT 30 FT 30 FT 20 FT
Maximum Height 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT 30 FT
* * See Section 7.12 for special bulk requirements for mobile homes * *
7.1a Detached Accessory Structures (Amended 2/11/2014)(Z-2014-0412)
For all detached accessory structures such as sheds, garages, pools, etc., where a dwelling
presently exists on the lot, the side and rear yard setbacks shall be as follows:
RA-60: Side yard setback of 15 feet. Rear yard setback of 10 feet.
RA-30: Side yard setback of 10 feet. Rear yard setback of 10 feet.
RA-19: Side yard setback of 5 feet. Rear yard setback of 5 feet.
The front yard setbacks are as shown in the bulk table.
Detached accessory structures (excluding swimming pools) having a footprint larger that
900 square feet or a height exceeding 20 feet shall require a Special Permit.
7.1b As of the official date of this amendment, June 29, 1987, it is the intention of the
Commission to eliminate the RA-19 District as a future development alternative. Bulk
Requirements for the RA-19 district will remain for enforcement use in all pre-existing
RA-19 Districts.
7.11 Minimum Floor Area
In order to assure a dwelling unit which provides for a healthful and comfortable environment and
which will not detract from values of adjacent properties, new dwelling units or dwelling units for
which the value of expansion or renovation equals or exceeds one hundred percent (100%) of the
reproduction value of the building at the time of application for a building permit shall contain, at
a minimum, the gross number of square feet shown in the table. Such gross area shall be
measured by exterior dimensions of the dwelling, except when infeasible due to floors which do
not extend to the full dimensions of the dwelling unit.
Such gross areas shall include all fully enclosed areas, but shall not include garages, carports,
basements, which are unheated or otherwise unsuited for living space; crawl spaces, or attics.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all dwelling unites except mobile homes, motel units,
and dwelling units permitted by special permit.
27
Minimum Gross Floor Areas (in sq ft)
Dwelling with
1 bedroom
Dwelling
with2
bedrooms
Dwelling with 3
bedrooms
Each additional
bedroom
650 770 950 120
Note: The figures in the above table were arrived at by summing the minimum room areas
recommended by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in HUD Manual PG-
50, then adding approximately 70% of these sums, to allow for bathrooms, closets, halls, stairs and
a slight amount of additional living space.
7.12 Mobile Homes
Mobile homes shall be permitted in RA-60 districts, provided the following standards are
satisfied:
a. Minimum Lot Area: 60,000 square feet per mobile home.
b. Setbacks, Separations. A mobile home shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all
streets, roads and property lines and at least 1500 feet from any other mobile home or dwelling
unit, occupied or unoccupied, including dwelling units under construction or approved for
construction.
c. Sewage Disposal. Each mobile home shall either connect to a municipal sewer at the time of
occupancy or shall connect to an on-site sewage disposal system which meets all standards
applicable to on-site sewage disposal systems for single-family dwellings in the Town. If the
mobile home will connect to an on-site disposal system, the owner or occupant shall secure a
written determination by the Northeast District Department of Health of whether the soil is
suitable for absorption of septic tank effluent. Such written report shall be delivered to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer and a zoning permit shall not be issued unless the soil is shown to
have an acceptable capacity to absorb effluent without contamination of surface water or
creation of other health or safety hazard.
d. Water Supply. Each mobile home site shall have an adequate supply of safe drinking water
from either a public water supply system or a private well at the time of occupancy.
e. Pad or Piers. A mobile home shall be underlaid by a concrete pad, poured concrete piers or
treated wood posts adequate to support the weight of the mobile home without movement due
to frost heaving or settling.
f. Skirting, Steps. All sides of the mobile home shall be skirted with corrosion-resistant
materials. Permanent steps with a handrail must be available at entrances.
g. Tiedown. A mobile home shall have tiedowns in accordance with the State Building Code.
h. Fuel Tanks. Fuel oil tanks, if not buried, and bottled gas tanks shall be securely fastened to
prevent accidental tipping.
7.2 Permitted Uses in Residential Districts
The following uses shall be deemed permitted uses in the following residence districts. Those
uses not enumerated herein shall be deemed prohibited in residence districts unless specifically
permitted elsewhere in these regulations.
28
7.21 RA-60 Districts
a. Single family detached dwellings; not more than one dwelling per lot.
b. Agricultural operations and proceedings incidental thereto.
c. The keeping and breeding of animals including, but not limited to cattle, sheep, pigs,
chickens, goats, horses and the rental of horses per Section 7.27. A Special Permit per Section
12.33 and an annual Kennel Permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer is required for
Dog Kennels.
d. Seasonal stands for the display and sale of agricultural products grown on the premises or on
property owned, leased or borrowed by the owner of the stand. The majority of the products
sold must be grown by the owner of the stand. (Amended 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02)
e. Golf courses.
f. Churches and places of worship.
g. Schools, public or private.
h. Cemeteries, hospitals.
i. Mobile homes according to the terms of Section 7.12 of these regulations.
j. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses including home
occupations.
7.21.1 Special Permit Uses (See Section 12):
a. Municipal buildings (Section 12.21)
b. Elderly housing (Section 12.25)
c. Accessory Apartments (Section 12.28)
d. Group Day Care Home, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
e. Child Day Care Center, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
f. Dog Kennels for more than six (6) dogs (Section 12.33).
g. Recreational Campgrounds (Section 12.34)
h. Earth Excavation (Section 12.32)
i. Special Purpose Landfill Facility (Section 12.38)
j. Bed and Breakfast – Special Functions Facility (Section 12.39)
k. Indoor Equestrian Riding Arenas (Section 12.40)
l. Commercial Agricultural Buildings – see section 12.44 (Z-2014-0436) (May 1, 2014)
m. Agri-tourism (See Definition section 1.2 & section 12.45 for Special Permit requirements.)
(Z-2014-0439) (May 1, 2014)
n. Breeder Kennel Class II
(Z2016-1033) (March 1, 2017)
7.21.2 No building, structure, on-site sewage disposal system, grading, excavations or dumping of fill or
other material shall be allowed within 100 feet of any wetland shown of the Official Wetlands
Map of the Town unless a permit for such activity has been issued by the Plainfield Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
7.22 RA-40 Districts
a. Single family detached dwellings; not more than one dwelling per lot.
b. Agricultural operations and proceedings incidental thereto.
c. Stands for the display and sale of agricultural products grown primarily on the premises.
d. Golf courses.
29
e. Churches and places of worship.
f. Schools, public and private.
g. Cemeteries, hospitals.
h. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including
occupations.
7.22.1 Special Permit Uses (See Section 12)
a. Municipal Buildings (Section 12.21)
b. Deleted 5/01/2009 (TA-2009-01)
c. Elderly housing (Section 12.25)
d. Accessory Apartments (Section 12.28)
e. Group Day Care Home, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
f. Child Day Care Center, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
g. Recreational Campgrounds (Section 12.34)
h. Earth Excavation (Section 12.32)
7.22.2 No building, structure, on-site sewage disposal system, grading, excavations or dumping of fill or
other material shall be allowed within 100 feet of any wetland shown of the Official Wetlands
Map of the Town unless a permit for such activity has been issued by the Plainfield Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
7.23 RA-30 Districts - Connection to public sanitary sewer required.
a. Single family detached dwellings.
b. Churches and places of worship.
c. Schools, public and private.
d. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including home
occupations.
e. Dwellings for more than one family, provided there shall be at least 30,000 square feet (3/4
acre) of lot area for each family or unit situated in the building and provided there are no more
than four (4) units in the building.
7.23.1 Special Permit Uses (See Section 12)
a. Garden Apartments (Section 12.2)
b. Municipal Buildings (Section 12.21)
c. Elderly Housing (Section 12.25)
d. Accessory Apartments (Section 12.28)
e. Group Day Care Home, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
f. Child Day Care Center, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
g. Recreational Campgrounds (Section 12.34)
h. Earth Excavation (Section 12.32)
i. Convalescent Homes, public sewer required (Section 12.23) (Added 5/01/2009, TA-2009-01)
7.23.2 No building, structure, grading, excavations or dumping of fill or other material shall be allowed
within 100 feet of any wetland shown on the Official Wetlands Map of the Town unless a permit
for such activity has been issued by the Plainfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission.
30
7.24 RA-19 Districts - Connection to public sanitary sewer required.
a. Single family detached dwellings.
b. Churches and places of worship.
c. Schools, public and private.
d. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses, including home
occupation.
e. Dwelling for more than one family, provided there shall be at least 21,780 square feet (1/2
acre) of lot area for each family or unit situated in the building and provided there are no more
than four (4) units in the building.
7.24.1 Special Permit Uses (See Section 12) (Amended 2/01/09)
a. Garden Apartments (Section 12.2)
b. Municipal Buildings (Section 12.21)
c. Convalescent Homes (Section 12.23)
d. Elderly Housing (Section 12.25)
e. Accessory Apartments (Section 12.28)
f. Group Day Care Home, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
g. Child Day Care Center, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
h. Earth Excavation (Section 12.32)
i. Conversion of former boarding houses into apartments (Section 12.42)
7.24.2 No building, structure, grading, excavations or dumping of fill or other material shall be allowed
within 100 feet of any wetland shown on the Official Wetlands Map of the Town unless a permit
for such activity has been issued by the Plainfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission.
7.25 Interior Lots (9/01/07) (TA-2007-04) (Amended 11/01/11, TA-2011-02)
Interior lots shall be permitted in RA-30, RA-40, and RA-60 zoning districts. Area requirements
for interior lots shall be 60,000 s.f. minimum for RA-30 zones, 80,000 s.f. minimum for RA-40
zones and 120,000 s.f. minimum for RA-60 zones. Interior lots shall be served by an unobstructed
40’ minimum width access strip leading to a public highway and shall be adequate to
accommodate fire apparatus and/or other emergency equipment. The access strip shall serve a
maximum of two (2) lots and shall be owned by one of the lots it serves. The access strip shall not
be included in the minimum area requirements for any lot and shall not be located any closer than
300 feet from any similar access strip on the land being divided. This 300 ft. restriction shall not
apply to access strips across any streets or roads or access strips on adjacent properties under
separate ownership at the time of adoption of these regulations and continuously thereafter.
7.26 Reduced Frontage on Cul-de-sacs
The frontage requirement may be reduced by 50% on lots fronting on the circular turn-around
(cul-de-sac) at the end of a dead-end street, provided such lots have a minimum width at the
building line equal to or greater than the frontage required for that zoning district and provided to
lot size is at least twice the lot size required for that zoning district.
31
7.27 Keeping of Animals in an RA-60 District
a. The number of animals shall not exceed those established in this section of the regulations.
b. Number of Animals per Acre
The minimum lot size for keeping animals is 1.38 acres (60,000 square feet), which may
include a dwelling. The area of land required for keeping animals will be referred to as
“dedicated land”. Dedicated land is land exclusive of wetlands, residential structures and uses,
and slopes of greater than 25%. Dedicated land is the area of land that the animals will be
allowed to roam. Properties consisting of 7 or more acres of dedicated land will be exempt
from the requirements of this section.
No more than two (2) animal units shall be kept on each acre of dedicated land owned, leased
or borrowed.
The number and type of animal constituting an animal unit as well as the number of animals
permitted on an area of land is described in the following table. For animals not listed in the
table, the Zoning officer will base the animal unit on the closest animal listed in the table:
Type of Animal Number of Animals
Per Animal Unit
No. of Animals
Permitted per Acre
of Dedicated Land
Horse, pony, mule, donkey,
and animals of similar size.
1 2
Dairy cow 1 2
Beef cow 1 2
Sheep 5 10
Goats 5 10
Pigs 2 mature pigs plus 1 litter
(3 months or less)
4 plus
2 litters
Rabbits 25 50
Chickens 32 64
Ducks 16 32
Geese, turkeys 8 16
Combinations of different animals and fowl are permitted provided total permitted animal
units are not exceeded for available acreage. Example – Five sheep and 32 chickens would be
permitted on one acre.
Space Standards:
Shelter – each animal shall have free access to shelter, which will provide shade and protection
from wind, rain and snow.
A minimum of 100 sq. ft. of interior floor space shall be provided for each animal unit.
32
c. Fencing
The owner of any animal and the owner of the property on which an animal is kept shall
have the responsibility of maintaining a fence suitable to contain every animal on the
premises. Barbed wire fencing is not permitted.
d. Indoor Equestrian Riding Arenas
Properties having equestrian stables equipped with year-round indoor riding arenas do not
have to meet the dedicated land requirements stated above. Indoor riding arenas are
permitted by Special Permit. See Section 12.40
33
SECTION 8 -Commercial Districts
8.1 Bulk Table (C-5 abolished 6-7-06) (TA-2006-06)
(C-1 & C-2 Requirements Modified 12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
The following table of bulk requirements shall be applicable to all lots and uses situated in C-1
and C-2.
C-1 C-2
Minimum Lot Area (sq ft) 30,000 SF 20,000 SF
Minimum Lot Frontage 150 FT* 100 FT*
Minimum Front Yard Depth 30 FT 30 FT
Minimum Side Yard Width 25 FT 25 FT
Minimum Rear Yard Depth 25 FT 25 FT
Maximum Height 30 FT 30 FT
*Interior lots shall be served by an unobstructed 40’ minimum width access strip or unobstructed
R.O.W. leading to a public highway and shall be adequate to accommodate fire apparatus and/or
other emergency equipment. The access strip shall serve a maximum of two (2) lots and shall be
owned by one of the lots it serves. The acess strip shall not be included in the minimum area
requirements for any lot. (Amended 4/01/2010, TA-2010-02) (Amended 12/14/10, TA-2010-05)
8.1a C-2 Bulk requirements shall apply only in Commercial Districts served by municipal sewerage.
Uses which opt for the C-2 bulk requirements shall connect to municipal sewerage.
8.11 Compliance (Amended 5/01/2008, TA-2008-02)
Whenever a structure is proposed for construction in any commercial district, a site development
plan as defined in Section 19 of these regulations, shall be submitted to the Planning & Zoning
Commission and said Commission shall act within the meanings of these regulations to insure that
the proposed development is in compliance with all regulations governing it. The approved site
development plan shall be signed by the Commission Chairman and recorded in the Town Clerk’s
office prior to issuance of zoning or building permits.
8.12 Buffer screening of commercial districts. (Added 8/01/2010)
Where any lot or part thereof in a commercial district adjoins a residential district, a landscaped
buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet wide shall extend the length of such district boundaries
seeded to grass and planted to trees and shrubs over six (6) feet in height and capable at all times
of the year of satisfactorily obscuring the sight, sound and illumination of nonresidential uses from
surrounding or adjacent residential uses as will safeguard the residential character of the adjoining
properties. In lieu of trees and shrubs, the Commission may approve an ornamental or other fence.
Said Commission may waive the requirements for all or part of such landscape strip or fence
where topography, permanent natural features, public lands or lack of industrial development on
adjacent properties accomplishes the purpose of separation and screening of a commercial district
from residential districts. Failure to maintain such a strip, where required, shall constitute a
violation of the provisions of these regulations.
34
8.13 Use of land for access and parking (Added 8/01/2010)
The use of land for access to or for off-street parking in connection with and adjacent to a
Commercial and/or Industrial use shall be considered to be accessory to and part of such use
except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit access across a commercial district to a
use lying in an industrial district.
8.2 Permitted uses in commercial districts
The following uses shall be deemed permitted uses in commercial districts C-1 and C-2. Those
uses not enumerated herein shall be deemed prohibited in commercial districts unless specifically
permitted elsewhere in these regulations.
a. Boarding or rooming houses; tourist homes. DELETED (Z-2014-0413) (2/11/2014)
b. Offices.
c. Retail, dry goods, variety, food, hardware, stationery, liquor, tobacco, newsstands, retail dry
cleaning & laundry facilities, shoe repair stores and pharmacies.
d. Post offices.
e. Banks.
f. Clothing Stores.
g. Home appliance stores.
h. Jewelry stores.
i. Beauty parlors and barbershops.
j. (Deleted 9/01/07 TA-2007-04)
k. Photographic studios.
l. Restaurants and taverns.
m. Bookstores.
n. Print Shops.
o. Hotels and motels.
p. Parking lots.
q. New and used car lots.
r. Gasoline service stations.
s. Theaters, except drive-in.
t. Animal hospitals
u. Funeral parlors.
v. Self Service Storage Facility subject to the following conditions (9/01/07) (TA-2007-04):
1. No commercial, wholesale or retail sales or miscellaneous garage sales,
2. No outside storage of goods or materials; storage of motor vehicles, boats or recreational
vehicles shall be allowed in a designated location provided said motor vehicle, boat or
recreational vehicle does not obstruct access to or within the facility. Maintenance of said
vehicles shall not be allowed on the premises. Said motor vehicles, boats or recreational
vehicles shall be operable and registered in the State of Connecticut at all times during
storage.
3. No operations of power tools, spray painting equipment, refrigerators, or similar
equipment or appliances,
4. No use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise fumes or vibrations,
5. No service, sales, repairs or fabrications of motor vehicles, trailers or other similar
equipment, appliances or machinery,
35
6. No storage of hazardous materials or flammable chemicals,
7. If a travel aisle between storage units is provided, the aisle must be a minimum of 24 feet
in width,
8. The facility must be completely enclosed by a 6 (six) foot (minimum) high fence of
material to be determined at the sole discretion of the Commission. Additionally the site
must appropriately landscaped to effectively screen the activity from neighboring uses.
9. Access to the facility is limited to normal business hours, as determined by the
Commission.
w. Massage parlors. The operation is expressly prohibited of any establishment as a massage
salon, bath parlor, or any similar type business, where any physical contact with the recipient
of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. This regulation shall not apply to
a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the State of
Connecticut, or to a licensed nurse acting under the direct prescription and direction of any
such physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath. Also this regulation shall not apply to
barber shops or beauty parlors in which massage is given to the scalp, the face, the neck or the
shoulders. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this regulation shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not more than one hundred dollars, and each day’s operation shall
constitute a separate offense.
x. Fitness and Exercise Facilities. (approved October 8, 1985 effective October 27, 1985).
y. Car wash, public sewer required. (Approved 5/8/90)
z. Massage therapy as defined in Section 1.2 of these regulations, subject to the massage
therapist presenting credentials which are satisfactory to the Commission at a regular meeting
of the Planning and Zoning Commission. In addition, the massage therapist shall present to
the Commission an affidavit sworn to by the applicant under oath stating that the applicant has
not in the past and will not in the future operate a massage parlor. Upon presentation of the
applicant’s credentials and affidavit and if the Commission find the applicant’s credentials to
be satisfactory the Commission shall issue to the applicant a zoning permit. Any
misrepresentations by the applicant in the affidavit or subsequent operation of a massage
parlor shall result in immediate revocation of said zoning permit.
aa. Any other commercial uses (except those for which a Special Permit is required) which are
proven by the applicant to be substantially similar in nature and impact to uses listed above
and approved by a majority vote of the Commission. (Approved 1/11/94 by P & Z)
bb. Clothing Donation Bins – (Amended 4/01/16) (Z-2016-0849) See Section 15.8 General
Requirements.
cc. Brewery I (Z-2017-1126) (07/01/17)
1. Accessory Uses: Food truck exclusively to provide on-site food for tasting events.
Maximum of two (2) food trucks on site at any time. Food trucks are not permitted to be on
site or to serve food outside of tasting hours.
dd. Brewpub (Z-2017-1126) (07/01/17)
1. Accessory Uses: Food truck exclusively to provide on-site food for tasting events.
Maximum of two (2) food trucks on site at any time. Food trucks are not permitted to be on
site or to serve food outside of tasting hours.
ee. Brewpub/Restaurant (Z-2017-1126) (07/01/17)
36
8.21 Special Permit Uses (See Section 12):
a. Arcades. Arcades may, by special permit only be allowed in any commercial zone. Such use
shall be subject to the applicable bulk and parking requirements of the zone in which it is
located, and to the pertinent sections of Section 12 of these Regulations regarding special
permit uses. (CZ-2006-04)(5-9-06)
b. Shopping Centers. See Section 12.22 and all Commercial buildings having a footprint of
10,000 square feet or greater, or a gross floor area of 18,000 square feet or greater, along with
all property and uses associated with the building.
c. Group Day Care home, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
d. Child Day Care Center, public sewer required (Section 1.2)
e. (Deleted 9/01/07 TA-2007-04):
f. Earth Excavation (Section 12.32)
g. Convalescent Homes, public sewer required (Section 12.23) (Added 5/01/2009, TA-2009-01)
h. Flea Markets (Section 12.29)
i. Boarding Houses ADDED (Z-2014-0413) (2/11/2014)
8.3 C-3 Design Commercial Development Zone (Deleted 6-01-2009, TA-2009-02)
8.4 C-4 Urban Commercial District (Deleted 6-01-2009, TA-2009-02)
8.5 C-5 Resort / Recreational Development District (Deleted 6-01-2009, TA-2009-02)
8.6 Wetlands
No building, structure, on-site sewage disposal system, grading, excavations or dumping of fill or
other material shall be allowed within 100 feet of any wetland shown on the Official Wetlands
Map of the Town unless a permit for such activity has been issued by the Plainfield Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Commission.
8.7 Clean-Up Services
All commercial facilities selling food items for consumption outside the immediate building must
provide clean-up service daily for the lot plus any adjacent area which are obviously affected by
litter from the business.
8.8 Highway Commercial District (Created 5-11-04)(Amended 2-14-06)
This Zoning District has been created for areas in the vicinity of the Route I-395 exits. This
Zoning District may be applied to properties lying within 1200 feet of the intersection of an I-395
exit ramp and an approved Town or State Highway.
8.81 Bulk Table Requirements
The bulk table requirements for the HC District will correspond with the requirements for
C-1 and C-2 districts depending on if the property is serviced by sanitary sewer, with the
exception of maximum height. The maximum building height in the HC District is 50 FT.
37
8.82 Permitted Uses in the Highway Commercial District.
The following uses shall be deemed permitted uses in the Highway Commercial District.
Those uses not enumerated shall be deemed prohibited unless specifically permitted
elsewhere in C-1 and C-2 zones in these regulations.
a. All uses permitted in the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts.
38
SECTION 9 - Industrial Districts
9.1 Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this Section is to provide and utilize Industrial Zones for a full range of
manufacturing, industrial, production and supporting facilities in Town while protecting the
Town’s Aquifers and water supplies.
9.2 Compliance (Amended 5/01/2008, TA-2008-02)
Whenever a structure is proposed for construction in any industrial district, a site development
plan as defined in Section 19 of these regulations, shall be submitted to the Planning & Zoning
Commission and said Commission shall act within the meanings of these regulations to insure that
the proposed development is in compliance with all regulations governing it. The approved site
development plan shall be signed by the Commission Chairman and recorded in the Town Clerk’s
office prior to issuance of zoning or building permits.
9.3 General Requirements (Amended 4/01/2010, TA-2010-01)
The following general requirements shall be applicable to all lots and uses in the Industrial 1 and 2
Districts.
I-1 Industrial I-2 Industrial
9.31 Bulk Table
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 60,000 40,000
Minimum Lot Frontage 200 ft or 40 ft 200 ft or 40 ft
unobstructed unobstructed
R.O.W. R.O.W.
Minimum Front Yard Depth 60 feet 50’
Minimum Side Yard Width 50 feet 50’
Minimum Rear Yard Depth 50 feet 50’
Maximum Height 50 feet 60’
Maximum Building Coverage 50 percent 65%
a. Additional Requirements for I-2 Industrial Zone
1. Lot Frontage must be along a State Highway, (Route 12, Route 14, Route 14A or
Interstate 395) or along a town road built to the town’s engineering specifications,
with direct access to a State Highway.
2. Uses in the I-2 Industrial Zoning District must be connected to the municipal
wastewater collection system.
b. Interior lots shall be served by an unobstructed 40’ minimum access strip or
unobstructed R.O.W. leading to a public highway and shall be adequate to
accommodate fire apparatus and/or other emergency equipment. The access strip shall
serve a maximum of two (2) lots and shall be owned by one of the lots it serves. The
acess strip shall not be included in the minimum area requirements for any lot.
(Amended 4/01/2010, TA-2010-02) (Amended 12/14/10, TA-2010-05)
9.32 More than one user per lot/Multi-tenant Facilities
These regulations do not prohibit the establishment or conversion of facilities to
accommodate more than one compatible and permitted user or industry per parcel.
However, when more than one user or industry is proposed per parcel, additional
39
information regarding common and specific facilities and obligations shall be submitted to
the Commission for approval. Such information shall include arrangements for shared or
separate utility, access maintenance and repairs, parking, circulation, loading and
unloading, signage, etc.
9.33 Requirements for change of use
(a) The changing of users shall not require a new site development plan for permitted uses
when the property had a previously approved site development plan and the new use
requires no more parking space or increased building footprint or volume.
(b) When a use has to be changed from an approved special permit use to another special
permit use, the Commission shall determine if the new use needs to have a new special
permit based on the relative intensity of the two uses. The Commission can only waive
the requirement for a new special permit when the applicant proves that the new use is
no more incompatible than the original use for which the special permit was granted.
(c) Industrial facilities which existed prior to the adoption of the Zoning Regulations and
are in the Industrial District can change to any permitted use in the Industrial District
without submitting a site development plan providing there are no proposed additions
to the footprint and volume of the building and further that the parking or loading
requirements do not increase.
(d) Industrial facilities which existed prior to the adoption of the Zoning Regulations and
are in the Industrial District shall not be changed from a permitted or special permit use
to a new special permit use without an approved special permit from the Commission.
9.34 Permitted uses in the I-1 Industrial District
The following uses are permitted except as prohibited by Section 3, subject to site
development plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and compliance with
Federal and State Regulations.
a. Agricultural Operations.
b. Scientific, Engineering and Medical Research Laboratories.
c. Business and professional offices necessary for sales, marketing, design and
development of products manufactured, assembled or processed on site.
d. Computer hardware and software design, manufacturing and assembling.
e. The manufacture of solar power systems and parts.
f. The manufacture and assembly of motor vehicles and parts.
g. The manufacture, processing, warehousing assembling, or packaging of cosmetics,
toiletries, pottery and ceramic products, furniture and fixtures, clothing and textiles,
electronic apparatus, woodworking, optical equipment, glass, hardware, tools and dies,
toys, novelties, stone products, sporting goods, musical instruments, signs and similar
industries, metal fabrication, the manufacturing and assembling of light and heavy
machinery and prefabricated buildings and their components.
h. Wholesale dry cleaning, rug cleaning and laundry plants.
i. Wholesale businesses, and building material storage and sale, but excluding storage of
coal or coke.
j. Radio or television studios including antenna.
40
k. Stone polishing, engraving, cutting or carving.
l. Warehousing and Distribution. (Added 5-9-00, CZ-2000-02)
Warehousing and distribution of any goods or products which are allowed to be
manufactured, produced, stored or sold in the commercial and industrial districts in the
Town of Plainfield.
m. Commercial Agricultural Buildings (Z-2014-0436) (May 1, 2014) – no agricultural
operations allowed outside of building.
n. Brewery II (Z-2017-1126) (07/01/17)
9.35 Permitted Uses in the I-2 Industrial District
a. Scientific, Engineering and Research Laboratories
b. Business and professional offices
c. Computer Hardware and Software design, manufacturing and assembling
d. Warehousing and Distribution
e. Manufacturing, with processes that do not conflict with the Aquifer Protection Overlay
District Regulations.
f. Self Service Storage Facility subject to the following conditions:
(TA-2007-05)(11/01/07)
1. No commercial, wholesale or retail sales or miscellaneous garage sales,
2. No outside storage,
3. No operations of power tools, spray painting equipment, refrigerators, or similar
equipment or appliances,
4. No use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes or
vibrations,
5. No service, sales, repairs or fabrications of motor vehicles, trailers or similar
equipment, appliances or machinery,
6. No storage of hazardous materials or flammable chemicals,
7. If a travel aisle between storage units is provided, the aisle must be a minimum of
24 feet in width,
8. The facility must be completely enclosed by a 6 (six) foot (minimum) high fence of
material to be determined at the sole discretion of the Commission. Additionally
the site must be appropriately landscaped to effectively screen the activity from
neighboring uses.
9. Access to the facility is limited to normal business hours, as determined by the
Commission.
g. Commercial Agricultural Buildings (Z-2014-0436) (May 1, 2014) – no agricultural
operations allowed outside of building.
h. Brewery II (Z-2017-1126) (07/01/17)
9.4 Special Permit Uses
9.41 Special Permit Uses in the I-1 Industrial District
The following uses (except as prohibited by Section 3) may be allowed subject to the
approval of a Special Permit Application by the Commission and to the approval of State
and Federal Permits.
41
a. The manufacturing of construction of building products from earth, rock, ore and
minerals.
b. The manufacture of products from recycled materials. Manufacturing shall be the
primary operation; retrieval, separating and transporting shall be secondary operations
to the manufacturing process.
c. Energy production facilities including facilities which produce energy from materials
sorted and retrieved elsewhere.
d. The manufacturing and processing food, candy and pharmaceuticals.
e. Bus, truck and/or freight terminals. (Amended to add 1. Effective 8-1-19)
1. As an accessory use to a truck terminal that rents or leases trucks and maintains
their fleet on premises, commercial motor vehicle repair of commercial/industrial
trucks, excluding auto body repair, may be allowed by special permit exclusively
for customers that have a current truck rental or lease agreement with that terminal.
f. Facilities to rehabilitate for resale durable and other goods; such as stoves, washers,
dryers, computers, etc.
g. Special revenue facilities (See Section 12.24)
h. Group Day Care Home, public sewer required (Section 1.2).
i. Child Day Care Center, public sewer required (Section 1.2) to satisfy the needs of
employees in nearby industry.
j. Oil Dealers and the aboveground bulk storage of oil including new, additional or
replacement tanks subject to the following requirements: (Amended 2/13/91)
1. In addition to the criteria set forth in Section 12.11, the Commission shall consider
the following:
a. the existing use of the parcel for oil storage giving consideration to the
appropriateness of expanding or upgrading an existing facility; or
b. the appropriateness of allowing the construction of a new facility giving
consideration to the present use, lot size and neighborhood.
2. Prior to submission of a Special Permit application, the applicant shall submit the
plan to the following agencies for their review and approval:
a. Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to its regulations
governing facilities used for receiving, storing, transferring or sale of oil and
petroleum liquids in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes Section 22a-
449. (b); and
b. The Plainfield Fire Marshal for determination of the plan’s compliance with
NFPA 30, “Flammable and Combustible Liquids.”
3. Such uses shall conform to the bulk requirements outlined in Section 9.21 as well
as the setback requirements set forth in NFPA 30. The more restrictive setback
requirements shall apply.
k. Gas dealers and the aboveground storage of bottled gas subject to the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection, Fire Marshal approvals, and compliance with
NFPA 58.
l. Earth Excavation, processing and removal (Section 12.32).
m. Solid Waste and Recyclables Transfer Station.
n. Film Studio
o. Auto Recycling Facility (Z-2015-0671) (08/01/2015)
p. Commercial Kennel (See Section 12.33a) (Z2016-1033) (March 1, 2017)
42
9.42 Special Permit Uses in the I-2 District
a. Energy Production facilities
b. Special revenue facilities
c. Group day care home, public sewer required
d. Child day care home, public sewer required
e. Film Studio
f. Auto Recycling Facility (Z-2015-0671) (08/01/2015)
g. Auto Repair, Service and Sales.
9.5 Buffer Zone
A buffer zone at least 25 feet (25’) wide shall be required between the Industrial District and
Residential or Commercial Districts. This buffer zone shall be maintained on a strip with a
planting of at least two staggered rows of evergreen trees, not less than five feet in height, on 20
foot centers, and at least 1 row of evergreen shrubs on 6’ centers, with minimum height of 3’, on
the outside edge of the buffer zone. Non-evergreen plantings may be included to supplement
evergreen planting, but not to take its place. Walls, ornamental fences, earthen berms or other
architectural materials may be substituted for plantings or used in combination with plantings
providing the Commission is satisfied that any substitutions for evergreen plantings are necessary
and are at least equal to them as a buffer, or that it is impractical to provide a 25 foot evergreen
buffer.
9.6 Front Landscaped Area
A front landscaped strip at least ten feet (10’) wide inside the property and adjacent to the front lot
line shall be covered with grass, shrub, or flowers. The purpose of this strip is to enhance the
appearance of the lot while providing adequate sight distances.
9.7 Wetlands
No building, structure, on-site sewage disposal system, grading, excavations or dumping of fill or
other material shall be allowed within 100 ft of any wetland shown on the Official Wetlands Map
of the Town unless a permit for such activity has been issued by the Plainfield Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Commission.
9.8 Use of land for access and parking (Added 8/01/2010)
The use of land for access to or for off-street parking in connection with and adjacent to a
Commercial and/or Industrial use shall be considered to be accessory to and part of such use
except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit access across a commercial district to a
use lying in an industrial district.
43
SECTION 10 - Industrial Park District (IP)
10.1 General Requirements
The following general requirements shall be applicable to all lots and uses in an IP District.
(Amended 9-11-2001)(CZ-2001-02)
10.1.1 Bulk Table.
Minimum Lot Area 80,000 sq ft
Minimum Lot Frontage 200 feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet (includes a
(building setback) required 25 ft wide
landscaped strip)
Minimum Side Yard Setback 30 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 35 feet
(may include buffer strip)
Maximum Height 50 feet
Maximum Site Coverage 50 percent
Minimum Separation from
Dwelling Units 100 feet
10.1.2 Reduced Frontage on Cul-de-sacs. (Approved March 12, 1991)
The frontage requirement may be reduced by the applicant to 100 feet on lots fronting on
the circular turn-around (cul-de-sac) at the end of a dead-end street, provided such lots
have a minimum width at the building line equal to or greater than the frontage required for
the Industrial Park (IP) District.
10.1.3 Buffer Strip.
Where any proposed industrial site adjoins a commercial or residential district, a buffer
strip at least 25 feet in width and containing planted screening material shall b provided.
Hardy, indigenious plant material shall be used where such a screen is required, at least
30% of which shall be evergreen and at least 60% of which shall be a minimum of 6 feet in
height. If at all possible, existing vegetation on-site may serve as the required buffer.
Spacing of such planted material shall be sufficient to serve the intended buffering
purpose. Permanent structures, such as wooden fences, stone walls, and the like may be
approved in lieu of part or all of the required planting where in the opinion of the Planning
and Zoning Commission, the intended buffering purpose is served by such a substitute.
Buffer strips will be considered on a lot-by-lot basis, and will be a part of the site plan
review. The costs of planting/installing the required buffer strip be absorbed by the lot
purchaser.
10.1.4 Parking and loading space standards
44
a. One parking space shall be provided for each one and one-half employees during the
largest daily work shift period.
b. All employee parking spaces shall have a minimum width of 9 feet and a minimum
length of 18 feet. No parking space shall be located less than 5 feet from the wall of
any building to allow for pedestrian walkways and/or landscaping.
c. Industrial uses requiring loading facilities must maintain at least one paved off-street
loading space of not less than 15 feet in width and 40 feet in length. There must be at
least a 14 foot vertical clearance. There shall be one such loading space for every
40,000 square feet of floor area or portion thereof. No loading space is to be located
within 20 feet of the property lines and/or street lines.
d. All parking spaces are to be surfaces with liquid asphalt, asphaltic concrete or portland
cement concrete. All spaces are to be defined with lines. Handicapped parking is to be
provided. Parking areas are to be drained properly and to be connected to the Industrial
Park drainage system.
10.1.5 Paved Access.
All lots within the Industrial Park (IP) District are to have driveways constructed according
to the following minimum standards:
a. A Minimum of 8 inches compacted, rolled gravel subbase and 4 inches processed
gravel subbase.
b. The driveway surface shall be constructed of 1.5 inches, compacted, premixed
bituminous base and 1.5 inches, compacted bituminous surface course.
10.2 Permitted uses in the Industrial Park District (Amended 12/11/90)
The uses outlined below are permitted in the Industrial Park District, subject to site development
plan review as outlined in Section 19 of these Regulations. All applications are further subject to
approval by the Plainfield Economic Development Commission prior to approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. The Commission may hold a public hearing on any application if it
feels it is in the public interest to do so.
a. Manufacturing, processing and assembling of goods and raw materials.
b. Business and professional offices when determined that such operations are directly involved
in adding value to a product or service and/or when such operation demonstrates a strong
performance in the exporting of goods or services. Office operations that directly serve the
general public are prohibited.
c. Research laboratories.
d. Light industrial fabrication.
e. Storage and distribution of raw materials and finished goods for manufacturing purposes.
Further, no more than 20% of the total number of lots available for sale shall be used
exclusively for distribution, storage, or warehousing operations.
f. Other uses as permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the
Plainfield Economic Development Commission.
10.3 Special Permit Uses in the Industrial Park District (Amended 12/11/90)
Please refer to Section 12 for Special Permit Application requirements and procedures.
a. Group day care home.
b. Child day care center.
45
(Added 5-10-05) (CZ-2005-0001)
c. Motorcycle On-Road Training Facility
10.4 Additional Requirements/Restrictions (Amended 12/11/90)
In addition to the requirements listed in Section 9.4 of these Regulations the following
requirements or restrictions apply to development in the industrial Park District:
a. The location of the individual lot within the larger industrial park layout are to be shown on
the plan.
b. Property lines within 200 feet of the overall industrial park site are to be shown on the plan.
c. On-site pedestrian walkways, loading areas, light and utility poles are to be shown on the plan.
d. Location of buffer strips and screening showing the types and approximate sizes of proposed
plantings. Buffer strips will be reviewed on a parcel by parcel basis. On those lots adjoining
watercourses, the required fifty (50) foot buffer on either side of the watercourse is to be
shown and a note of its maintenance is to be included on the plan.
e. Dumpster locations are to be shown and properly screened with wooden fencing.
f. Landscaping plans are required.
g. All utilities must be underground.
h. There is to be no outside storage of tractor trailers.
i. Other requirements as specified by the Plainfield Economic Development Commission and/or
Planning and Zoning Commission.
46
SECTION 11 - Planned Development District (P.D.D.)
(Effective Date 11/23/05) (CZ-2005-02) (Amended 6/01/07 – TA-2007-03)
11.1 Purpose: Planned Development Districts (P.D.D.) may be established by the Commission within
any existing Industrial or Commercially Zoned parcel of property. The Planned Development
District may also include any other properties when, upon application, the Commission determines
the subject property and proposed use would not adversely affect the surrounding area. The
provisions of this Section are designed to permit modification of the strict application of the
standards and provisions of these Regulations to accomplish the purposes set forth below. A
Planned Development District may be established by the Commission when found necessary and
appropriate for the following purposes:
11.1.1 To permit tracts of land to be developed, redeveloped and improved as harmonious design
unit of stable character, consistent with the character of the Town and the long range improvement
of the neighborhood and consistent with the comprehensive plan of development adopted by the
Commission when such tracts are of sufficient size to accommodate such design units and when
another zoning district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes.
11.1.2 To permit the use of land, buildings and other structures for purposes that would be
beneficial to and consistent with the character of the Town and the long range improvement of the
neighborhood and consistent with the comprehensive plan of development adopted by the
Commission when such uses are located on tracts of sufficient size to accommodate harmonious
design of buildings, structures and facilities in connection with the use and when another zoning
district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes.
11.1.3 Permitted Uses: permitted uses shall be limited to those uses currently allowed in existing
commercial, industrial & residential zones. In no case shall residential uses be allowed as a
principle use. Permitted uses are subject to review and approval by the Commission and further
subject to the requirements of this section.
11.2 Size: The tract of land for which application is made for the establishment of a Planned
Development District must contain an area of not less than 80,000 square feet.
11.3 Building Height: Buildings and other structures shall not exceed a height of 60 in sufficient detail
to show the existing conditions and improvements proposed to be erected on the site, the open
spaces, to be provided, the nature and location of the proposed use or uses, the relationship of the
proposed development to surrounding properties and other pertinent information. Six (6) blue line
or black line prints shall be submitted. Plans where applicable feet, except that the Commission
may permit a greater height if (i) such building or other structure shall be located within an area
which is primarily devoted to or zoned for industrial and commercial development, (ii) such
greater height shall result in the preservation of more open space on the tract than would otherwise
47
be available, and (iii) topography of the tract on which such building or structure is located, the
location thereof, on such tract, and nature thereof are appropriate to accommodate such greater
height.
11.4 Informal Consideration: The Commission recommends that, prior to the submission of a formal
application for approval of a Planned Development District, the applicant review with the
Commission and its staff in a preliminary and informal manner any proposal for a Planned
Development District. The Commission recommends that the preliminary plans meet the
requirements for a Basic Development Plan under Paragraph 11.5.2 and that four (4) copies be
submitted. The Commission or its staff may request that the applicant submit such additional
information as may lead to a rendering of a non-binding opinion by the Commission.
11.5 Petition: A petition for the establishment of a Planned Development District shall be submitted to
the Commission in writing, shall be signed by the owner or owners of all parcels within the
proposed District and shall be accompanied by the following:
11.5.1 Statement: A written statement specifying in detail the particular provisions of these
Regulations which are proposed to be modified and the special or additional provisions which are
proposed to be applicable to the use of land, buildings and other structures, the location and bulk
of buildings and other structures and the area, shape, and frontage of lots within the District: ten
(10) copies shall be submitted.
11.5.2 Basic Development Plans: A Basic Development Plan for the proposed development,
including property maps, site plans, architectural plans and other drawings as relevant shall be
prepared and certified by an architect, professional civil engineer and/or licensed land surveyor
licensed to practice in the State of Connecticut and shall include the following information:
a. Location and size of property, including a boundary map with an accuracy meeting or
exceeding standards for a “Class A-2 Survey” as defined by Sections 20-300b-1 through 20-
300b-20 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies and the “Standards for Surveys an
Maps in the State of Connecticut” which map is to show the precise boundaries of the
proposed District, as well as existing zoning boundaries and the boundaries of any officially
designated wetland area;
b. Present and proposed land uses and the acreage of each use, as well as existing and future land
uses in the surrounding area;
c. Present and proposed buildings and structures including use, dimensions and locations of each;
d. Proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns including locations and dimensions or
private and public streets and common drives, pedestrian walkways, malls and other public
and private paths;
e. Location of proposed off-street parking facilities with dimensions, including location, size and
number of parking spaces, access drives and walkways;
48
f. Proposed open area such as parks, lawn areas, and recreational facilities;
g. Existing and proposed landscaping treatment, including major tree areas, water bodies and
related treatment of open space areas, screening, and existing and proposed topography;
h. Utility information including water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, including
capacity of water courses and the additional flow being produced, electrical service and
exterior lighting;
i. A location map showing the site’s situation within the Town’s circulation system and all
streets and intersections within 1,000 feet of the site;
j. Preliminary architectural plans including generalized floor plans, exterior elevations,
perspective drawings and descriptive information on types of building materials and exterior
finishes;
k. Any addition information which the Commission may reasonably require or the applicant may
wish to submit, including such items as a traffic study, storm drainage and flooding report;
soils and geology map, marketability study, project model, covenants and/or easements related
to public access rights, legal information related to disposition, ownership and maintenance of
community facilities and open space, bonding to insure completion of essential site
improvements and community elements, and schedules of development phases.
11.5.3 Modification to Requirements: Except as provided in Section 11.5.3 herein, each lot within
a proposed Planned Development District shall be developed in accordance with the applicable
setback, lot width, coverage, lot frontage requirements, and parking requirements of the zoning
district in which such lot is located.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve modifications to those standards and
contained in these regulations, only to the extent described within in this section. In granting such
modifications, the Commission shall give careful consideration to the topography of the site, the
proposed location of the individual buildings to be constructed on the site, and the impact such
modifications would have on adjacent traffic patterns, adjacent property values, and the future
development of adjacent property. The granting of such modifications shall be accomplished
through the approval of a Site Plan which shall meet all requirements of Section 19 of these
regulations and on which shall be indicated those provisions which are being modified.
Subsequent approval of such Site Plan by the Commission shall be deemed to establish the
detailed requirements on the plan as the requirements for such Planned Development District in
lieu of otherwise applicable requirements of these regulations. The following modifications may
be approved:
a. The Commission may approve modifications to the setback, lot width, and lot frontage
requirements for the district in which the Planned Group Development is located.
b. Maximum building coverage requirements may be exceeded on individual lots
established within the area for which Planned Development District approval is requested
provided the total maximum coverage within the entire proposed Planned Development
District site does not exceed the maximum lot coverage for the district in which such
development is located.
49
c. The Commission may approve modifications to the requirements for off-street parking
for a proposed Planned Development District site.
d. In those cases where adequate evidence can be provided to the Commission to assure
that any proposed private roadway will permanently be set aside in such a manner so as to
relieve the Town from ever having to own or maintain such roadway, then and only then
may the Commission approve construction of such road to a standard less then that
required by the Town’s Subdivision Regulations.
11.5.4 Application Fee: A petition fee of $500 plus state fee and an additional fee of $500 plus
state fee at submission of Detailed Development Plan, payable to the Town of Plainfield.
11.5.5 Consulting Review Fee: Contemporaneously with the filing of any application for a
Planned Development District which proposes the development of more than 50,000
square feet of gross floor area in all buildings in the proposed development, the applicant
shall be responsible for the payment of the project review fees incurred by the Town in
obtaining professional advice with respect to such application from non-municipal
employees, including, but not limited to, professional engineers, landscape architects,
traffic engineers, planners or other qualified professionals; who, in the opinion of the
Commission, are required in order to provide a comprehensive review of the application.
The project review fee shall not exceed $5,000.00 for each 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area in all buildings included in the application. Project review fees shall be placed in
an escrow account and any unused portion shall be returned to the applicant after the
Commission has rendered its final decision.
11.6 Procedures: After receipt of a complete petition for the establishment of a Planned
Development District, the Commission shall review the petition and during this review
may hold meetings with the petitioner and request additional information: the Commission
shall hold a public hearing on a petition in the same manner and with the same notice as
required for amendment of these Regulations. The Commission may request the following
information for presentation prior to or at the public hearing:
a. Evidence from the Sewer Authority that sewers are available to the project for tie-in
and that the sewer lines, sewage treatment plant and related appurtenances have the
capacity for the projected volumes:
b. A statement from Northeast District Department of Health on the adequacy of solid
waste disposal and, if no public sewers are available the adequacy of private sewage
disposal systems;
c. A statement from the Police Department that the proposal will not cause any undue
traffic hazards;
d. A statement from the Fire Marshall and District Fire Chief that the proposal meets fire
safety standards and concerning the fire fighting feasibility of the proposed plan;
50
e. A statement from the Town Engineer in reference to the adequacy of the basic
drainage, public street design and the design of elements to be served by the Public
Works Department of the Town;
f. A statement from any other municipal department or advisory committee whose
opinion is deemed appropriate by the Commission.
After the public hearing, the Commission may disapprove or give approval to the Basic
Development Plans or approval subject to modifications, only after the Commission makes the
findings set forth under Paragraph 11.8 below, in addition to other findings necessary for
amendment of these Regulations. Approval of the Basic Developments Plans shall not constitute
final approval of the Planned Development District and shall simply authorize the submission of
Detailed Development Plans setting forth in detail the specifics of the proposed development and
showing and modifications specified by the Commission. If the Detailed Development Plans are
approved by the Commission, the Planned Development District shall be considered established
and the Zoning Map shall be considered to be modified to permit the establishment of the
development as approved. The approved Planned Development District shall be shown on the
Zoning Map with a reference to the records of the Commission where the approved standards and
plans may be seen. If the petition is approved, the Commission shall give notice of such approval
in the same manner as required for the amendment of these Regulations.
11.7 Detailed Development Plans: Detailed Development Plans shall be submitted in conformance
with and including all the information required by the approved Basic Development Plans. Such
Detailed Development Plans may be submitted in stages provided that such stages encompass not
less than the minimum required tract size and include all those public amenities and features used
as a public protection for the surrounding area. Such stages shall be capable of complete and selfsufficient
existence without the completion of the remaining stages. Six (6) copies of all Detailed
Plans shall be submitted and shall include at least the following:
a. Site Plan in conformance with Section 19 of these Regulations containing detailed layout
information related to all site plan proposals contained in the Basic Development Plans, plus
an additional. Schematic layout of building, drives and parking areas at a scale of 1” = 40’;
b. Building Plans encompassing the architectural information developed in the Basic
Development Plans;
c. Landscaping Plans presenting in detail the landscaping treatments and open space proposals
contained in the Basic Development Plans;
d. Engineering Plans in conformance with Section 19 of these Regulations presenting the detail
designs and information supporting all the engineering elements of the Basic Development
Plans.
Approval of the detailed Development Plans shall be noted on said Plans which shall then be
signed by the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission with the date of approval
51
indicated on the Plans. A complete copy of the approved, signed Plans shall be recorded in the
Office of the Plainfield Town Clerk.
11.8 Findings Required: The Commission may adopt the Planned Development District thereby
amending these Regulations and the Zoning Map only after the Commission makes the following
findings in addition to other findings necessary for the amendment of these Regulations:
a. The Planned Development District and the standards and Basic Development Plans applicable
therein will accomplish the purpose set forth in Paragraph 11.1.
b. Another zoning district could not be appropriately established to accomplish such purposes;
c. The Planned Development District and the Standards and Basic Development Plans applicable
therein will be consistent with the comprehensive plan of development adopted by the
Commission.
d. The Planned Development District encompasses a tract of land of not less than 80,000 square
feet.
e. The petitioner has provided, where appropriate, for the continued maintenance of the
development in general, including those open space and recreational areas not dedicated for
general public use;
f. The streets and drives will be suitable and adequate to accommodate anticipated traffic and
projected development intensity will not generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the
street system in the area;
g. The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed development and the
utilities and drainage have been so arranged as to not overburden the capacity of the facilities
connected therewith.
11.9 Bonds: The petitioner shall file with the Commission a performance bond, in form, amount and
surety approved by the Commission, to guarantee the faithful performance of the site
improvements work to be undertaken including driveway connections, sanitary sewer and water
supply facilities, storm drainage and pollution control facilities, landscaping and other essential
site improvements.
11.10 Certificate for Zoning Compliance: Prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Zoning Compliance
to permit any occupancy of the development before final acceptance, the developer shall file with
the Commission a performance bond, in form, amount and surety approved by the Commission, to
guarantee the provision of all facilities common to the entire development, including but not
limited to private roads, buffer strips, walkways, recreational facilities, club houses and other
common areas. Said bond shall be constituted upon completion of said common facilities within
one (1) year of the date of approval of the first such Certificate of Zoning Compliance, except that
the Commission may extend the time of completion for an additional period not to exceed one (1)
year after public hearing for good cause shown.
52
11.11 Additional Limitations: Adoption of a Planned Development District by the Commission shall
constitute authorization to establish the uses, buildings, structures and site development in
accordance with the standards and Detailed Development Plans adopted by the Commission for
the District and in accordance with detailed specifications approved by the Commission. All
approvals shall be null and void unless construction of the development authorized by the
Commission shall be begun within two (2) years, and completed within five (5) years from the
effective date of the District, except that the Commission may extend the time for commencement
of construction and for completion for one (1) year periods after public hearing for good cause
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission; otherwise the Commission shall be deemed
authorized by the owner or owners of land within the District to amend the Zoning Map, deleting
the Planned Development District and establishing for such land the provisions of another zoning
district.
53
SECTION 12 - Special Permits
12.1 Findings, Purpose of Special Permits, Statutory Authorization
The land uses allowed upon approval of special permits are found to be so unusual in their effect
on an area that, in order to secure compliance with the purposes set forth in Section 1 of these
Regulations, it is necessary for the Planning and Zoning Commission to consider each such
proposed use in the light of specific criteria set forth within this article and to consider each such
proposed use as a special case. It is also found necessary to restrict the land uses to very specific
locations within the zoning districts and to very specific designs. It is furthermore found desirable
to permit the establishment and expansion of such land uses, provided specific and appropriate
criteria are satisfied. Therefore, in accordance with Chapter 124 of the General Statutes, land uses
identified within this article shall be permitted within the districts specified thereunder only after
obtaining a special permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission, subject to satisfaction of
criteria and due procedures set forth in these regulations.
12.11 Criteria for approval of Special Permits. (amended 2/13/91)
A Special Permit shall not be granted until the Planning and Zoning Commission has
considered the Following:
a. The proposed use is in harmony with the zoning regulations and any plan of
development adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b. The proposed use will not adversely affect the health and safety of residents or workers
in the area.
c. The proposed use will not adversely affect the reasonable use or development of
properties in the general neighborhood. The proposed use will not depreciate adjacent
property values and the size and height of all proposed buildings and the extent of all
proposed site improvements shall be in harmony with the existing character of the
neighborhood.
d. The streets serving the proposed use are adequate to carry all prospective traffic;
adequate provision is made for entering and leaving the subject site in such a manner
that no undue hazard to traffic or undue traffic congestion shall be created.
e. The nature or location of the proposed use and of any building or other structure shall
ensure that there is adequate access to it for the purposes of fire protection, police
protection, and other emergency equipment.
f. The site has adequate water and sewerage systems to service the proposed use.
Adequate provision for storm water drainage can be provided without adversely
affecting neighboring properties or adjacent public drainage systems.
g. The proposed use complies with all standards and conditions for the pertinent land use
as set forth in the following sections of this article, and in sections of any other articles
in this regulation which pertain to specially permitted uses.
12.12 The Commission, in approving a special permit, may stipulate reasonable restrictions to
protect or promote the rights of individuals, property values and the environment in the
area as a whole; public health, safety or welfare; sound planning and zoning principles;
improved land use; site planning and land restrictions may concern, without limitation, the
54
components of the site plan, building location, size and layout, vehicle and pedestrian
circulation, parking and open space. The following subsections establish criteria to
address the most common major land use categories. Though not restricted to these uses,
the special permit enables consideration on each unique proposed project and its
development merits.
12.2 Garden Apartments
Garden Apartments shall be permitted by special permit in RA-19 and RA-30 districts, subject to
the following standards:
a. Minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres.
b. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 21,780 square feet in RA-19 districts and 30,000
square feet in RA-30 districts.
c. Maximum number of dwelling units per building shall be four (4).
d. All dwelling units shall be served by municipal sewers and by an adequate water supply.
e. All utility lines serving the site shall be underground.
f. Streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic on the site. The Planning and
Zoning Commission may require connection of or abutting streets in order to provide for a safe
and efficient area circulation system except where topography or other physical considerations
do not permit such streets, or where such street connection would adversely affect the area.
g. Access and circulation ways shall be so designed to permit fire-fighting equipment, furniture
moving vans, fuel trucks, refuse collection vehicles, delivery vehicles and snow removal
vehicles to operate in a safe and efficient manner. Internal circulation ways shall be paved in
conformity with Town standards for public streets, except that the minimum widths of such
roadways shall be twenty-four (24) feet.
h. Notwithstanding any provision of Section 13.3, paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided at the rate of two spaces per dwelling unit. Required parking spaces shall be placed
within one hundred (100 ) feet via concrete, asphalt, stone, wood, or other hard-surface
walkways or a door to the dwelling unit which they are intended to serve. Parking spaces shall
be separated from buildings by a planted buffer at least six (6) feet wide.
i. Open space shall be provided at a rate of two hundred and fifty (250) square feet per bedroom.
j. Buildings shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and streets. No
buildings shall be closer to each other than fifty (50) feet at any point.
k. Edges of the site adjoining other properties or public streets shall be planted and maintained
with shrubs or trees sufficiently dense to provide privacy for present or potential residents on
both sides of such buffer. Buffer plantings shall break for rights-of-way and on both sides of
roadways in order to allow safe sight distances. Such buffer of trees or shrubs shall be at least
four (4) feet in height at the time of planting. Existing wooded areas may be considered buffer
plantings. The Planning and Zoning Commission may waive requirements of buffer plantings
upon finding that such buffer would not promote privacy or protect the value of adjacent
properties, or if some alternative type of ornamental screening at least six (6) feet in height
would provide comparable benefits.
l. No building, roadways, parking area, or other paved area shall be located within one hundred
(100) feet of any watercourses or wetlands unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds
that such safeguards to water quality and public safety are unwarranted or an unfair hardship.
m. No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet, nor shall it exceed two stories.
55
12.21 Municipal Uses of Land (Amended 11/12/96)
Buildings and facilities (exempting utilities and facilities in public right of ways) of the Town of
Plainfield and its precincts which are not otherwise permitted in a particular zone, may be
permitted in that zone by Special Permit, subject to the following standards:
a. Bulk requirements of the applicable district shall apply.
b. Adequate parking shall be provided.
c. Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided to public streets.
d. Any municipal building designed or used for housing shall abide by all regulations found
elsewhere in these regulations.
e. Any proposed building shall be so designed to be in harmony with other buildings in the
immediate area and otherwise compatible with the surroundings.
f. Complete visual screens shall be provided adjacent to where such use adjoins or is across the
street from a residential district.
12.22 Shopping Centers (Amended 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02)
Shopping Centers shall be permitted by special permit in C-1 & C-2 districts, subject to the
following standards:
Bulk Table
Min. site area 4 acres
Min. lot frontage 200 feet
Min. front yard 100 feet
Min. side yard 30 feet unobstructed
Max site coverage 60%
(all impervious surfaces)
Min. rear yard 30 feet
Max. building height 35 feet
*Where any proposed site adjoins a residential zoning district, a buffer strip of at least 25 feet
wide shall be left.
**The fire marshal shall certify that adequate access for fire and other safety vehicles is provided.
b. Public sanitary sewers and an adequate water supply shall be required.
c. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.3, the number of parking spaces shall be based
on the floor area of the stores as follows:
1. Five (5) spaces for each one thousand (1000) square feet of gross leaseable floor area.
2. Off-street parking spaces shall be at least 10 feet in width and at least 20 feet in length.
Designated compact car spaces shall be at least 8 feet in width and at least 16 feet in
length. These dimensions shall be exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or
office or working areas. Enclosed parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least
seven (7) feet.
3. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of
such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such
parking space. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of
56
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement.
4. The parking area shall consist of bituminous concrete pavement to the Town of Plainfield
specifications.
5. The parking lot shall be adequately drained and shall be illuminated in such manner that
direct light is shielded from abutting properties and the general public.
6. The parking lot shall be designed for attractive appearance and shall contain landscaping of
grass, trees, and shrubs in the proportion of twenty-five (25) square feet for each parking
space. Parking areas shall be separated from a public right-of-way by a landscaped strip of
not less than ten (10) feet in width.
7. Required parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the building or use which
they serve except that required spaces serving a non-residential use may be permitted
elsewhere by the Commission on a special permit use basis. Such off-site parking facilities
shall be not more than 500 feet walking distance from the premises, measured in a straight
line to the nearest space for vehicular parking.
8. Joint parking areas and loading spaces may be established by the owners of separate
contiguous lots in order to provide the total number of off-street parking and loading
spaces required. In such case, side yard requirements specified may be waived for the
common property line.
d. Use Restrictions.
1. All uses permitted in the respective districts are permitted.
2. Loading facilities must be located so as not to interfere with traffic movement on the site
or on adjacent public streets.
3. All solid waste facilities such as dumpsters must be screened from adjacent properties and
public streets.
12.23 Convalescent Homes (Modified 5/01/2009, TA-2009-01)
Convalescent homes shall be permitted by special permit in RA-19, RA-30 and C-2 districts,
subject to the following standards:
a. Bulk table
Minimum site area 2 acres
Minimum lot frontage 200 feet
Minimum front yard 75 feet
Minimum side yard 20 feet
Minimum rear yard 40 feet
Maximum site coverage 30 percent
Maximum building height 35 feet
b. A public sanitary sewer shall be required.
c. Deleted 5/01/2009, (TA-2009-01)
d. The design of the building shall be in harmony with other buildings in the immediate area.
12.24 Special Revenue Facilities. (Deleted 9/01/07) (TA-2007-04)
57
12.25 Elderly Housing (Amended 2/01/09), (Amended 11/01/15)
Elderly housing shall be permitted by special permit only in RA-19, RA-30, RA-40 and RA-60
districts subject to the following standards:
a. Each dwelling unit shall be occupied by at least 1 person who is 55 years of age or older. No
resident shall be under 22 years of age. Occupancy shall be limited to two persons per
dwelling unit. Occupancy shall be defined as residing in the dwelling unit more than 120 days
per year or 120 consecutive days per year. Occupancy shall meet all federal and state
guidelines pertaining to age and/or handicap requirements. A spouse or companion under 55
years of age who survives his or her spouse or companion, or whose spouse or companion has
entered into a long-term care facility shall be permitted to remain in a dwelling unit, provided
he or she has an ownership interest in the dwelling unit and complies with all other occupancy
requirements. Remaining parties who remarry or co-habitate must meet all occupancy
requirements as set forth in subsection a-c.
a. A restrictive covenant shall be filed in the land records by the owner(s) approved as to form
and content by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Selectmen and Town Attorney,
guaranteeing exclusive occupancy by those persons as defined above. The owner(s) shall
submit an affidavit to the Zoning Enforcement Officer on a yearly basis certifying that the
elderly housing development is in full compliance with the occupancy requirements of this
section. The purchase of a dwelling unit by a non-occupying individual or entity for
investment purposes is prohibited except that a nonresident family member may purchase up
to one unit for a family member who will reside in the dwelling unit and will otherwise
comply with the requirements of this section, or an association may own units for rental
purposes in accordance with these regulations.
b. Elderly housing developments shall be located in such a manner as to minimize adverse traffic
conflicts. At the discretion of the Commission, the applicant may be required to provide a
detailed traffic study prepared by a qualified Traffic Engineer.
c. Minimum lot area must meet the minimum area requirement for the zone in which the
development is proposed to be located.
d. The development shall be served by public water and sewer.
e. All utility lines serving the site shall be underground.
f. Parking shall be provided at a minimum rate of two spaces per dwelling unit of which one
space shall be provided by a garage. Parking space dimensions shall be 10’ wide by 20’ deep.
No part of any parking space may encroach upon any sidewalk.
g. No application for elderly housing shall be approved by the Commission unless the
Commission determines, at its sole discretion, that a need exists within the Town of Plainfield
for the specific type of housing proposed.
h. Front, side and rear setbacks shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
i. A planted buffer zone of at least 25 feet in width shall be established and maintained along all
property lines to provide privacy between the proposed development and adjoining properties.
The planted buffer shall consist of a mixture of 6 ft. minimum height deciduous and evergreen
trees supplemented with a mixture of shrubs. Spacing of such planted material shall be
58
sufficient to serve the intended buffering purpose. Permanent structures such as wooden
fences, stone walls and the like or existing vegetation may be approved in lieu of part of the
required buffer planting where, in the opinion of the Commission, the intended buffering
purpose is served by such substitution. Maintenance of any and all buffers shall be subject to
ongoing review by the Commission.
j. Density shall not exceed 5 (five) units per acre of buildable land. Buildable land shall exclude
all wetlands, watercourses, wetland and watercourse buffer areas, slopes in excess of 20% and
any other adverse site conditions as determined by the Commission.
k. The maximum coverage for buildings, streets, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, patios,
other structures or features with impervious surfaces shall not exceed 30% of the entire lot.
l. A 4 ft. minimum width concrete sidewalk shall be provided to connect building entrances with
parking areas, community facilities and streets. A 4 ft. minimum width concrete sidewalk
shall also be provided along one side of the street to provide separation between vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
m. All streets shown on an approved plan shall be completed prior to issuance of certificates of
occupancy for the units or a cash bond in an amount approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, assuring completion within a specified time limit, shall be filed with the
Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be forfeited if the work is not completed within
such time limit. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with Town standards for public
streets, except that the minimum paved widths of said streets shall be 24 ft. All streets shall be
privately owned and maintained by the homeowners association as common property.
n. Site lighting shall be provided along all streets, driveways and parking areas. Lighting
systems shall be designed to prevent glare on adjacent properties.
o. No building shall exceed 200 ft. in length or width. No exterior wall shall exceed 40 ft. in
length in an unbroken plane without an offset of at least 10 ft.
p. Building height shall not exceed 30 feet or 2 stories.
q. The minimum distance between buildings shall not be less than 30 ft.
r. No dwelling unit or individual residential unit shall contain more than 2 bedrooms.
s. No building shall contain more than 8 dwelling units.
t. The developer shall post a performance bond in accordance with section 6.8 of these
regulations.
12.26 Cluster Subdivisions
As of the official date of this Amendment, April 9, 1991, Cluster Subdivisions shall no longer be
permitted. Bulk and other requirements for “Cluster Subdivision” will remain in effect for
enforcement use in all approved and existing Cluster Subdivisions.
a. Minimum total parcel area. Ten (10) acres.
b. Permitted uses. Single-family detached residences.
c. Maximum residential density. Two and three-tenths (2.3) units per acre of total parcel area.
d. Sewer and water supply. All dwelling units shall be served by municipal sewers and by an
adequate water supply.
e. Underground utilities. All utility lines serving the site shall be underground.
f. Street layout. Streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic on the site. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may require connection of or to abutting streets in order to
provide for a safe and efficient area circulation system, except where topography or other
59
physical considerations do not permit such streets, or where such street connection would
adversely affect the area. All streets shown on an approved plan shall be completed before
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, or a cash bond in an amount approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, assuring completion within a specified time limit, shall be filed with
the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be forfeited if the work is not completed
within such time limit. All streets shall be privately owned by the homeowners association as
common property.
g. Access and internal circulation. Access and circulation ways shall be so designed to permit
fire-fighting equipment, furniture moving vans, fuel trucks, refuse collection vehicles; delivery
vehicles and snow removal vehicles to operate in a safe and efficient manner. Internal
circulation ways shall be paved in conformity with Town standards for public streets, except
that the minimum widths of such roadways shall be twenty-six (26) feet.
h. Parking. Notwithstanding any provision of Section 13.3, off-street parking spaces are required
and shall be provided at the rate of two spaces per dwelling unit. Required parking spaces
shall be placed within one hundred (100) feet via concrete, asphalt, stone, wood or other hardsurface
walkways to a door to the residence which they are intended to serve.
i. Open space. Open space shall be provided at a rate of two hundred fifty (250) square feet per
bedroom. For all proposals containing five (5) acres or more of prime agricultural soils, at
least fifty (50) percent of all open space shall be land with prime agricultural soils. All open
space and landscaped buffer areas shall be permanently preserved in accordance with the
approved plan by deed restrictions. All open space shall be accessible from the street by
accessways at least twenty (20) feet wide. Proposed deed restrictions shall be submitted with
the application and their recording in the Plainfield Land Records shall be a condition of any
approval.
j. Bulk and dimensional requirements. The following table of bulk and dimensional
requirements shall be applicable to all lots:
Minimum lot area 9,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage
(measured at the building line) 60 feet
Minimum front yard depth 20 feet
Minimum side yard depth 10 feet
Minimum rear yard depth 15 feet
Maximum height 30 feet
Minimum width or residences 24 feet
Minimum floor area of residences 750 square feet
k. Buffer plantings. Edges of the site adjoining other properties or public streets shall have a
landscaped buffer at least fifty (50) feet wide to provide privacy for present and future
residents on both sides of such buffer.
1. A landscaped buffer shall consist of no fewer than two rows of suitable evergreen trees of
at least 2”-2 1/2” in caliper measured 6” above the ground planted 15 feet apart, staggered
in adjoining rows to provide a visual barrier. Where appropriate, in the judgment of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, walls, fencing, or existing vegetation may be used as
part of the required buffer.
60
2. Existing plant materials and trees may be used to meet all or part of the landscape
requirement, and existing trees in good condition over 12” caliper shall be preserved unless
approved for removal by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. The Planning and Zoning Commission may reduce the landscape requirements by not
more than 25% for excellence in building or space design. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall consider, among other features, the site characteristics, compatibility of
proposed structure with surrounding architectural types, quality of building materials and
the size and quality of landscape materials.
4. All landscaping shown on an approved plan shall be completed before issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, or a cash bond in an amount approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and shall be forfeited if the work is not completed within such time
limit.
5. Landscape plans shall include a planting plan, with plant names, quantities, sizes and
locations. Typical sections may be shown. Existing planting shall be identified on the
plan.
l. Distance from watercourses and wetlands. No building, roadways, parking area, or other
paved area shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any watercourses or wetlands
unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that such safeguards to water quality and
public safety are unwarranted or an unfair hardship.
m. Homeowners association. The applicant shall submit a written description of the
documentation to be recorded in the Plainfield land records for the creation and governance of
a homeowners association to own, operate and maintain the common property.
12.27 Arcades
Arcades shall be permitted by special permit in all commercial zones subject to the bulk and
parking requirements of the zone in which they are located and provided that in the opinion of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the proposed use shall not have a negative effect upon the
neighborhood in which it is located, and provided that the proposed use conforms to all pertinent
criteria of Section 12.11 regarding the approval of special permit uses.
12.28 Accessory Apartments (Amended: 8/13/91)
12.28.1 Accessory Apartments in Residential Districts (Amended: 8/27/97)
Accessory apartments are allowed by special permit in all Residence Districts when
attached to a single family dwelling by a common wall subject to the following conditions:
a. An accessory apartment cannot exceed 600 square feet of floor area. Only one
Accessory Apartment shall be permitted per building and lot.
b. The entire structure shall maintain the appearance of a single family dwelling.
c. The owner of the house must occupy one unit. There shall be direct interior access
from the accessory apartment (subordinate dwelling unit) to the primary dwelling unit
(single-family residence onto which the accessory apartment is attached).
d. The lot shall conform in all respects to the bulk requirements of the Zoning
Regulations.
e. If the primary dwelling unit does not conform to all zoning setback requirements, any
conversion or addition must not increase that nonconformity.
f. The entire floor space shall be attached to the primary dwelling by a common wall or
floor.
61
g. The accessory apartment must have at least three rooms, including a bath, private
kitchen and bedroom. Only one bedroom is allowed.
h. No more than two people shall occupy an accessory apartment.
i. Only one point of access (driveway) shall be permitted to the public roads.
j. No separate sewer or utilities shall be permitted except for telephone and cable TV.
k. New doors and fire escapes must be in the rear of the accessory apartment.
l. Adequate water supply and sewage disposal capabilities must be provided as certified
by the appropriate authorities.
m. Widths of door shall comply with building code with regard to handicap access.
n. Deleted (12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
12.28.2 Accessory Apartments in Commercial Districts (Amended 5-11-04)(CZ-2004-04)
Accessory Apartments are allowed by special permit in all commercial districts subject to
the following conditions:
a. Only one accessory apartment per building is allowed except per sub section (i) of this
section. (Amended 12/05)
b. A separate entrance is required for accessory apartments;
c. Main entrance(s) for residents cannot be located in close proximity to commercial
loading/service areas.
d. Two parking spaces per apartment are required. Applicant may request a waiver,
which may be granted by the Commission after applicant has demonstrated that shared
parking with commercial uses will be adequate.
e. Pedestrian circulation must be attractively designed to encourage use by resident.
f. Adequate lighting of both pedestrian and parking areas must be provided.
g. Acoustic and thermal insulation must be provided between commercial and residential
levels per the building code.
h. Where dumpsters are proposed, dumpster locations shall be shown on the site plan. All
dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad and suitably screened with trees, shrubs,
fencing, or by other appropriate means (e.g., the building itself). Solid waste removal
services shall be provided by the owners of the property.
i. For larger buildings that have existed prior to the adoption of zoning, where there is an
existing second story above the primary commercial use(s), the Commission may
approve the conversion of that second story to multiple apartments with the following
conditions:
1. The area to be converted to apartments has existed since the adoption of zoning.
2. No additions to the second story shall be permitted to increase the livable area of
the apartments. Only area that has existed prior to the adoption of zoning can be
utilized for the apartments.
3. The building inspector, fire marshal and fire chief shall give their approval on the
plans prior to the permit being granted.
12.28.3 Application for a Special Permit
Application for a special permit for an accessory apartment must include plans drawn to
scale showing the floor, windows, doors, driveway, walkways, parking, utilities and lot
boundaries.
62
12.29 Flea Markets
Flea markets may be allowed by special permit in Commercial zones subject to the following
conditions. Because of the potential for flea markets to become nuisances if not properly
conducted, the regulations are strict to prevent this and to protect surrounding property owners.
a. Minimum site area is 2 acres.
b. Minimum setback from property boundaries is 25 feet on all sides.
c. Off-street, on-site parking for at least 50 cars must be provided.
d. Entrance and exit must not pose a safety hazard, and must be approved by Plainfield Police
Chief and, if on a state highway, by state police.
e. Market may be held maximum of 2 days per week.
f. Sanitary facilities must be provided. If drinking water is provided, it must be an approved
public water supply (NDDH).
g. Special permit must be renewed annually by the Commission and may be subject to public
hearing at each renewal. Emphasis will be placed on objections from adjoining property
owners or property owners facing the site from across a street, at each public hearing.
h. Within 24 hours following each market, area must be cleaned of garbage, refuse, etc., by
owner.
12.30 Historic Preservation through use-conversions
The purpose of this regulation is to encourage restoration and preservation of existing buildings of
historic value and to promote harmony of surrounding land uses. There are some uses, both
residential and commercial, which would enhance historic structures and would not disrupt the
neighborhood is properly conducted. Therefore, by special permit, the following uses may be
allowed in a historic structure in any zone subject to the conditions listed below. Each use will be
considered on a case-by-case basis, and further reasonable conditions may be imposed by the
Commission. The list of uses is not all-inclusive; applicants with proposed uses not listed are
encouraged to apply for a historic conversion permit if their proposed use is in harmony with the
intent of this regulation.
a. Structure must be designated as historically significant by (1) registry in the National Register
of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Places or, (2) by the Planning and Zoning
Commission upon presentation by the applicant of adequate evidence of historic significance
such as the Town of Plainfield Historic Resources Survey.
b. Where applicable, a site plan under Section 19, and floor plans/sketches will be submitted with
application. Commission may waive site plan requirement if the scope of the project does not
warrant a site plan.
c. Architectural integrity of the structure must be preserved, and the proposed use must be in
harmony with surrounding uses.
d. The proposed use must meet all health and safety requirements such as: adequate water supply
for drinking and fire-fighting; adequate sewage disposal; safe traffic flow and control;
drainage, parking (as required in Section 13.3); wetlands approval where needed, etc., as well
as building code requirements.
e. There is no lot size requirement; however, an existing lot cannot be split if the split creates any
nonconforming lot (including the lot containing the historic structure).
63
f. The Plainfield Historical Society will be notified of all historic conversions so they may
comment on (1) the appropriateness of the use, and (2) planned restoration/preservation of
architectural integrity. If comments are not received from the Historical Society within 30
days of submission of application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, a “no comment”
reply will be assumed.
g. No evidence of the use shall be visible from the exterior except for a business sign not to
exceed 25 square feet.
12.30.1 Special Permit Uses: gift shops; antiques shops; museums; galleries; multiple family
residences; bed-and-breakfast tourist homes; restaurants; bookstores; professional offices.
12.31 Preservation of existing textile mills through use-conversion.( Effective date: February 1, 2005)
The purpose of this regulation is to allow textile mills that currently exist at the time that this
regulation is adopted to maintain their usefulness by converting in-part or wholly to a commercial
use or uses. It is recognized that the days of textile industry in Connecticut have passed. This
leaves many textile buildings partially or completely vacant. Because of this, the Commission
may, by special permit, allow commercial uses to fill vacant portions of existing textile buildings
if the proposed commercial use is found by the Commission to be appropriate for that particular
building and the areas leading to and surrounding the building. Each use will be considered on a
case-by-case basis and further reasonable conditions may be imposed by the Commission.
a. All applications shall include a site plan showing the location of the proposed use within the
building and showing the route of access within the building to that use, along with a plan
showing designated parking areas and the number of parking spaces provided for the proposed
use. In addition the plan must also show the layout of the existing uses in the building, the
accesses within the building to those uses, any other uses located else ware on the same
property, the parking provided for the existing uses, the types of traffic generated by the
existing uses and the flow of traffic for the entire site.
b. All proposed uses must have safe and adequate travel areas for entering the property and
exiting the property, safe and adequate parking and must not interfere with traffic associated
with any existing industrial uses.
c. Safe pedestrian access to the building must be provided. The access route within the building
to the proposed use must be safe and must not pass through any industrial or hazardous areas.
d. The Commission will determine what is considered to be safe for parking areas, traffic flow
entering onto, exiting from and traveling within the property boundaries, pedestrian access to
the building and access within the building to the proposed use. If the Commission feels that
any portion of the plan is unsafe or will interfere with the other uses located within the
building, or the uses of the surrounding area, whether on or off the site, the plan shall be
modified by the Commission or denied.
e. Once a special permit has been granted to allow for any commercial use in a textile building,
all future changes that will be made to that building, buildings located on the same property,
the traffic flow, parking areas or to the existing uses contained within that building or else
ware on the property, whether those changes are for commercial or industrial use, must be
brought before the Commission as a special permit to assure that the proposed changes or uses
will be in harmony with the other uses contained within that building.
f. This section of the regulations does not apply to buildings or properties located within the
Plainfield Industrial Park Zone.
64
12.32 Earth Excavation, processing and removal. (Approved 12/11/90.)
It is recognized that the Town of Plainfield has valuable earth material resources including stone,
sand and gravel which will be needed in the future for building construction in Plainfield and the
region. These Regulations are intended to establish performance standards for such operations.
Earth excavation, processing and removal operations are permitted in all zoning districts of the
Town by Special Permit. Except non-conforming operations all other operations must comply
with these Regulations and must submit an application in accordance with these Regulations
within 180 days of the effective date of this amendment.
12.32.1 Exceptions
a. (Deleted 9/01/07) (TA-2007-04)
b. Operating Farms: Exemption for operating farms can be obtained upon approval of the
Planning and Zoning for the removal of earth, sand, stone, gravel, soil, minerals, loam, fill,
clay, peat moss and other similar substances from one part of the farm to another part of the
same farm, when such removal is made on a farm due to agricultural necessity. Excess
material may be sold upon approval of Planning and Zoning and with conditions. Conditions
of approval shall be erosion and sediment control, notification of abutter, safety, dust control
and other site specific requirements of the Commission.
c. Non Conforming Gravel Operations: Gravel operations in existence prior to adoption of the
Zoning Regulations (Sept. 25, 1972) are non-conforming uses. Non-conforming operations
not registered with the Planning and Zoning Commission within 180 days of the effective date
of this Amendment shall comply with Sections 12.32.3 et. seq. Non-conforming operators that
do register within 180 days do not have to comply with Section 12.32.3 et. seq. except Section
12.32.8 which the Commission may apply in its discretion.
12.32.2 The following information shall be provided for registration as a non-conforming use
within the 180 day period from the effective date of this Amendment:
1. A copy of the Assessor’s Map or Survey’s Map if available showing the whole parcel and
adjacent parcels within 200 feet of it.
2. The applicant shall be given rights a non-conforming use us intended in State Statutes.
a. Expansion is permitted provided that the applicant reclaims the equivalent area, except
for the stockpiling of materials from the previous bank.
3. The location of existing and proposed excavation and operations and equipment storage.
4. All topsoil removed up to 4 inches shall be preserved on the site for use in regarding and
revegetating the site in phases as approved by the Commission.
5. Excavation at or below water table and creation of ponds shall be done in accordance with
an approved site operations plan.
6. Additional information on map and narrative to accompany registration as a nonconforming
use:
65
a. Ingress and egress to and from the site with estimates of the number of daily trips.
b. Proposed hours of operation.
c. List of the types and numbers of excavation equipment, trucks and processing
machinery to be used.
d. The words “Site Operations Plan” and the name of the owner(s) of the property.
e. The date and any revisions, scale and north arrow.
f. An approval block for the Planning and Zoning Commission’s signature and date.
g. The total area of the site.
h. Property lines and streets within 100 feet of the site and the name(s) of owner(s) of
abutting property as shown in the most current Assessor’s records.
i. Locations of existing and proposed access points and buildings, signs, structures and
machinery in relation to zoning setbacks.
j. Locations and dimensions of existing utility lines, including but not limited to water,
sanitary and storm sewers, gas, electric and telephone lines.
k. A copy of the best Town, State of Federal topographic map of the parcel available in
the public record.
l. All regulated areas as defined in the Plainfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations as shown on the official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
m. Drainage facilities on-site, existing and proposed alterations to drainage and erosion
and sediment controls.
n. One hundred year floodplains, as shown on the flood maps.
o. Location of existing and proposed wells within 100 feet of excavation and machinery.
p. Location of buffer strips and screening, to a minimum width of 25 feet.
12.32.3 Gravel processing for gravel obtained on site shall be permitted in all zoning
districts in accordance with a valid Special Permit. Processing of imported gravel in the
Industrial and Industrial Park Districts may be allowed by special permit regardless of
source. Processing of imported gravel may be allowed by special permit in any other
district providing the material is imported from adjacent properties and properties across
the street under the same ownership. Any proposed gravel processing must be approved as
part of the application for a Special permit.
12.32.4 Application Requirements and Procedures: Applicants must submit a written
application on forms provided by the Commission and the required fee, as well as
additional information and a site operations plan in accordance with this Section. The
Commission shall follow the procedure outlined in Section 12.5 of these Regulations in
receiving, hearing and deciding upon such applications.
a. Additional information to accompany written application or late registration.
1. Proposed truck routes to and from the site with estimates of the number of daily
trips.
2. Proposed hours of operation.
3. List of the types and numbers of excavation equipment, trucks and processing
machinery to be used.
66
b. The Site Operations Plan, drawn at a minimum scale of 1”=100’ on 24” x 26” mylar
sheets (or other scale or size of sheet acceptable to the Commission or its agent) which
may include:
1. The words “Site Operations Plan” and the name of the applicant(s) and owner(s) of
the property.
2. The name, address and seal of the professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
responsible for preparing the plan.
3. The date and any revisions, scale and north arrow.
4. An approval block for the Planning and Zoning Commission’s signature and date.
5. For site plans submitted on more than one sheet, an index map locating each sheet
in relation to the entire site with match lines.
6. The total area of the site and the total area for which Special Permit approval is
sought.
7. Property lines and streets within 200 feet of the site and the name(s) of owner(s) of
abutting property as shown in the most current Assessor’s records.
8. Locations of existing and proposed access points and buildings, signs, structures
and machinery in relation to zoning setbacks.
9. Locations and dimensions of existing utility lines, including but not limited to
water, sanitary and storm sewers, gas, electric and telephone lines.
10. Existing and proposed contour lines showing elevations at intervals of five feet or
less. Contours extrapolated form existing photogrammetry shall be field verified.
Contours shall not be extrapolated from USGS topographic maps.
11. All regulated areas as defined in the Plainfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations and shown on the official Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map.
12. Drainage facilities on-site, existing and proposed alterations to drainage and
erosion and sediment controls.
13. One hundred year floodplains, noting source of information.
14. Location of existing and proposed wells within 100 feet of excavation and
machinery.
15. Location of buffer strips and screening, where required, showing the types and
approximate sizes.
16. Depth to groundwater measured at least three times during the official wet season
with measurements made at least one week apart and direction of groundwater
flow. Wet season shall be determined by appropriate regulatory agencies.
a. Groundwater measurements shall be made in at least three groundwater
monitoring wells each located immediately adjacent to the proposed area of
excavation in the upgradient, crossgradient, and downgradient hydrological
direction. Groundwater monitoring wells shall be placed so they will not be
destroyed during gravel excavation. Any monitoring wells that are destroyed
or damaged to the extent they are unusable for the purpose of groundwater
measurement shall be replaced by the applicant.
b. During years when drought conditions do not allow opening of an official wet
season, groundwater measurements shall be adjusted to measurements made
during the previous wet season by the United States Geological Survey in well
414054071552001 CT-PL, located in Plainfield, CT.
67
c. A table containing the well identifier, well elevation measured to the top of
well riser, groundwater depth and groundwater elevation shall be included on
the operations plan. Groundwater elevation contours and direction of
groundwater flow shall be included on the operations plan. Groundwater
elevation contours shall be based on the highest groundwater elevation
measured in each will during the wet season.
d. Monitoring wells installed for the purpose of groundwater measurement shall
be constructed of 2-inch inside diameter schedule 40 polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
and shall have a well screen at least 10 feet in length. The well screen shall
have a slot width of .01 inch. The well screen shall be surrounded by a sand
filter pack that extends to at least two feet above the top of the well screen.
The filter pack shall be sealed with a bentonite filter pack seal that extends at
least two feet above the top of the filter pack. The screened interval shall
intersect the groundwater table with no more than three feet of the screen
projecting above the water table. Each well shall have a locking steel
protective cover that is secured with a keyed lock. A copy of the key for each
lock shall be provided to the Town Zoning Official.
e. Logs for borings used to install monitoring wells shall be included on the Site
Operations Plan.
12.32.5 Wetlands: All applications for a Special Permit which involve a regulated activity
within 100 feet of a wetland or watercourse shall require approval from the Plainfield
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission prior to issuance of a Special permit by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
12.32.6 Permit Evaluation Criteria: The Commission shall evaluate the Special Permit
application for earth excavation, processing and removal based upon the criteria outlined in
Section 12.11 of these Regulations. It may further stipulate reasonable conditions in
accordance with Section 12.12
.
12.32.7 Permit Performance Standards: In addition to the criteria referenced above, the
Commission shall determine whether proposed earth excavation, processing and removal
operations conform to the performance standards outlined below.
a. Minimum setbacks. No fixed or portable machinery, equipment or buildings shall be
erected or maintained within 100 feet of an adjoining property line or street. Limits of
active excavation from property lines and streets shall be no less than 50 feet nor more
than 150 feet except as set forth in Subsection j. below. The exact setback distance for
active excavation shall be determined by the Commission based on neighboring land
uses and final slopes and may be eliminated if agreed upon by the applicant and
adjoining property owner.
b. Access points and roads. Locations for access points and truck routes shall be selected
so as to minimize effects on surrounding properties. In accordance with standard
engineering practices, the sight line and width of access points shall be sufficient to
provide an appropriate distance and turning radius for vehicles entering and exiting the
site. Access points shall have a durable and dustless surface such as pavement or anti68
tracking mats or other suitable material to minimize the deposition of material from
trucks onto public roads.
c. Fences. All access points to excavation sites shall be secured by a fence or gate.
d. Hours of operation. Operating hours shall be between the hours of 7:00 AM and 7:00
PM in all but the Industrial District. The Commission may stipulate reasonable
operating hours which may be more or less restrictive depending upon the nature of
surrounding land uses.
e. Buffer strip. The Commission may require a buffer strip along adjoining property lines
which shall consist of existing vegetation and/or interplantings of evergreen and
deciduous trees and/or fencing suitable to provide a visual screen within a reasonable
time period depending upon the nature of surrounding land uses.
f. Topsoil preservation. All topsoil removed up to 4 inches shall be preserved on the site
for use in regrading and revegetating the site at conclusion of the operation unless
otherwise approved by the Commission.
g. Removal of debris. All stumps, loose boulders, waste products, process residues or
other material not incorporated into the plan of restoration or contributing to reuse of
the site shall be buried or removed from the site.
h. Site drainage. At all stages of the operation sufficient temporary and permanent
drainage shall be provided to avoid hazardous conditions due to discharge or collection
and stagnation of water.
i. Stockpiling of materials. Except in the Industrial District, only materials excavated,
unearthed or processed on site in accordance with a valid Special Permit shall be
permitted to be stockpiled on site. Material may be stockpiled in a residential area
providing that the site is at least five acres, lesser amounts can be waived by the
Commission.
j. Final grading. Minimum setbacks allowed shall be 50 feet where a final slope of 1 foot
vertical to 2 feet horizontal is established from the setback and 20 feet where the final
slope is 1 foot vertical to 3 feet horizontal from the setback. Where any soft earth
excavation exceeding 10 feet in depth remains inactive for a period of 60 days or more,
the standing excavation faces shall be graded to a slope not to exceed 1 foot vertical to
1 foot horizontal for safety reasons. Hard rock excavation shall be maintained in a
series of stepped benches with a line of slope not to exceed 1 foot vertical to 1 foot
horizontal.
k. Erosion and sediment control. Erosion by wind and water shall be controlled
throughout the site to prevent harmful effects to wetlands and watercourses and
adjoining properties.
l. Excavation below water table. Excavation at or below water table and creation of
ponds shall be done in accordance with an approved site operations plan.
m. Explosives. Any use of explosive devices in the Town of Plainfield shall be by persons
licensed to use such explosives by the State Fire Marshal as required by Statute. A use
permit must be obtained by the Plainfield Fire Marshal. The use of explosives and any
noise or resulting vibration shall be limited by applicable State Statutes and
Regulations and Federal Regulations including but not limited to Regulations of the
State Fire Marshal, the Federal Department of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and
guidelines set forth in the U.S. Bureau of Mines, RI 8507, “Response and Damage
Produced by Ground Vibration from Surface Mine Blasting.”
69
n. Noise. The operator shall at all times make the best effort and use the best practicable
noise control measures to minimize noise emitted by operations carried on at the site.
It will be considered a violation of the approved site operations plan to emit or cause to
be emitted any noise beyond the boundaries of the subject property in excess of
permissible noise levels allowed in the State as set forth in the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies, Title 22a, Sections 22a-69-1 to 22a-69-7.4.
o. Dust. The operator shall at all times make the best efforts and use the best practicable
dust control measures to minimize dust emitted by operations carried on at the site. It
will be considered a violation of the approved site operations plan to emit or cause to
be emitted any dust beyond the boundaries of the subject property in excess of
permissible fugitive dust amounts allowed in the State as set forth in the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies, Title 22a, Section 18b.
12.32.8 Waiver Provision: The Commission may waive any or all of the above application
requirements or performance standards if, in its opinion, such requirements or standards
are unnecessary for a particular site. Sufficient information must be supplied to the
Commission to enable it to grant a waiver. The Commission must state the reason(s) why
the waiver was granted and such reason(s) must be recorded in the minutes.
12.32.9 Length of Permit/Renewal: A Special Permit for earth excavation, processing and
removal shall be valid for a period of 5 years from the date of issuance of the permit. The
permittee will be subject to an administrative review by the Commission or its agent after
30 months from the date of issuance of the permit. The Special Permit is renewable after 5
years upon application. Renewals are considered new applications and as such the
Commission shall hold a public hearing.
12.32.10 Performance Bond: The Commission may require posting of a performance bond
satisfactory with the Commission at the time of the approval or the 30 month review or at
any other review or renewal if the applicant has not shown good faith in complying with
the approved site operations plan and/or any additional stipulations placed on the Special
Permit by the Commission.
12.32.11 Other Permits: Existing and proposed earth excavation operators are warned that
earth excavation and processing activities may require State and/or Federal permits and
may be subject to State and/or Federal Regulations not set forth in these Regulations.
Approval of a site operations plan under this Section of the Zoning Regulations does not
indicate compliance with any other duly authorized and applicable permit procedures or
regulations. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to determine and secure all necessary
Federal and State permits.
12.33 Breeder Kennel Class II. (Z2016-1033) (March 1, 2017)
Kennels for more than 6 dogs, outdoor kennels, dog runs and training courses as a use secondary
to a residential dwelling may be permitted by Special Permit in RA-60 Zones subject to the
standards below:
For kennels where dogs shall be kept in the house except for exercise periods, training, relief, etc:
Dogs shall be leashed or fenced in to prevent them from leaving the property. The Commission
shall use best judgement in determining the maximum number of dogs and buffers/setbacks for
exercise and training areas based on the surrounding area, taking neighbors into consideration.
70
Outdoor Kennels and Runs shall adhere to the following requirements.
a. Bulk Table :
Minimum Lot Area 5.0 Acres
Minimum Front Yard Setback 200 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback 125 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 125 feet
Maximum Building Height 25 feet
No portion of any outdoor kennel or run shall be less than these distances from lot
boundaries.
b. The number of dogs allowed in a kennel shall be based on the Residual lot area enclosed by
the various minimum setback lines stated above. The number of dogs over the age of six (6)
months in a kennel at any time shall not be more than one (1) dog per 1,000 SF of the residual
lot area to a maximum of 20 dogs per property over the age of six (6) months. (Residual lot
area is defined herein as the area of the lot that is enclosed by the minimum yard setbacks
stated in Section a, above).
c. The Commission may require visual screens and sound barriers as it deems appropriate to
reduce the impact of dogs and traffic.
d. The applicant shall obtain Dept. of Health Permits (if required by NDDH) for human Sewage
and animal waste disposal as a condition of approval.
e. The applicant shall submit a site plan per Section 19 prepared by a Licensed Surveyor and
Engineer.
f. The applicant shall submit in narrative form all proposed uses of the site, as well as devices
and methods he/she proposes to use to reduce nuisance from the kennel. The site plan shall
show the location of any devices to reduce nuisance.
12.33a Commercial Kennel (Z2016-1033) (March 1, 2017)
Allows for uses contained in Breeder Kennels Class I and II, boarding and training, dog day care
and other similar uses. Allows for more than 20 dogs per parcel.
a. Outdoor facilities (kennels, runs, training courses, etc.) shall not be located within fifty (50)
feet of any property line.
b. The applicant shall submit a site plan per Section 19 prepared by a Licensed Surveyor and
Engineer.
c. The applicant shall submit in narrative form all proposed uses of the site, as well as
information with regard to devices and methods he/she proposes to use to reduce nuisance
from the kennel. The site plan shall show the location of any devices to reduce nuisance.
d. Commission shall use best judgment on determining adequate uses for the proposed project,
setbacks from property lines, visual and acoustic screening, and maximum number of dogs
allowed based on the surrounding area and uses. The Commission shall not allow for more
than one dog per 1000 square feet of total lot area.
71
12.34 Recreational Camp Grounds. (Approved 2/11/93.)
Recreational campgrounds shall be permitted by special permit in RA-30, RA-40 and RA-60
districts. In addition to the requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code, all campgrounds
shall conform to the following requirements:
a. The campground shall contain a minimum of five acres.
b. The primary access road to each camp ground shall connect directly to and have 150’ of
frontage on a state highway or town approved road. The access road shall be 24’ wide for two
way traffic. Where there are over 150 individually numbered camp sites, there shall, in
addition to the main entrance, be an emergency road not less than 24’ wide to a town or state
road. No camp site shall be located closer than 50’ to any public road and no camper unit,
recreational vehicle or tent shall be located closer than 100’ from any dwelling on adjacent
property or 20’ from any adjacent camper unit, recreational vehicle or test.
c. Where an area abuts any use other than a state forest, lake, non-access highway or other land
of the camp ground owner, a landscaped buffer strip at least 25’ wide shall be provided.
Where a landscaped buffer strip is required, such strip shall consist of an interplanting of
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs or existing trees and shrubs providing a complete
visual screen between different land uses.
d. At the discretion of the commission, not more than 15 camp sites shall be provided for each
acre of site area exclusive of wetlands. The acreage shall include buffer areas, recreational
facilities, rental sites, community areas, emergency overflow areas, supporting facilities and
land which is readily accessible and considered an integral part of the complex.
e. Individual sites shall have a number designation on its site and also a map in the office
available to the Zoning Enforcement Officer which shall give the dimensions of each
individual number designated site.
f. Each campground shall provide one or more service buildings adequately equipped with flushtype
toilet fixtures. No service building shall contain less than two toilets for women, one
toilet for men, one lavatory and shower for each sex, one urinal for men, one laundry tray and
one slop water closet. The service building shall have sufficient toilet and laundry facilities
according to the requirements of the Connecticut Public Health Code.
g. A trapped dumping station shall be provided for the use of independent type camper units.
h. Electrical outlets shall be weatherproof. Electrical service lines to individual camp sites shall
be underground.
i. Open camp fires shall be permitted at the discretion of the campground owner.
j. The minimum width for all roads servicing individual camp sites shall be 20’ for two way
traffic and 12’ for one way traffic. Dead end roads shall have a cul-de-sac with and 80’ radius.
All roads shall be graded so as to avoid standing water in times of rainfall. Roadbeds shall
consist of a 12” layer of bank run gravel below a 6” layer of processed gravel. Roads shall be
maintained dust free and in passable condition to trailers and emergency vehicles.
k. Camp sites may be occupied by a camper unit, recreational vehicle or tent.
l. No camp site may be occupied by the same person or persons for more than 30 consecutive
days between November first and the following April first. No visitors shall claim residency
during their stay.
m. Unoccupied camper units, recreational vehicles and boats may be stored in recreation camp
grounds. During the month of September each year, the camp ground owner shall provide the
Assessor of the Town of Plainfield with a list containing identification information as may be
required by the Assessor for all long-term camper units on the property.
72
n. The owner and/or operator of any camp ground shall be responsible for the maintenance of an
accurate register at such campground in which the following information shall be recorded.
1. Name and permanent address of each occupant of any vehicle.
2. Date of arrival and departure.
3. Make and model of each vehicle and identification of campsite occupied by it.
Such register shall be available to the Zoning Enforcement Officer to assist in the enforcement
of these Regulations, and to the police, health officer and fire marshal in connection with the
discharge of their duties.
o. In any campground having at least ten individually developed camp sites, there may be located
on the same premises, one permanent single-family dwelling or one mobile home not less than
12’ wide with axle removed and securely anchored, provided such dwelling or mobile home is
occupied by the owner, manager, guard or caretaker of the camp ground and is not rented. The
location of all permanent dwellings and mobile homes shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
p. Permitted as a necessary use to a recreational camp ground and for camper use only, but not
permitted as a principal use, there may be, with approval of the Commission: a grocery store
with grocery, camper provisions and gifts, snack bar, swimming pool, golf course of any kind,
tennis courts, recreation pavilion, service building with bath, shower and laundry facilities,
horseback riding, and any other appropriate activities, even though some of the activities by
their nature are performed off the premises, but all activities must originate on the premises.
q. The volume of sound from music and public address systems shall be controlled so as to
prevent objectionable noises affecting others within and off the premises.
r. After initial approval and issuance of a camp ground permit, each camp ground operator shall
renew the permit during the month of March. Such permit shall be issued upon payment of a
$25.00 fee, provided the operation continues to be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of these Regulations as determined by the Commission during a biannual review in
the Aquifer Protection District and a 5 year review elsewhere.
s. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall comply with all town ordinances and with
the State Statutes.
t. Signs shall conform to the requirements of Section 13.5 of these regulations.
12.35 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (Approved 3/10/98)
12.35.1 The intent of these regulations is to provide for the establishment
and/or expansion of wireless telecommunication services while protecting neighborhoods
and minimizing the adverse visual and operational effects of wireless telecommunications
facilities through careful design, siting and screening. More specifically these regulations
have been developed in order to:
1. Maximize use of existing and approved towers and other structures to accommodate
new antennas and transmitters in order to reduce the number of communication towers
needed to serve the community and the public.
2. Encourage providers to co-locate their facilities on a single facility;
3. Site facilities below visually prominent ridge lines;
4. Minimize the location of facilities in visually sensitive areas;
5. Encourage creative design measures to camouflage facilities;
6. Protect historic and residential areas from adverse impacts of communication towers;
73
7. Avoid hazards to adjacent properties and the public from structural failure through
engineered design and prudent siting of tower structures.
8. Avoid interference with existing natural scenic vistas.
12.35.2 Definitions
For the purpose of applying the provisions of this section the terms shall be defined as
follows:
ANTENNA means a device used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves. Examples
include, but are not limited to whip antennas, panel antennas and dish antennas. Devices
used exclusively for television reception by occupants of a single family residence, public
buildings, and multiple family buildings comprising no more than 4 units, shall be
exempted from these regulations.
CO-LOCATION means locating wireless communication facilities of more than one
provider on a single site.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES means licensed communications
including, but not necessarily limited to, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging
and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SITE means a facility operated by a licensed
wireless telecommunication service provider which consists of the equipment and
structures involved in receiving or transmitting electromagnetic waves associated with
wireless telecommunication services.
HEIGHT OF TOWER means the vertical distance measured in feet from the highest
existing ground elevation surrounding the tower and within ten feet thereof to the topmost
point of the tower including any antenna or other appurtenances. The height of a tower
mounted on a building shall be measured from the highest existing elevation of the ground
along all walls of the building to the tallest point on the tower including the antenna and all
other appurtenances.
EXISTING ELEVATION shall mean the actual elevations which existed 2 years prior to
initial application under Section 12.35 for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility.
TOWER means a structure that is specifically intended to support equipment used to
receive and/or transmit electromagnetic waves. Design examples of towers include (a) selfsupporting
lattice, (b) guyed and (c) monopole.
12.35.3 Location Preferences
The locations for siting the equipment involved in receiving or transmitting
electromagnetic waves associated with wireless telecommunication services are listed in
paragraphs 1 through 5 below, in order of preference.
1. On existing structures such as buildings, water towers, utility poles, and existing or
previously approved towers.
2. On new towers less than 60 feet in height located in commercial or industrial zones or
on municipal property.
3. On new towers 60 feet or greater in height located in commercial and industrial zones
or on municipal property.
74
4. On new towers less than 60 feet in height located in residential zones.
5. On new towers 60 feet or greater in height located in residential zones.
12.35.4 General Requirements
1. Applications for any commercial telecommunications service facility shall be made by
a licensed carrier only.
2. No wireless telecommunication tower site shall be located within 200 feet of a
residence.
3. No tower exceeding 60 feet in height shall be located within 1,000 feet of the boundary
of an approved historic district.
4. No lights shall be mounted on proposed towers unless otherwise required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Strobe lighting shall be permitted only where
required by applicable regulations.
5. Towers not requiring special FAA painting or markings shall be painted a noncontrasting
blue, gray or black or as required by the Commission.
6. Towers, antennas and equipment boxes may not be used to exhibit advertising or any
signage other than as required for public safety.
7. All towers shall be monopole design unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
8. Any proposed tower shall be designed in all respects to accommodate both the
applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the
tower is over 150 feet in height or for at least one additional comparable antenna if the
tower is 150 height or under. The commission may require the tower to be of such
design as to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accommodate antennas mounted at varying heights.
9. The Commission may require that towers, antennas, antenna mounts, equipment
buildings/boxes and telecommunication structures be of such design and material so
that they are inconspicuous.
10. Antennas or equipment buildings/boxes mounted to or on buildings or structures shall
to the greatest degree possible blend with the color and design of such building.
11. Each telecommunications facility site shall be provided with a paved driveway and
parking space for at least one vehicle.
12. No proposed wireless telecommunication site shall be designed, located or operated as
to interfere with existing or proposed public safety communications.
13. The design of all wireless telecommunication sites shall comply with the standards
promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for non-ionizing
electromagnetic emissions. In the absence of such standards sites shall comply with
standards set by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers for safe human
exposure to radio frequency electromagnetic fields. Approved tower owners shall
submit an annual report detailing the maximum current measurement of radio
frequency emissions.
14. All utilities proposed to serve a wireless telecommunication site shall be installed
underground unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
15. All generators installed in conjunction with any wireless telecommunication site shall
comply with all State and Local noise regulations and be provided with an approved
noise attenuation system as may be required at any time by the Commission.
75
16. All towers shall be fenced and all accompanying equipment buildings or boxes shall be
screened and fended to minimize visual intrusion as approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission as part of the site plan review.
17. In all Commercial, Industrial, and Industrial Park zoning districts any proposed new
construction of an antenna or tower shall be required to provide for co-location of
telecommunication services. The applicant shall be required to submit to the
Commission, in a form satisfactory to it, evidence prior to construction that it is bound
to share antenna space with other telecommunications providers. This may take
the form of an affidavit, caveat, declaration of covenants, etc. on the land records once
approved by the Commission.
12.35.5 Bulk Requirements
1. Lot Size. Wireless telecommunication sites containing a freestanding tower shall not
be located on any lot less than 40,000 square feet in area. No such facility shall be
sited on a lot which is not a legal building lot.
2. Height. The maximum height of a tower proposed under these regulations shall be 180
feet including the antenna and all other appurtenances and excluding the height of
supporting structures which existed prior to Jan 1, 1998. The maximum height of any
roof top mounted equipment building or box shall be 15 feet.
3. Setbacks.
4. All freestanding monopole or other towers shall comply with the minimum property
line setbacks for that zone except that in no cases shall a monopole or tower be
constructed so that it is set back from the property line less than a distance equal to the
height of the tower.
5. All equipment buildings/boxes or equipment areas, including areas devoted to parking,
screening and equipment shall comply with the following minimum property line
setbacks:
a. Front Yard As required in Zone.
b. Rear and Side Yards 20 feet.
6. All applications shall comply with any applicable requirements of the Flood Plain
Management Ordinance and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations.
12.35.6 Site Plan Requirements
For all proposals to develop a wireless telecommunication site the following additional
information shall be submitted in addition to the requirements of Section 19.
a. A plan showing where and how the proposed antenna will be affixed to a particular
building or structure. Plans shall be at a scale of not less than 1” = 40’.
b. Details of all proposed antenna and mounting equipment including size and color.
c. Elevations of all proposed shielding and details of materials including color.
d. An elevation of all proposed equipment buildings or boxes and details of proposed
screening and enclosures including materials and colors.
e. A design drawing including cross section and elevation of all proposed towers. A
description of the tower’s capacity including the number and type of antennas it can
accommodate as well as the proposed location of all mounting positions for co-located
antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas. The design shall
76
illustrate how the tower will collapse upon itself without encroaching upon any
adjoining property.
f. A report from a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut
indicating that the proposed wireless telecommunication site will comply with the
emission standards found in Section 12.35.4.13 of this regulation. Such report shall
also certify that the installation of such site will not interfere with public safety
communications. Such report shall include a description of the maximum power
density with all channels operating at highest power for all existing and proposed
emissions and ambient levels at the site. Modeling shall be performed at the fence line.
g. An analysis of the fall zone for the proposed tower prepared by a licensed professional
engineer registered in the State of Connecticut.
h. All applications shall include proof that either the applicant or co-applicant holds bona
fide license from the FCC to provide the telecommunication services that the proposed
tower is designed to support.
i. A map prepared by a licensed land surveyor depicting the extent of the provider’s
planned coverage within the Town of Plainfield and the service area of the proposed
wireless telecommunication site. A map indicating the search radius for the proposed
wireless telecommunication site and all existing towers and structures over a height of
50 feet within the planned coverage area.
j. The applicant shall demonstrate need for the network as proposed and shall describe
feasibility of alternative facility locations including existing towers and structures and
tower heights.
k. For proposed tower installations, all plans shall be designed and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer registered in the State of Connecticut.
l. Upon request of the Commission the applicant shall provide a graphic representation of
the proposed installation in relation to the site and its vicinity in order to help the
Commission ascertain the visual impacts associated with such proposal. Such
representation may include computer simulation, enhanced photographs or
architectural drawings or renderings.
m. For towers located in or within 1,000 feet of a residential zone, historic building, or
Historic zone the applicant shall provide an analysis showing all areas from which the
tower would be visible.
12.35.7 Factors upon which decisions of the Commission shall be based
In order to approve applications for wireless telecommunication sites, the Commission
shall also find:
1. In the event a wireless telecommunication site is proposed to be locate on, or within
1,000 feet of a property or District designated on the national Historic Register that
such proposal will preserve the historic and/or architectural character of the landscape
of any structure.
2. In the event where an application for the proposed location of wireless
telecommunication site is not a preference 1 or 2 location the applicant has adequately
described the efforts and measures taken to pursue those preferences and why a higher
preference location was not technologically, legally or economically feasible. The
supplied documentation should evaluate the following factors:
a. The planned equipment would cause unacceptable interference with the operation
of other existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved tower as
77
documented by a qualified licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Connecticut and the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a reasonable
cost.
b. The planned equipment cannot be accommodated on existing or approved tower as
documented by a qualified licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Connecticut.
c. The existing or planned equipment on an existing or approved tower would cause
unacceptable interference with the equipment proposed by the applicant as
documented by a qualified licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Connecticut and that the interference cannot be prevented or eliminated at a
reasonable cost.
d. Any restriction or limitation imposed by the FCC.
12.35.8 Abandonment
At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a wireless
facility, such carrier will notify the Commission by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date
of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no less than
30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations. In the event that a licensed
carrier fails to give such notice, the facility shall be considered abandoned upon such
discontinuation of operations. Upon abandonment or discontinuance of use, the carrier
shall physically remove the facility within 90 days from the date of abandonment. A
commercial wireless telecommunication site not in use for 12 consecutive months shall be
removed by the service facility owner. Upon removal the site shall be restored to its
previous appearance and where appropriate re-vegetated to blend with the surrounding
area.
12.36 Adult Uses Approved December 8, 1998
12.36.1 Purpose
The intent of this section is to regulate uses which, because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics, particularly when several of
them are concentrated could have a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Allowing
by Special Permit of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. The primary
control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a proliferation of these uses in any
one area.
12.36.2 Definitions
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
Adult book store - an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock
in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or viewing on premises by uses of motion picture
devices or any coin-operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified
Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Area", or an establishment with a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
78
Adult motion picture theater - An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons
used regularly and routinely for material having a dominant theme material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified
Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Area", for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater - An enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50
persons used regularly and routinely for material having a dominant theme material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Area", for observation by patrons
therein.
Adult Entertainment Cabaret - A public or private establishment which is licensed to serve
food and/or alcoholic beverages, which feature topless dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators, or similar entertainers, or acts relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or
"Specified Anatomical Areas", for observation by patrons therein.
"Specified Sexual Activities" is defined as:
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation arousal;
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female
breast;
"Specified Anatomical Areas" is defined as:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered: (I) human genitals, pubic region, (II)
buttock and (III) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
12.36.3 Regulated uses
Regulated uses include all Adult Uses which include, but are not limited to, the following:
Adult Book Store
Adult Entertainment Cabaret
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater
Adult Motion Picture Theater
a. Adult use shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
1. No such Adult use shall be allowed within 1000 feet of another existing Adult Use.
The 1000 feet shall be the straight horizontal distance from any part of a building
housing Adult Use, to any part of the other building housing Adult Use, as
measured by the Plainfield Town Engineer.
2. No such Adult Use shall be located within 1500 feet of any Residential Zoning
District. The 1500 feet shall be the straight horizontal distance from any part of a
building housing Adult Use to any boundary of a Residential Zoning District, as
measured by the Plainfield Town Engineer.
3. No such adult use shall be located within 1500 feet of a pre-existing school,
cemetery, park, library or place of worship. The 1500 feet shall be the straight
horizontal distance, as measured by the Plainfield Town Engineer, from any part of
a building housing Adult Use to any boundary of a property containing a school,
park, library or place of worship.
4. No such Adult Use shall be located in any Zoning District except Industrial (I) and
Commercial (C-1)
79
b. The provisions of a.1. through a.4 above shall not be deemed to be retroactive, except
that any building or premises being used for Adult Uses as defined herein whose use
for such purpose shall be discontinued for a period of 30 days shall thereafter conform
to these regulations.
12.36.4 Exterior Display
No Adult Use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any
material depicting, describing or relating to "Special Sexual Activities" or "Specified
Anatomical Areas," from any public way or from any property not registered as an Adult
Use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other
opening.
12.36.5 Registration
1. The owner of a building or premises, his/her agent for the purposes of managing or
controlling, or collecting rents, or any other person managing or controlling a building
or premises, any part of which contains an Adult Use, shall register with the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and provide the following Information:
a. The address of the premises.
b. The name of the owner of the premises and the names of the beneficial owners if the
property is in a land trust.
c. The address(es) of the owner and the beneficial owners.
d. The name of the business or the establishment subject to the provision of 12.36.3.
e. The name (s) of the owner, beneficial owner of the major stock holders of the business
or the establishment subject to the provisions of 12.36.3.
f. The address(es) of those persons named in subparagraph (e).
g. The date of initiation of the Adult Use.
h. If the building or premises is leased, a copy of the said lease shall be attached.
12.36.6 It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any property to establish
or operate thereon or to permit any person to establish or operate an Adult Use without
first having properly registered and received certification of approved registration; preexisting
Adult Uses prior to the effective date of this Regulation shall register within ten
(10) days of the effective date of this Regulation.
12.36.7 The owner, manager or agent of a registered Adult Use shall display a copy of the
Registration Form approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in a conspicuous place on
the premises.
12.37 Solid Waste and Recyclables Transfer Stations (Added 4/04) (CZ-2004-02)
Transfer Stations shall be permitted by Special Permit in Industrial Districts. In addition to the
requirements set forth in the Connecticut State Statutes, Title 22a, and the Connecticut Public
Health Code, Solid Waste and Recyclables Transfer Stations are subject to the standards below:
a. Description of the purpose and nature of the proposed use, any associated processing and the
type and quantity of all materials to be used or produced in connection therewith. The
description shall demonstrate that the proposed use will not pose a risk of pollution of the
groundwater.
80
b. Description of the nature, chemical composition, and means of disposal of any water,
including waste water, to be generated in connection with the proposed use.
c. Loading and transfer of commercially hauled solid waste and recyclables shall be conducted in
an enclosed building.
d. The site plan shall show measures to be taken to provide buffer areas and other proposed
screening measures. A landscaping buffer of twenty five (25’) feet shall be provided for any
property boundary adjacent to a residential district. The site plan shall also include location of
a gate and fencing to minimize access during times when the facility is not open.
e. A Solid Waste and Recyclables Transfer Station may only accept the following waste types:
mixed municipal solid waste produced by residential, commercial, industrial and institutional
sources, construction and demolition debris, leaves, clean brush and wood, recyclables
including old newsprint, old corrugated cardboard, and glass, metal, and plastic containers,
waste oil, used electronics, and scrap metal including appliances.
f. Storage of waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be in accordance with the
following:
1. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored in an enclosed structure
or under a roof that prevents storm water entry to the containment area and shall be
protected from groundwater intrusion.
2. Floors within a structure where waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics may be
stored shall be coated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to spillage
of or from any such material.
3. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored within an impermeable
containment area capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of such
material present in structure, or 10% of the total volume of all such containers in such area,
whichever is larger, without overflow or release of material from the containment area.
4. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored in a manner that will
prevent the contact of materials with such materials so as to create a hazard of fire,
explosion, or generation of toxic substances.
5. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored only in containers that
have been certified by a State or Federal agency or the American Society of Testing
Materials as suitable for the transport or storage of such materials.
6. Storage area for waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be inspected
daily for damage, leaks, or spills. Cleanup of all spills shall be initiated no longer than two
hours after discovery.
g. The perimeter of the facility shall be inspected daily for spilled debris.
h. All trucks containing waste and recyclables shall be covered when entering or exiting the
facility.
i. Provisions shall be made to minimize noise and dust emitted by operations carried on at the
site.
j. Outside storage or stockpiling of solid waste (other than leaves, brush or clean wood) is
prohibited unless stored within an enclosure trailer or other type of container approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
k. Where dumpsters or roll-off containers are proposed, the locations shall be shown on the site
plan. The roll-off containers shall be placed on a bituminous or concrete pad.
l. No material designated as hazardous waste as defined by 40CFR Part 261 Subpart C shall be
received at the Facility. Deliveries of waste oil, batteries, used electronics and antifreeze shall
81
be received from residential customers. Deliveries from commercial customers shall be as
approved by the Town of Plainfield Planning & Engineering Department.
m. Except for clean wood, brush, and leaves, areas where solid waste and recyclables are handled
and transferred, must be located outside areas of the Town designated as an Aquifer Protection
District pursuant to these regulations.
n. The permittee shall submit to the town any inspection reports required pursuant to State or
Federal regulations and permits for the facility.
o. The hours of operation for receiving or removing wastes and recyclables shall be limited to 7
A.M. to 5 P.M. Monday through Friday, and 7 A.M. to Noon on Saturday, except for weeks
containing a holiday, in which case Saturday operating hours shall be 7 A.M. to 5 P.M.
p. A holding tank shall be provided for the collection and off-site removal of any liquids
collected in the transfer building floor drains, unless the facility is located at a site served by
public sewers, and the permittee has been granted any applicable approvals for use of the
public sewer by the Connecticut DEP and the Plainfield Water Pollution Control Authority.
q. The bulk requirements of the Industrial District shall apply except the Commission may
impose additional buffering or lot size requirements depending upon the conditions associated
with any particular site or application hereunder.
r. All roll-off containers shall be covered when not in use, unless under a roof.
12.38 Special Purpose Landfill Facility – (Deleted 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02)
12.39 Bed and Breakfast – Special Function Facility (Effective 9/18/05, CZ-20050004)
A Bed and Breakfast – Special Function Facility may be permitted by Special Permit in an RA-60
Zoning District under the following criteria and standards:
a. Where applicable, a site development plan, as defined under Section 19 of these regulations,
along with floor plans and sketchesshall be submitted with the application. The Commission
may waive this requirement if the scope of the project does not warrant the plan.
b. The design of all proposed structures shall be in harmony with the surrounding area.
c. The proposed use must meet all health and safety requirements such as: adequate water supply
for drinking and fire fighting, adequate sewage disposal, safe traffic flow and control,
drainage, parking, wetlands approval, where necessary, as well as building code requirements.
d. The minimum lot size shall be 3 acres. Minimum setbacks shall be equal to the requirements
for the zone in which the property is located.
e. Parking shall be provided at the rate of 1 space for every 3 guests.
f. To ensure minimum disruption of the surrounding neighbors, a 25 foot minimum landscaped
buffer zone shall be provided, at the discretion of the Commission.
g. Evidence of use shall be minimal from the exterior, except for a business sign, not to exceed
12 sq. ft.
h. The maximum height for new buildings shall be limited to 30 feet.
i. The maximum size for new buildings shall be limited to 5,000 sq. ft.
82
12.40 Indoor Equestrian Riding Arenas (Effective 2/01/09) (TA 2008-07)
Indoor Equestrian Riding Arenas may be allowed in RA-60 Districts by special permit if the
Commission feels that the use will be in harmony with the surrounding area, and the following
conditions are met to the Commission’s satisfaction:
a. A site plan (of A-2 Survey accuracy if desired by the Commission) shall be submitted showing
the location of the structure, access to the facility, topography, wetlands, parking areas, etc.
b. The applicant must state if the facility will be for private use, to be used mainly by the
property owner, or if the facility will be of a commercial nature, used regularly by riders other
than the property owner.
c. If the facility will be of a commercial nature, adequate parking must be provided and shall be
of a dust-free surface.
d. Illustrations of the proposed structure shall be included with the proposed site plan and the
architecture of the structure shall be in harmony with the architecture of the surrounding area.
12.41 Film Studio (Added 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02)
Film studios may be allowed in all I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts by Special Permit providing that
the use will be in harmony with the surrounding area.
Accessory Uses
a. Film studio residences, provided that these shall be clearly an accessory use to the facility and
not rented out.
b. Outside storage area, provided that an area used for outside storage shall be adequately
screened from all streets and residential properties.
c. Outside film stage including any area of the studio property where filming takes place outside
of a fully enclosed studio, provided that no area used for an outside film stage shall be located
within 500 feet of a street or residential property. All measures must be taken to screen the
stage from streets and residences, and to diminish noise and light from exiting the property.
These measures include light and sound barriers and vegetative buffers.
Parking
a. Offices: one space per 300 square feet;
b. Computer Data Centers: one space per 1,000 square feet;
c. Stages, film editing, green rooms, mills, paint shop, commissary, film studio residences and
other uses that are incidental to the film studio: one space per 2,000 square feet; and
d. A plan for off-site parking on large casting days shall be submitted to and approved by the
Commission, the Police Chief and ConnDOT as part of the Special Permit Application.
Commission staff and the Police Chief will be notified no less than 3 days prior to each large
casting day.
12.42 Conversion of former boarding houses into apartments (Added 11/10/10, TA-2010-04)
The purpose of this regulation is to allow the conversion of a former boarding house into apartments
rather than single room living areas. Typically, boarding houses have significantly larger living areas
than single family homes and the conversion of that space into apartments would allow for better use of
the structure. Therefore, by Special Permit, a former boarding house may be converted into apartments
83
subject to the conditions listed below. Each application will be considered on a case by case basis and
further reasonable conditions may be imposed by the Commission.
a. The minimum lot area is 19,000 square feet.
b. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 4,500 square feet.
c. Open space shall be provided at the rate of 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit. Open space
shall be exclusive of structures, other than community buildings, access drives, parking areas,
wetlands, sidewalks or similar features.
d. Interior access and circulation shall be designed to permit fire-fighting equipment, emergency
vehicles, refuse collection vehicles, delivery vehicles and snow removal vehicles to operate in
a safe and efficient manner. Internal drives shall be paved to a minimum width of twenty four
(24) feet for two way traffic and sixteen (16) feet for one way traffic with 45 degree parking.
e. Paved off street parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of two (2) spaces per dwelling
unit. Parking spaces shall be ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet and shall be within one hundred
(100) feet via a concrete walk of the dwelling unit they are intended to serve. Parking spaces
shall be separated from buildings by a planting buffer at least six (6) feet wide.
f. The site shall be served by public water and sewer.
g. Dumpsters and/or refuse containers shall be placed on a concrete pad enclosed by a six (6) foot
high stockade fence.
h. Site lighting shall be provided for all walkways, access drives and parking areas. Lighting
shall be diffused and shall not be directed onto adjacent properties. Lights shall not be more
than ten (10) feet high.
i. Each application shall require the submission of a site development plan in accordance with
Section 12.52 of these regulations and preliminary architectural plans. The site development
plans and preliminary architectural plans shall also be submitted to the Building Official, Fire
Marshall and Fire Department for their review and comments.
12.43 Boarding Houses (Added 2/11/2014) (Z-2014-0413)
Boarding Houses are allowed by Special Permit in a Commercial Zone, provided that it will be in
harmony with the surrounding area. The following conditions must be met:
A site plan showing adequate parking shall be submitted to the Commission along with a floor
plan showing all rooms and uses, along with the number of beds proposed and maximum
occupancy numbers.
Room Capacity: Room capacity shall not exceed one occupant per 50 square feet of bedroom
floor area.
Each bedroom shall have a closet with each occupant having at least 48 cubic feet of closet area.
No sleeping quarters shall be located in any common areas of the dwelling (ie: living room,
kitchen, etc.)
The dwelling shall meet all building and fire code requirements and the Building Inspector and
Fire Marshall must approve the floor plans before the Commission can grant approval.
If the Special Permit is approved, any requirements of the Building Inspector and Fire Marshall
must be met before the building can be occupied.
No modifications to the floor plan or maximum occupancy can be made without modification to
the Special Permit.
Upon written request from the Zoning officer to the property owner, the owner shall allow the
Zoning Officer to inspect the dwelling within 48 hours of receiving the notice for compliance with
84
the Special Permit. The Building Inspector and Fire Marshall can accompany the Zoning Officer
to check for Building and Fire Code compliance.
12.44 Commercial Agricultural Buildings (Site Plan Required).
12.44.1 Intent. The intent of this section is to minimize the adverse impacts that certain large-scale
agricultural buildings and associated activities have on the neighborhood with respect to public
health, welfare, and property values. Such adverse impacts may include odors, flies and other
vectors, and contamination of surface and groundwater, light pollution and aesthetics, among
others.
12.44.2 A commercial agricultural building is defined in Section 1.2.
12.44.3 Standards. The Commission shall approve a permit for a commercial agricultural building
only upon finding that:
a. The building(s) shall be designed to resemble traditional New England style
farming structures.
b. The property shall have the appearance of a traditional working farm, or be
screened from view with natural vegetation. A temporary privacy fence may
be necessary while the vegetation matures.
c. Roads and intersections providing access to the property and associated
parking and loading will be adequate to provide safe and uncongested
movement of traffic.
d. Parking and driveways will be set back from side and rear lot lines by a
minimum of 50 feet. Parking areas shall be designed and screened so as to
minimize impact on the surrounding area.
e. The applicant is required to submit its plans for storage and disposal of wastes
to the Northeast District Department of Health for any comments they may
wish to make. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any applicable
State and Federal permits.
f. No such building or any waste storage or treatment area shall be located
closer than 200 feet from a street center line or 300 feet from any abutting
property. The Commission may reduce the distance to 100 feet if it
determines that the adjacent property is public open space, or physically
unsuitable for building purposes, and if there is no offsite dwelling within 300
feet of the property line.
g. Any noxious or offensive emissions (i.e., odors, smells) emanating and/or
resulting from the proposed use shall be properly treated and eliminated.
(i.e., bio-filters, etc.).
h. If the site is to be illuminated between the hours of 8:00pm and 6:00am, full
cut-off box light fixtures shall be used. Lights shall not be mounted higher than
fourteen feet and light shall not spill off the property. A lighting diagram shall
be required.
12.45 Agri-tourism (RA-60 District only)(See section 1.2 Definitions)
The intent of this regulation is to allow working farms (registered with the State of CT) with a
minimum of twenty (20) working acres to participate in agri-tourism while minimizing impact to
residents in the area. Considerations must be made in regards to traffic, accesses, parking, noise,
light, etc. and will be reviewed on a case by case basis. A detailed description of the proposal is
85
required. Depending on the scope of the project, an A-2 survey and site plan may be required by
the Commission.
Any new buildings to be constructed must meet Zoning requirements along with the approval of
the Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, and Department of Health.
If products are to be sold, at least 40% of those products shall be produced by the owner(s) of the
farm and a list of the types of products sold shall be provided as part of the special permit. The
intent is to allow the sale of locally produced, agricultural related products such as plants, food,
etc.
12.46 Auto Recycling Facility (Z-2015-0671) (08/01/2015)
An Auto Recycling Facility may be permitted by Special Permit in Industrial 1 District (“I-1”) and
Industrial 2 District (“I-2”) if the Commission determines that the use will not adversely affect the
surrounding area. In addition to any requirements established by Connecticut State Statutes, such
Auto Recycling Facility is subject to the standards below:
a. Description of the purpose and nature of the proposed use, any associated processing and the
type and quantity of all materials to be used or produced in connection therewith. The description
shall demonstrate that the proposed use will not pose a risk of pollution of the groundwater.
b. Description of the nature and means of disposal of any water, including waste water, to be
generated in connection with the proposed use.
c. The site plan filed in connection with such special permit application shall show measures to be
taken to provide buffer areas and other proposed screening measures. A landscaping buffer of one
hundred (100’) feet shall be provided for any property boundary adjacent to a residential district.
Such buffer area may remain in its natural state provided that such natural state, combined with
any additional screening measures to be provided by applicant, is determined by the Planning and
Zoning Commission to be sufficient screening from abutting residential areas. The site plan shall
also include location of a gate and fencing to minimize access during times when the facility is not
open and shall be screened in accordance with the following regulations:
1. The entire site shall be screened either:
a. by a buffer zone at least 25 feet wide with natural or planted screening
material of sufficient height and thickness to screen the facility from
all directions at all times of the year (plantings must be deer resistant);
or
b. by a solid, maintenance free fence at least 8 feet high sufficient or
screen the facility at all times of the year; or
c. by other natural topographic features approved by the Commission,
sufficient to screen the facility at all times of the year; or
d. by any combination of the above which fulfills the surrounding
screening material.
2. Parts and vehicles shall be stacked higher than the surrounding screening
material.
86
d. The grant of such special permit shall be conditioned in all cases upon the receipt by the
applicant prior to commencement of operation of such Auto Recycling Facility of a Connecticut
Motor Vehicle Recycler (Junk Yard) License.
e. Storage of waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall in accordance with the
following:
1. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored in an enclosed
structure or under a roof that prevents storm water entry to the containment area and shall be
protected from groundwater intrusion.
2. Floors within a structure where waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics may
be stored shall be coated to protect the surface of the floor from deterioration due to spillage
of or from any such material.
3. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored within an
impermeable containment area capable of containing at least the volume of the largest
container of such material present in structure, or 10% of the total volume of all such
containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow or release of material from
the containment area.
4. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored in a manner that will
prevent the contact of materials with such materials so as to create a hazard of fire,
explosion or generation of toxic substances.
5. Waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be stored only in containers that
have been certified by a State or Federal agency or the American Society of Testing
Materials as suitable for the transport or storage of such materials.
6. Storage area for waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, and used electronics shall be inspected
daily for damage, leaks, or spills. Cleanup of all spills shall be initiated no longer than two
hours after discovery.
f. Provisions shall be made to minimize noise and dusts emitted by operations carried on at the
site.
g. The Auto Recycling Facility must be located on a lot: (i) outside of areas of the Town
designated as an Aquifer Protection District pursuant to these regulations; and
(ii) containing at least twenty (20) acres.
h. No exterior dismantling or stacking operations shall take place between the hours of 6:00 PM
and 7:00 AM. The facility shall not be open on Sundays. Crushing activities shall be limited to
weekdays only and shall take place only during the hours of 9 AM to 4 PM.
i. Height of any exterior parts storage areas shall not exceed thirty (30) feet or the height of
the visual screening material.
87
j. The facility must contain at least seventy-five (75,000) square feet of enclosed building space.
k. Dismantling of vehicles shall take place in an area located inside the main building provided
for in Section 12.46(j) above, which dismantling area shall contain no less than 15,000 square feet.
l. External warehousing of parts shall be in an orderly fashion.
m. Vehicles must be processed within 90 days of being brought to the facility.
n. The Site Development Plan must include regulations and design of storm water treatment and
management system for those areas where vehicles will be stored outside.
12.50 Application Procedures
Application for special permits shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission or its
appointed agent in writing and in a form prescribed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
12.51 Application Fee (Amended 3/11/03)
An application for a special permit shall be accompanied by a fee that is listed under Section 20
(Application Fee Schedule) of the Town of Plainfield Zoning Regulations. The purpose of this fee
is to defray the cost of public notice required for hearings, processing and supplies.
12.52 Site Development Plan
a. Purpose
A site plan is intended to provide the Commission with information that will enable it to
determine that the proposed structures and uses comply with the requirements of these
Regulations; and, in conjunction with any application for a special permit use, assist the
Commission in determining that the structures and uses are arranged in a manner that enhances
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Plainfield and shall be of such character as to
harmonize with the neighborhood, to accomplish a transitioning character between areas of
unlike character, to protect property values in the neighborhood, to preserve and protect
natural resources and the appearance and beauty of the community and to avoid undue traffic
congestion.
b. Procedure
Four (4) copies of the Site Development Plan shall be submitted for approval with an
application for a zoning permit involving uses other than single and two family dwellings and
accessory buildings and excavations less than 500 cubic yards.
(i) A site plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer and/or land surveyor licensed
and registered to practice in Connecticut. If the proposed development includes
wetlands, or areas located within 100 feet of wetlands, the Commission shall have the
right to require that a certified soil scientist delineate the wetlands. The signed seal(s)
of those who prepared the site plan shall be included on the site plan. The site plan
shall conform with Class A-2 and T-2 Standards for Accuracy in accordance with
Sections 20-300b-1 through 20-300b-20 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies and Standards for Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut.
88
(ii) A written statement describing the proposed use or uses in sufficient detail will be
submitted with each site plan to determine compliance with the permitted uses or
special permits in the applicable zoning district.
(iii) A location map at a scale of 1 inch equals 1,000 feet shall be submitted showing the
subject property, streets, lot lines, and zoning district boundaries within 1,000 feet of
the subject property.
c. Site Plan Content
A site plan drawn at a scale of 1 inch equals 40 feet or such other scale as may be approved by
the Town Planner shall be prepared and clearly show to the satisfaction of the Commission the
following information.
(i) The name and address of the applicant and owner of record.
(ii) North arrow, scale, date of the drawing or its revision date and the names and seals of
those persons preparing the site plan.
(iii) Property boundaries, dimensions and area in acres and square feet of the lot and all
existing monuments, pipe markers and other physical evidence concerning property
boundaries.
(iv) Zoning districts and dimensions of all yards as required by these Regulations. This
information will be shown in both mapped tabular form.
(v) Existing and proposed contour lines at 2-foot intervals.
(vi) Location, width and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and rights of ways
on the property.
(vii) Location of all existing watercourses, wetlands, public water supply, watershed
boundaries and bedrock outcrops.
(viii) Location and size in square feet of all existing and proposed structures including
underground storage tanks and uses on the property and the approximate location and
size of all existing structures on abutting properties which are within 100 feet of the
property lines.
(ix) Location of all storage areas for materials, supplies, products, vehicles and equipment
that will not be kept inside a structure.
(x) Location, size and arrangement of all parking and loading areas including existing and
proposed driveway entrances and exits. The Town Planner may require the applicant
to submit a traffic evaluation report prepared by a traffic engineer if the proposed
development has the potential to impact traffic flow or significantly impact peak period
traffic counts.
(xi) Location, size and arrangements of all pedestrian walkways and sidewalks.
(xii) Location, layout, type and size of buffer or landscaped area, plant materials, fencing,
screening devices or other materials proposed for use.
(xiii) Location, size, height, lighting and orientation of all signs.
(xiv) Location, size, height and orientation of all outdoor lighting facilities.
(xv) A detailed analysis and calculation of the storm water drainage system, including the
location and elevations of all existing and proposed street drainage facilities within 100
feet of the property.
(xvi) Location, size and type of all water and fire protection facilities.
89
(xvii) Location, size and type of all sewerage disposal facilities.
(xviii) Building elevations in conceptual form showing the general type of building proposed
for construction.
(xix) In cases where the applicant intends to develop in stages, an overall site and staging
plan shall be required.
(xx) A detailed erosion and sediment control plan as required in Section 6 of these
Regulations.
(xxi) For any use which contains more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and for all
satellite parking areas, the site plan shall be accompanied by a detailed traffic study
delineating the traffic impacts which will occur as a result of the proposed
development, including, but not limited to, ingress and egress to and from the site and
all parking areas.
(xxii) A signature and, if applicable, waiver block for endorsement of the site plan by the
commission.
(xxiii) Any additional information in order to satisfy the requirements of Section 19 of these
Regulations.
d. Waivers
The Commission may waive one or more of the site plan ingredient requirements of Section
12.42(c) if it finds that the information is not necessary to reach a decision on the application.
A waiver of the applicable section or sections must be requested in writing by the applicant.
12.53 Floor Plans and Sketches
An application shall be accompanied by floor plans of all proposed new or renovated buildings on
the site, sufficient to show room configurations, entrances, exits, loading areas, restrooms, and
cooking areas, and the sketches of proposed construction sufficient to assist the Planning and
Zoning Commission in determining the visual impact of the development on neighboring
properties. Such plans may be in a preliminary form.
12.60 Planning and Zoning Commission Action
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within sixty-five (65) days or receipt of an
application for a special permit, hold a public hearing on such application. Notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the
municipality at least twice, at intervals of not less than two (2) days, the first not more than fifteen
(15) days, nor less than ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the date of
such hearing. At such hearing any party may appear in person and may be represented by such
agent or by attorney. The Commission shall decide upon such application within sixty-five (65)
days after the hearing. Special permits may be approved subject to any appropriate conditions and
safeguards deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to secure the
findings required by Section 12.11 of these regulations. Whenever the Commission grants or
denies a special permit, it shall state upon its records the reason for its decision. Notice of the
decision of the Commission shall be published in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in
the municipality and addressed by certified mail tot he person who applied for the special permit
by its secretary or clerk, under his signature in any written, printed, typewritten or stamped form
within fifteen (15) days after such decision has been rendered.
90
12.70 Effective Date of Special Permits
A special permit shall become effective at such time as it has been approved by the Planning and
Zoning commission and the following obligations have been satisfied.
a. The approved site development plan, including any stipulations approved by the Commission,
is signed by the Chairman of the Commission.
b. The approved, signed site development plan has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk by
the applicant or record owner, at his expense.
c. A performance bond has been posted and approved as required in this article.
d. Whenever a State of Connecticut or federal agency is required to approve a plan for any
project prior to commencement of construction or to approve a permit for road, street, or
driveway connections, a special permit shall not become effective until such approvals have
been granted.
12.80 Expiration of Special Permits (Amended May 11, 1993)
A special permit shall be valid for a period of two (2) years after the date of approval of the permit
by the Commission. Such permit shall continue to be valid thereafter, provided all construction,
landscaping, and other improvements are completed according to the approved site plan. At any
time, the Commission, at its discretion, may require the owner to prepare and submit an as built
drawing, and other evidence and/or otherwise show compliance with the approved site
development plans and terms of approval. If the Commission finds substantial noncompliance it
shall schedule the matter for a public hearing. Based on the evidence submitted at the public
hearing, the Commission shall extend, extend with conditions, or revoke the special permit. A
special permit is only valid for the specific use for which it was granted except per Section 9.23 of
these regulations.
12.90 Performance Bond (Amended May 11, 1993)
The record owner of the property for which the special permit has been approved may be required
to post a bond approved by the Commission or its designated agent as to form and sureties, in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of construction of street improvements, driveway connections,
drainage and pollution control facilities, sewer and water supply facilities, landscaping, and other
conditions required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Evidence of all terms of such bond
shall be made available by the Commission or its agent for public inspection. The performance
bond shall not be released until the work bonded has been completed in accordance with the
approved site development plan to the satisfaction of the Commission.
91
SECTION 13 – Liquor uses, Gasoline service stations, Parking requirements,
Signs and Existing Junkyards (Amended 6/01/2009, TA-2009-02)
13.0 Notwithstanding what is provided elsewhere in these regulations, the following uses involving the
sale of liquor or alcoholic beverages and the sale of gasoline products shall be subject to the
provisions of this article.
13.1 Liquor Sale
13.11 After the adoption of these regulations, no permit shall be issued for the erection of a
liquor sale place, nor for the conversion or alteration of any premises for such use, if any
part of the building or lot to be so used be within five hundred (500) feet of any entrance to
a public park or playground, excluding small park areas within the boundaries of a
highway, or within five hundred (500) feet of the nearest point of any building in which
there is established or maintained a school, hospital, church, theater, youth club, public
library or building for public assembly.
13.2 Public garages, Automobile filling and servicing stations
(Front Setback changed 12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
13.21 No gasoline or diesel filling appliance shall be located within ten (25) feet of the street lot
line or within twenty-five (25) feet of the side or rear lot line of the lot on which such
filling appliance is located.
13.3 Parking Requirements
13.31 Dimensions of parking space. A required parking space shall contain not less than two
hundred (200) square feet in the case of a parking lot and not less than one hundred sixty
(160) square feet in the case of a parking garage or a parking lot to be used for an
Industrial or Municipal use. Each space shall be useable shape and exclusive of driveways
and access areas. (Amended 2/11/03) (CZ-2002-12)
13.32 Required minimum parking spaces. Except as provided elsewhere in these regulations,
off-street parking in the following minimum amounts shall be provided:
a. Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
b. For a permitted home occupation, in addition to the parking requirements of Section
13.32.a, the following requirements apply:
1. One (1) parking space for each employee plus one (1) parking space for
every three hundred (300) square feet of building floor area devoted to
such use except for:
a. Skilled handcrafts which require one (1) parking space plus one
(1) additional space for each employee.
b. Bed and Breakfasts which require one (1) space per guestroom
and one (1) space per employee on the numerically largest shift.
c. For industrial and manufacturing plants, one (1) parking space for
every 1.25 employees based on the numerically largest shift.
92
d. For hotels, one (1) parking space for each guest room, plus one (1) additional space for
each employee.
e. For motels, tourist homes or trailer courts, one (1) parking space for each rental unit
plus one (1) additional space for each employee of the premises.
f. For boarding houses, rooming houses or dormitories, one (1) parking space for each
resident plus one (1) additional space for each employee.
g. For hospitals, sanitariums, convalescent or nursing homes, one (1) parking space for
each four (4) beds plus one (1) additional space for each employee based on the
numerically largest shift.
h. For medical or dental offices, two (2) parking spaces for each examination room plus
(1) additional space for each employee.
i. For funeral establishments, one (1) parking space for each “official” vehicle, plus one
(1) additional space for each employee, plus one (1) additional space for each three (3)
legal occupants of the building.
j. For theaters and places of assembly, amusement and recreation, one (1) parking space
for each three (3) seats, plus one (1) additional space for each employee.
k. For business offices, financial institutions and fitness facilities, one (1) parking space
for each two hundred (200) square feet of building floor area exclusive of basement
storage and service areas and stairs.
l. For restaurants or other eating places, one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100)
square feet of building floor area exclusive of basement storage and service areas and
stairs. For bars and nightclubs, one parking space for every fifty (50) square feet.
m. For retail stores and personal service shops, one (1) space for each two hundred (200)
square feet of gross feasible floor area.
n. For Day Care facilities, an adequate pick-up and drop-off area with parking for at least
four (4) vehicles, plus one space per employee.
o. For auto sales & service, number of reserved parking spaces:
1. One (1) space per employee
2. One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of interior customer area.
3. One (1) space per two thousand (2000) square feet of exterior display area.
4. One (1) space per service bay.
13.33 Parking for the physically handicapped shall be located as close as possible to walkways,
ramps, and building entrances. Parking spaces shall be located so that physically
handicapped persons are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked vehicles to reach
building entrances, ramps or walkways. There is to be three (3) feet of cross-hatch on
either side of the required parking space. Such spaces shall be so designated both on the
pavement and with an above grade sign (Parking for the Handicapped - Standard).
total parking in lot # handicapped spaces (min.)
up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 - 100 4
100 + 5+
93
13.5 Sign Regulation (Amended 4/01/16) (Z-2016-0854)
13.51 Authorization. No sign shall be established, constructed, enlarged, altered, extended or
moved except in conformance with these regulations.
13.52 Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to permit signs
while regulating and restricting them so as to prevent signs from being: Excessive in
number, illumination, area or height; distracting to motorists; incompatible with the use of
the land or building to which they are accessory; having an adverse impact on property
values and the aesthetic and historic character of the Town of Plainfield; or otherwise
impairing the public health, safety and welfare.
13.53 Overview of signs. Unless specifically stated otherwise, signs can be either one or two
sided. When referring to the size of a sign, the size is referring to one side of the sign. For
example, if it is stated that the maximum allowable size for a sign is 50 square feet, that 50
square feet refers to one side. If that sign is allowed to have two sides, it can have a
maximum of 50 square feet for each side. Two sided signs shall be lettered back to back.
The height of a sign shall be measured from the ground to the top of the sign face.
Decorative tops of a reasonable size and height will not be measured as the top of the sign.
No part of the decorative top shall exceed three feet above the top of the sign face and shall
not contain any lettering.
No sign shall be located within the right-of-way for any street or restrict the sightline of
traffic traveling within or entering on to any public right-of-way.
New signs shall be located such that they do not block the sight lines of existing signs on
neighboring properties.
No sign shall be erected in such a manner that will interfere with, obstruct, mislead or
confuse traffic.
Signs shall be made of material sufficient to withstand the elements and maintain their
original appearance for a number of years.
13.54 Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited in all zones.
13.54.1 Flashing signs, as defined in these regulations (see section 1) except for
signs on Town or State highways used for traffic safety.
13.54.2 Moving signs (also at times called “mechanical” signs) as defined in these
regulations (see section 1). “Moving signs” shall include, but not be limited
to, permanent spinners, streamers, banners, and the like.
13.54.3 Portable or mobile signs, being any sign which is mounted on wheels, is
collapsible, or mounted or painted on a vehicle. “Portable signs shall
include, but not be limited to signs on balloons, kites or other objects
suspended in the air.
13.54.4 Signs painted directly upon any building surface, such as wall, roof or
painted or otherwise displayed upon the surface of the earth itself.
13.54.5 Roof signs or sky signs, as defined in these regulations (see section 1).
94
13.54.6 Any sign which displays lights resembling those customarily used by
police, fire, ambulance other emergency vehicles; and any sign which
resembles a traffic control sign that may be misconstrued to be a public
safety warning sign or other official traffic control sign.
13.55 Exempt Signs. The following signs do not require a Zoning Permit provided that they
comply with the provisions of these regulations:
13.55.1 Public signs. Signs erected in the public interest by or on the order of a
public official in the performance of his or her duty, including but not
limited to, safety, trespassing, traffic control signs, and signs of memorial or
historic interest.
13.56 Regulated Signs. Except where it is specifically stated that no Zoning Permit is required,
no sign shall be erected or established until the issuance of a Zoning permit for that sign.
For any sign requiring a special permit or site plan review pursuant to these regulations, all
required information shall be submitted as part of the application for such special permit or
site plan review and shall be approved, modified and approved or disapproved exclusively
by the Commission, as part of its application on the special permit or site plan review.
Where a special permit or site plan review is not required, the Commission’s Designated
Agent, currently the Zoning Enforcement Officer, will review all applicable information
and will issue the Zoning Permit for the sign. Non-residential use signs shall have
landscaping around them.
13.56.1 Application for a Permit for a Sign. Every application for a permit for a sign,
whether as part of an application for a special permit, site plan review, or simply
for a Zoning permit shall contain, at minimum, the following information:
a. A site plan depicting the location of the sign(s) on the subject site and its
relation to adjacent buildings and structures and any associated landscaping,
lighting sources, structural components, existing signs (located on and
remaining on the site) and the like.
b. An illustration of the proposed sign(s), including dimensions, text/content,
materials, color and structural support.
c. A narrative description of the sign(s), including the method of illumination,
materials (if not evident from the illustration), a description of the total
signage area for each sign.
13.56.2 Signs in a residential zone.
a. Residential uses (no permit required).
1. Building mounted signs – up to 4 square feet of area.
2. Free-standing ground signs – up to 4 square feet of area. Not to
exceed 6 feet in height. One sign per property.
3. Temporary signs (not to exceed 60 days) – up to 16 square feet of
area.
95
b. Legally existing non-residential uses.
1. Building mounted signs – up to 50 square feet of area per use, or 1
square foot of area per every 2 feet of linear building frontage
occupied, not to exceed 150 square feet per use.
2. Free-standing ground signs – One sign per property, not to exceed
50 square feet of area or 10 feet in height, except per section 13.56.4
lots with multiple non-residential uses.
3. Temporary signs (not to exceed 60 days) – up to 16 square feet of
area.
4. Window Signs.
a. Permanent Window Signs: Permanent window signs shall be
permitted in addition to the exterior signage. The window
signage shall not cover more than 25% of the total window area.
The signage shall be painted or be vinyl, gold leaf, silver leaf, or
other similar material approved by the Commission or its
appointed agent, and shall be affixed to the inside of the
window.
b. Temporary Window Signs: Temporary display window signs
shall not cover more than 20% of the total window area and can
be used in addition to the permanent window signage. The signs
shall not remain for more than 30 days at a time. The signs shall
be placed against the interior portion of the window.
13.56.3 Specific Requirements for Signs located in Commercial and Industrial Zones.
a. Building mounted signs – up to 50 square feet of area per use, or 1 square
foot of area per every 2 feet of linear building frontage occupied, not to
exceed 150 square feet per use.
b. Free-standing ground signs – One sign per property, not to exceed 50 square
feet of area or 10 feet in height, except per section 13.56.4 lots with
multiple non-residential uses.
c. Temporary signs (not to exceed 60 days) – up to 32 square feet of area.
d. Window Signs.
1. Permanent Window Signs: Permanent window signs shall be permitted
in addition to the exterior signage. The window signage shall not cover
more than 25% of the total window area. The signage shall be painted
or be vinyl, gold leaf, silver leaf, or other similar material approved by
the Commission or its appointed agent, and shall be affixed to the inside
of the window.
2. Temporary Window Signs: Temporary display window signs shall not
cover more than 20% of the total window area and can be used in
addition to the permanent window signage. The signs shall not remain
for more than 30 days at a time. The signs shall be placed against the
interior portion of the window.
96
13.56.4 Properties with Multiple Non-residential Uses.
In the case of properties having more than one business on it, one (1) permanent
freestanding sign (typically referred to as a marquis sign) may be erected to
display all of the businesses located on the property. The structure shall not
exceed 20 feet in height nor exceed 15 feet in width, nor shall the overall size of
the structure exceed 200 square feet. Not more than 50 square feet of said
structure shall be dedicated to each legal use on the property.
13.56.5 Pylon Signs. Special Permit Required.
a. Allowed in Highway Commercial Zones only.
b. Uses located within the Highway Commercial Zone may be allowed
additional signage to be seen by motorists traveling on Interstate 395.
Through Special Permit, the Commission may permit up to 150 square feet
of additional signage per use on a structure separate from the ground sign.
No part of the structure or signs located thereon shall exceed 50 feet in
height. This additional signage does not have to be located on the same
property as the use, but must remain within the Highway Commercial Zone
and be used for uses within that same Zone. It is encouraged that multiple
uses utilize the same sign structure to minimize cluttering of the skyline.
The Commission has full control over the height, size, appearance, and
location of the sign structure and the signs located thereon, should the signs
or structure be permitted. The Commission reserves the right to request a
skyline demonstration showing digitally enhanced photos of the proposed
structure and signs located thereon from various points in the vicinity of
that structure.
13.6 Regulation of existing junkyards and scrap metal processing facilities.
All junkyards, automobile junkyards and scrap metal processing facilities lawfully in existence as
of June 26, 1985, are required to meet the following regulations by January 1, 1986. (See
Definitions, Section 1.2, for terms defined.)
a. The entire site shall be screened either:
1. by a buffer zone at least 25 feet wide with natural or planted screening material of
sufficient thickness to screen the facility from all directions at all times of the year; or
2. by a solid wooden fence at least 8 feet high sufficient to screen the facility from all
directions at all times of the year; or
3. by other natural topographic features sufficient to screen the facility at all times of the
year; or
4. by any combination of the above which fulfills the screening requirement.
b. Scrap shall not be piled higher than the surrounding screening material.
97
SECTION 14 - Nonconforming buildings, lots and uses, Abandonment
14.1 Nonconforming Building and Uses
Any nonconforming use of a building or premises lawfully existing at the effective date of these
regulations or of any amendments hereto, may be continued and any building so existing which
was designed, arranged, intended for or devoted to a nonconforming use may be reconstructed and
structurally altered and the nonconforming use therein changed subject to the following
regulations.
14.11 Unsafe structures. (Amended 8/01/2010)
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any portion of a building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority. An unsafe
structure which does not conform to the minimum setback dimensions for the zone in
which it is located may be demolished and reconstructed in the same location as the
original structure.
14.12 Extension.
A nonconforming use may be extended to another part of a building designed for such use
but not at the expense of a conforming use.
14.13 Change to conforming use when altered. (Amended 6/11/02 CZ-2002-02)
(Amended 2/11/2014, Z-2013-0401)
No building devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged in area unless the use
therein is changed to a conforming use. Structural improvements and alterations are
permitted, provided that the area of the nonconforming use is not increased.
Mobile homes located in an existing non-conforming mobile home park may be replaced
provided that the new mobile home does not exceed two hundred (200) percent of the floor
area of the existing mobile home.
14.14 Reconstruction after fire, etc., damage.
When a building in which there is a nonconforming use is damaged by fire, collapse,
explosion, act of God, or act of the public enemy, it may be reconstructed, repaired or
rebuilt only to its previous floor area and cubical content provided such reconstruction or
rebuilding is commenced within one (1) year of such damage and the nonconforming use
continued.
14.15 Change of use.
No nonconforming use may be changed except to a conforming use, except that the
Planning and Zoning Commission may permit a nonconforming use to be changed to
another nonconforming use or additional nonconforming use upon determination by it,
after public hearing duly advertised, that the proposed new use or additional use will be no
more detrimental to its neighborhood and its surroundings than is the use it is to be added
to or replace and further provided that such building or structure shall not be reconstructed
98
or structurally altered except in conformity with these regulations. In determining relative
“detriment” the Planning and Zoning Commission shall take into consideration, among
other things: traffic generated, nuisance characteristics such as emission of noise, dust and
smoke; fire hazards; and hours and manner or operation.
14.2 Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designed use of a
building or structure for which a building permit has been issued and the construction of which
shall have been diligently prosecuted within six (6) months of the date of such permit and the
ground-story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed
within six (6) months of such period and which entire building shall be completed according to
such plans as filed within two (2) years from the date of adoption of this ordinance.
14.3 Bulk Requirements
A building containing a permitted use but which does not conform to the requirements regarding
building height limit, width of lot, required yard and parking facilities for the district in which it is
located, may be enlarged or altered, provided:
14.31 Such enlargement provides for a permitted use containing no more family dwelling units
than now exists.
14.32 Any additions are constructed within the applicable yard requirements or are not nearer to
the lot lines than the existing building.
14.4 Abandonment (Amended 8/01/2010)
No nonconforming use which has been abandoned shall be thereafter resumed. A nonconforming
use shall be considered abandoned when there is an actual cessation of such use for a period of one
(1) year.
14.5 District changes
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one district to
another district of a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein.
14.6 Construction on existing non-conforming lots (Added 8/01/2010)
Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the construction of a permitted building or structure on
an undeveloped lot existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, which does not contain
the required minimum lot area or minimum lot frontage on a street, subject to the provisions of
these regulations for the zoning district in which the lot is located and Department of Health
requirements, if applicable. Building setbacks for undeveloped lots shall not be less than the
average setbacks of those lots in the surrounding area. Any undeveloped lot in a subdivision
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conform to the zoning setback
requirements in effect at the time the subdivision was approved.
99
SECTION 15 - General Requirements
15.1 Conformity to Regulations
15.1.1 Conformity of buildings and land use and occupancy. No building, structure, or premises
shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected,
raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity
with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
15.1.2 Conformity of building heights, yards, area, etc.
No building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered or used so as to produce greater
heights, smaller yards or less unoccupied area and no building shall be occupied by more
families than prescribed for such building, structure or premise for the district in which it is
located.
15.1.3 Conformity of open spaces.
No yard, court or open space or part thereof, shall be included as a part of the yard, court or
open space similarly required for any other building, structure or dwelling under the
provisions of these regulations.
15.1.4 Reduction of dimension of lot areas. (Amended 8/01/2010)
No lot shall be diminished in area or frontage nor shall any yard, court or open space be
reduced except in conformity with the requirements of these regulations.
15.2 Lots in more than one district
Where a lot lies in more than one district, the provisions of the less restrictive district may be
applied for a distance of not over twenty-five (25) feet into the more restrictive district provided
that such lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district.
15.3 Height Limitations Amended March 10, 1998, Amended 9/12/2006, TA-2006-08
Structure height limit shall be applied separately for each wing or other distinct portion of the
structure, and may be increased for any structure or distinct portion thereof by one foot for every
two (2) feet by which such structure or such portion thereof lies inside the nearest line of any
required front, side or rear yard. Spires, cupolas, towers, chimneys, flagpoles, ventilators, tanks,
and similar features except Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (which shall be regulated in
accordance with Section 12.35.5), occupying in the aggregate not more than ten (10) per cent of
the structure area and not used for human occupancy, may be erected to an additional reasonable
and necessary height not to exceed 40 ft.. The Maximum height of elevated storage facilities for
public and private water supply and distribution companies shall be as determined by certification
and computations by a professional engineer.
15.4 Projections into yards
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the projection of not more than one (1) foot into a required
open space of pilasters, belt courses, sills, cornices or similar architectural features, nor the
planting or landscaping of such open spaces, except as limited in Section 15.8 and subsection
15.8.1 hereof.
15.5 Corner visibility Amended April 14, 1992
Generally, except as provided in subsection 15.8.1, no wall, fence or other structure shall be
erected and no hedge, shrub tree or other growth or earth fill shall be maintained on a corner lot
100
between the building line and the street line, so as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing the
view.
15.5.1 In residence district. Amended April 14, 1992
On a corner lot in any residence district no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting
more than three (3) feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line adjoining said
street lines at points which are twenty five (25’) feet distant from the point of intersection,
measured along said street lines.
15.6 Fences (Effective 10/01/2014)
Fences do not require a zoning permit, however they must meet the following requirements:
a. No fence shall within a town or state right of way.
b. No fence shall shall restrict the sightlines of driveways, rights-of-ways, or public roadways. A
200foot sightline must be maintained. The sightline shall be measured from the center of the
driveway or right-of-way, 10 feet back from the edge of road at a height of 3 feet off the
ground.
c. For fences at intersections, the fence nust also meet the requirements of Section 15.5 of these
regulations entitled “Corner Visibility”.
15. 7 Temporary Housing (Amended 2/11/03)
The use of a trailer or mobile home for temporary housing may be allowed provided that the
existing dwelling has been damaged by fire or by the forces of nature and providing that the
following criteria are met.
a. A Building Permit to rebuild or renovate the existing dwelling shall be applied for prior to
applying for a Zoning Permit for a Temporary Dwelling Unit.
b. Temporary Dwelling Units shall be located on the same parcel as the existing dwelling to be
reconstructed. The Units shall be located within the Building Setbacks established for that
Zoning District and shall be located behind dwelling to be reconstructed.
c. Temporary Dwelling Units shall be connected to water (public or private) and sewer (public or
private) and meet all specifications of the Northeast District Department of Health.
1. In addition to the criteria set forth in Section 15.1, the following regulations also apply.
a. A Zoning Permit for a Temporary Dwelling Unit is valid for one (1) year. If work is
not completed by that time, a second Permit may be applied for. This second Permit is
valid for six (6) months. A third Permit shall not be granted.
1. All Temporary Dwelling Units shall be removed from the site within 21 days of the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (for the reconstructed/renovated building)
from the Building Inspector or shall be removed by the date of Permit Expiration,
which ever comes first.
2. The Zoning Permit for that Temporary Dwelling Unit shall expire once a
Certificate of Occupancy has been issued (for the reconstructed/renovated
dwelling).
b. The building to be reconstructed shall not be occupied while the Zoning Permit for the
Temporary Dwelling Unit is current.
c. Only one Temporary Unit shall be allowed per building lot.
101
Section 15.8 Clothing donation bins (Amended 4/01/16) (Z-2016-0849)
a. No person or other legal entity shall place or maintain any clothing donation bin on any
premises open to the public unless issued a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Officer.
b. Clothing donation bins shall be permitted only on a commercially zoned parcel where there
exists an occupied commercial building. Clothing donation bins shall not be allowed on
vacant lots or lots where a commercial building is unoccupied. Should a building become
vacant after a Zoning Permit has been issued for the placement of a clothing donation bin, the
bin shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) days. The Zoning Officer shall
approve the location of the clothing donation bin on the property such that it does not interfere
with parking, traffic flow, pedestrian traffic, and sightlines. The application for a Zoning
Permit shall include contact information for the owner of the bin and the property owner.
Should the contact information change, the Zoning Officer shall be notified in writing of the
new contact information within seven (7) days of the change. Both the owner of the clothing
donation bin and the property owner shall sign the Zoning Permit application.
c. The owner, lessee, or other person or legal entity in control of the property where the clothing
donation bin is being maintained and the person or entity which owns, maintains, or operates
the clothing donation bin in violation of this section shall be jointly and severally liable for
such violation(s) therefor.
d. Clothing donation bins shall be emptied at regular intervals so that there is sufficient storage
space in the bin for the public to place new donations.
Any and all items left outside of the clothing donation bins shall be removed from sight within
24 hours of being placed there.
e. Clothing donation bins shall be constructed of steel or fireproof material and be designed in a
way that is weatherproof and secured from entry by the public.
Clothing donation bins shall be no larger than seventy-two (72) inches tall, seventy-one (71)
inches wide, and sixty (60) inches deep.
Clothing donation bins shall be maintained in good condition, free from damage, weathered
surfaces and corrosion.
f. All clothing donation bins shall clearly display a notice in block letters at least two inches high
stating:
a. If the donation is for a charitable purpose:
i. The name of the nonprofit organization that will benefit from the donation;
ii. The name and telephone number of the owner of such bin; and
iii. That the public may contact the Department of Consumer Protection for further
information, or
b. If not intended for a charitable purpose:
i. That such donation is not for a charitable purpose; and
ii. The name and telephone number of the owner of such bin.
c. Such notice shall be on the same side of the bin where the donation is likely to be
made.
g. The Zoning Permit applicant may apply for two (2) clothing donation bins on a single parcel
of land if the volume of donations warrants the extra storage capacity; however, no more than
two (2) clothing donation bins shall be allowed on a single parcel.
h. No owner shall be permitted to place more than ten (10) total clothing donation bins in the
Town.
102
i. Property owners having clothing donation bins on their property at the time this Ordinance is
adopted shall be notified by certified mail that a Zoning Permit is required. Permits for such
unregulated bins must be obtained from the Zoning Office within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the mailing of said notices or the person(s) responsible for such unregulated bins will face
enforcement proceedings and penalties, pursuant to Section 4 of Town Ordinance No. 124.
j. Enforcement and Penalty:
Violators of this regulation shall be subject to enforcement per Section 4 of Town Ordinance
No. 124. – An Ordinance Concerning the Regulation of Clothing Donation Bins.
k. No person or other legal entity shall place or maintain any clothing bin on any premises open
to the public except when issued a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Officer.
l. Clothing bins shall be permitted only on commercially zoned parcel where there exists an
occupied commercial building. Clothing bins shall not be allowed on vacant lots or where a
commercial building is unoccupied. Should a building become vacant after a permit has been
issued for the placement of a clothing bin, that bin shall be removed from the property within
30 days. The Zoning Officer shall approve the location of the clothing bin on the property so
that it does not interfere with parking, traffic flow, pedestrian traffic and sightlines. Along with
the application for a Zoning Permit, contact information for the owner of the bin and the party
responsible for maintaining the property shall be submitted. Should the contact information
change, the Zoning Officer shall be notified and be provided with new contact information
within 7 days of the change. Both the owner of the clothing bin and the owner of the property
shall sign the Zoning Permit application.
m. The owner, lessee, or other person or legal entity in control of the property where the clothing
bin is being maintained and the person or entity which owns, maintains, or operates the
clothing bin in violation of this section shall be jointly and severally liable for such violation(s)
therefor.
n. Any and all items left outside of the clothing bins shall be removed from sight within 24 hours
of being placed there.
o. Clothing bins shall be constructed of steel or fireproof material and be designed in a way that
is weatherproof and secured from entry by the public. Clothing bins shall be maintained in
good condition, free from damage, weathered surfaces and corrosion.
p. All clothing bins shall clearly display the company/owner of the bin, a contact number,
website of the company/owner (if the company/owner has a website) and whether the
company/owner is a non-profit or for-profit entity.
q. The Zoning Officer may permit up to two (2) clothing bins per property if the donation traffic
warrants the extra storage.
r. No owner/company shall be permitted to have more than ten (10) total clothing bins within the
Town.
15.10 Nothing contained in these regulations shall prohibit the use of a trailer or mobile home for office
purposes during and in connection with a construction project, provided all applicable sanitary
codes are satisfied.
103
SECTION 16- Administrative provisions: Interpretation, Enforcement and Zoning
Board of Appeals
16.1 Interpretation of Regulations
16.11 Other Ordinances and Agreement.
These Regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinance, regulations or other provisions of law, or any easement, or other private
agreement or legal relationship. When these Regulations impose restrictions on use or
bulk different from those imposed by any other statue, ordinance, covenant or private
agreement or legal relationship, whichever provisions are more restrictive, or impose
higher standards, shall control.
16.2 Enforcement (Modified 6/01/08, TA-2008-05)
16.21 These Regulations shall be administered by the Commission or its appointed agent. A
zoning permit shall be applied for before any construction or use is commenced and shall
be issued if the provisions of these Regulations are complied with. The method of issuing
permits shall be determined by the Commission. Forms for such application shall be
furnished by the Commission. All applications for new houses shall submit an A-2 survey
site plan showing the proposed house location along with any porches, decks or
outbuildings, driveway location, existing and proposed topography, septic system location,
foundation drains and setback requirements for that zone. An as-built plan of the house
location and any outbuildings shall be submitted before a C.O. will be given for the house.
The A-2 survey and as-built may, however, be waived by the Commission or its designated
agent if the applicant can satisfactorily demonstrate that the proposed structure will be
located a minimum of 100 feet from the property boundaries. The Commission or its
designated agent reserves the right to require an A-2 survey of any proposed addition or
structure, when the property boundaries are not clearly identified in the field. When
completed, an as-built may be required to ensure compliance with zoning setbacks. In
addition to the foregoing, the Comission or its appointed agent shall have the power to:
1. Check any building, place, premises or use as to its compliance with these Regulations.
2. Issue or renew a permit if the provisions of these Regulations are complied with.
(Amended 3/11/03)
3. Collect a fee that is listed under Section 20 (Application Fee Schedule) of the Town of
Plainfield Zoning Regulations. The purpose of this fee is to defray the cost of
inspections, processing and supplies.
4. Collect such additional fees as authorized by the General Statutes.
16.21.1 Such fees when collected by the appointed agent, shall be remitted to the
Treasurer of the Town of Plainfield, said fees shall include the cost of the
certificate of use and compliance. In the enforcement of these Regulation a zoning
permit may be combined with a building permit and a certificate of use and
compliance with a certificate of occupancy without in any way affecting the fee to
be charged for each permit or certificate.
104
16.21.2 Unless provided otherwise by these Regulations a zoning permit issued
shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Such permit must
be reviewed if the facility for which the permit has been issued is not completed
within that year. Such renewal shall be obtained before the expiration date of the
initial permit and a permit for one additional year shall be granted by the
Commission or its appointed agent.
16.21.3 Collect a fee that is listed under section 20.1 (Application Fee Schedule) of
the Town of Plainfield Zoning Regulations. The purpose of this fee is to defray the
cost of inspections, processing and supplies.
16.22 Requirements to Obtain a Permit
No building, structure or sign may be erected, altered, or changed in use and no land use
may be commenced or changed, except agricultural activity, unless a permit therefor has
been applied for and has been granted by the Commission or its appointed agent. All
applications for a permit or a special permit shall be accompanied by the following:
1. Plot plan in duplicate, drawn by a Connecticut licensed land surveyor to a scale of at
least 1” = 40’ showing dimensions, radii and angles of lot, size, elevations and
locations of driveway(s), building(s), and accessory building (2) built or to be built, the
location of sanitary facilities and water supply and any other information as required by
the Commission and as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement
of these Regulations.
2. Any change of the information required in Section 16.22(1) must be reported to the
Commission or its appointed agent immediately and no work may be undertaken
involving such change or changes unless written permission is first obtained from the
Commission or its appointed agent upon submission of a revised application showing
in detail the changes requested.
3. The filing of plans required in (1) above may be modified or waived when the
proposed work is of simple construction, or repairs, provided the scope of the work is
adequately described in the application.
16.22.1 Certificate of Use and Compliance.
No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected, altered or
extended shall be used or changed in use until a Certificate of Use and Compliance
shall have been issued by the Commission or its appointed agent, stating that the
building and proposed use complies with the provisions of these Regulations:
1. All certificates of use and compliances shall be applied for co-incident
with the application for a building permit or a zoning permit.
2. The Commission or its appointed agent shall maintain a record of all
permits and certificates and a copy shall be furnished, upon request, to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or
use at a fee of two dollars ($2.00).
3. No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, or repairs
to any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a
certificate of use and compliance.
16.22.2 Prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit and/or Use and Compliance Permit,
the applicant is to obtain a house/structure number.
105
16.3 Zoning Board of Appeals
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement,
or decision made by the official charged with the enforcement of these regulations.
2. To hear and decide all matters including special exceptions upon which it is required to pass
by the specific terms of these regulations.
3. To determine and vary the application of these Regulations in harmony with their general
purpose and intent and with due consideration for conserving the public health, safety,
convenience, welfare and property values solely with respect to a parcel of land where, owing
to conditions especially affecting such parcel but not affecting generally the district in which it
is situated, a literal enforcement of these Regulations would result in exceptional difficulty or
unusual hardship so that substantial justice will be done and the public safety and welfare
secured.
4. To hear and decide on applications as required by state statute.
When an appeal is before the Zoning Board of Appeals for its consideration pursuant to the
provisions of these Regulations notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published
in a newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town at least twice at intervals of not
less than two days, the first not more than fifteen days, nor less than ten days and the last not
less than two days before such hearing.
16.4 Penalties for Violations
16.41 In accordance with Chapter 124, Section 8-12 of the Connecticut General Statutes, any
person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of these regulations, shall for
each violation, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than ten ($10) dollars nor
more than one hundred ($100) dollars, for each day that such violation shall continue; but
if the offense be willful, the person convicted thereof shall be fined not less than one
hundred ($100) dollars nor more than two hundred and fifty ($250) dollars for each day
that such violation shall continue, or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days, for each day
such violation shall continue, or both.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have such other remedies as are provided by
law to restrain, correct, or abate any violation of the Zoning Regulations.
16.5 Notice to adjacent property owners and to adjoining municipalities of application
or requests.
1. Notice Required
All applications submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Zoning Board of
Appeals, which the appointed agents are not authorized to review and decide, shall be
responsible for meeting the requirements of this section.
2. Legal Notice
The appropriate commission or board shall publish a legal notice of the scheduled public
hearing pursuant to statutory requirements.
106
3. Abutters
The applicant shall prepare a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all property
within 150 feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as shown on the latest Grand List of
the Town of Plainfield in the Assessor’s Office. Such list and a map indicating all described
properties, prepared also by the applicant, shall be submitted to the appropriate Commission or
Board, along with the required application and fee. The applicant shall mail, by certified mail
– return receipt, notification of said pending application to the owner of each such property not
more than thirty (30) days, or less than ten (10) days, before the date set for the public hearing.
The mailing shall include, at a minimum, the text of the public hearing notice. Evidence of
such notification and mailing shall be submitted to the Planning and Engineering Department
at least two days prior to the scheduled hearing date.
4. Adjacent Municipalities
Where necessary, the Town of Plainfield shall notify adjacent municipalities in accordance
with Connecticut General Statutes Section 8-7b and 8-7e, as amended.
107
SECTION 17 - Separability and Effective date
17.1 Separability
17.11 If any Section, Clause, Provision or portion of these Regulations shall be held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction such holding shall not affect or
impair any other section, clause, provision or portion of the Regulations.
17.2 Effective Date
17.21 The Zoning Regulations shall not become effective until a hearing has been held in
compliance with Chapter 124, Section 8-3 of the General Statutes of the State of
Connecticut and adoption by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The effective date of
these Regulations shall be after publication of notice of such adoption as provided in
Chapter 124, Section 8-3 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
108
SECTION 18 - Amendments
18.1 Initiation
18.11 On its initiative or on receipt of a written application to amend any portion of these
Regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission may amend the regulations or change
the boundaries of the zones herein established after public hearing in accordance with
Chapter 124. Section 8-3 of the General Statutes of the State of Connecticut.
18.2 Notice
18.21 Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having a
substantial circulation in the Town of Plainfield, at least twice, at intervals of not less than
two days, the first time not more than fifteen days nor less than ten days and the last not
less than two days before such hearing and a copy of such proposed regulations or
boundary shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk for public inspection at least ten
days before such hearing.
18.3 Applications
18.31 Any person, firm or corporation who are property owners or residents in the Town of
Plainfield, Connecticut, or their attorney or agent, may make written application for
amendment of these Regulations. A plan giving proposed boundaries must accompany
each application for a change of zoning boundaries.
18.4 Reapplication
18.41 In the event of the rejection by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the application, or
if the application is withdrawn by the applicant, such application shall not again be made
within a period of one year from the date of rejection or withdrawal unless the Planning
and Zoning Commission finds a material change in the situation justifies a hearing in the
interest of the public as well as the applicant.
18.5 Filing Change of Zone (approved July 8, 1986; effective July 24, 1986)
18.51 In the event a zone change application is approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the applicant will be notified of such and required to file a record of the
change with the Town Clerk. That which is to be filed will be sent with the approval
notification. The zone change will take effect only after the record is so filed.
18.6 Deadline for Submittal of Applications (approved 9/9/86; 9/24/86.)
18.61 For an application to be placed on the agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission, it
must be received in the Town Planner’s Office no later than two weeks before the meeting
date. Plainfield’s Planning and Zoning Commission regularly meets on the second (2nd)
Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. in the Town Hall.***
18.62 For an application to be placed on the agenda of the Zoning Board of Appeals, it must be
received at least eighteen (18) days prior to the meeting date. Plainfield’s Zoning Board of
Appeals meets regularly on the first (1st) Tuesday of each month at 7:30 p.m. in the Town
Hall.***
18.63 For an application to be placed on the agenda of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission, it must be received at least ten (10) days prior to a meeting. Plainfield’s
109
Inland Wetlands and Water Courses Commission meets the third (3rd) Tuesday of each
month at 7:30 p.m. in the Town Hall.***
***When there are no applications and/or matters of discussion a regularly
scheduled meeting may not be held.
110
SECTION 19 - Site Development Plan
19.0 Site Plan Objectives
In reviewing a site plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall take into consideration the
health, safety and welfare of the public and may prescribe reasonable conditions and safeguards to
ensure the accomplishment of the following general objectives:
a. Any proposed building or structure shall be so designed and located on the site so that there
will be adequate access for emergency vehicles.
b. The streets and driveways serving the proposed use shall be adequate to safely carry the
vehicular traffic generated by the proposed activity. Entrance and exit points shall not create a
traffic hazard or undue traffic congestion.
c. All proposed traffic access ways are adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in width,
grade, alignment and sightline.
d. Adequate on site parking and loading spaces and the interior circulation systems.
e. All playground, parking and service areas are reasonably screened during all seasons of the
year from the view of adjacent residential lots and streets.
f. The character and appearance of the proposed buildings and/or outdoor signs will be in general
harmony with the character and appearance of the surrounding neighborhood.
(Added 12/05) (CZ-2005-05)
19.1 Optional Requirements
Applicants may, at the Commission’s discretion, be required to:
a. provide a comprehensive traffic study detailing the effects of the proposed development,
taking into account current or future shared access to adjacent or consolidated parcels;
b. make improvements to roadways in order to accommodate a proposed development, including
but not limited to acceleration and deceleration lanes, left turn lanes with adequate stacking
distance, roadway widening, and traffic control devices;
c. close existing curb cuts, limit proposed curb cuts, or close temporary curb cuts when
alternative access points become available;
d. align access drives or roads with opposing access drives or roads wherever practical.
19.2 Building Design
The following building design guidelines are not intended to limit creativity but to address issues
of architectural variety, compatibility of design and scale with the surrounding neighborhood, and
pedestrian access.
19.2.1 Articulation
a. Wall plane projections or recesses should be utilized to limit uniform facades to less
than 100 continuous linear feet. The aggregate length of a projection or recess shall be
at least 20% of the facade length.
b. Architectural elements such as arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other
such features should account for at least 60% of the horizontal length of the ground
floor facade.
c. At least three (3) of the following should be repeated along the facade at intervals of 30
feet and at least one should repeat horizontally.
1. color change
2. texture change
111
3. material change
4. expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than
12” in width, such as an offset, reveal, projecting rib or pilaster.
19.2.2 Human Scale Elements
The following human scale elements should be incorporated into the design of buildings to
reduce thetheir visual impact and create a pedestrian friendly experience:
a. Arcades are strongly suggested as a means of providing human scale. If provided,
arcades should conform to the following requirements:
1. An arcade should be inviting to pedestrians, incorporating benches, wide
walkways, display windows or similar features.
2. When there are multiple tenants in a building, signs should be incorporated into the
design to allow pedestrians to easily recognize establishments from beneath the
arcade.
19.2.3 Rooflines
The following guidelines are intended to reduce the massive scale of large buildings, and
complement the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Roofs should include at least
two of the following elements:
a. Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment. The average height of such
parapets should not exceed 15% of the height of the supporting wall and at no point
should a parapet exceed 30% of the height of the supporting wall. Parapets should
feature three dimensional cornice treatment.
b. Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three (3) feet past the supporting walls.
c. Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an
average slope greater than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every three (3)
feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every one
(1) foot of horizontal run.
d. Three or more roof slope planes.
19.2.4 Materials and colors
Exterior building materials and colors should be compatible with materials and colors used
in adjoining neighborhoods. Building materials should comply with the following
guidelines whenever practicable:
a. Predominant exterior building materials should be of high quality including brick,
stone or wood. Concrete block may only be used on elevations that are not visible from
a public vantage point. Exterior insulation finish systems, smoothface concrete blocks,
tilt-up concrete panels and prefabricated steel panels shall not be used as the
predominant exterior building material.
b. Predominant exterior building materials should be nonglossy and have subtle, neutral
or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity, metallic or fluorescent colors or black
is discouraged;
c. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors,
but shall not include neon-tubing features.
112
19.2.5 Entrances
a. To orient customers to the entrance(s), each principal building should have no less than
three (3) of the following elements:
1. canopies or porticos;
2. overhangs;
3. recesses/projections;
4. arcades
5. raised, corniced parapets over the door;
6. peaked roof forms;
7. arches;
8. outdoor patios;
9. display windows;
10. architectural details such as tile work and moldings integrated into the building;
11. integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for
sitting
19.2.6 Signage
A signage package based on a design theme for the entire parcel that includes, but is not
limited to, signage design standards and guidelines, shall be submitted as part of the site
plan review application. All standards of Section 13.5 Sign Regulations, shall apply.
Signage Programs shall include:
a. A legible scaled drawing with description and dimensions of the sign(s) to be erected
or maintained under that permit and the sign's proposed location on the building or site.
b. Size, colors, materials, placement, illumination, and other information as may be
required for the Commission to evaluate all attached and detached signs which may be
installed on a given site.
19.3 Landscaping
A detailed landscaping plan shall be required as a part of any Site Plan Application and/or Special
Use Permit Application. The plan shall include: a planting layout; planting schedule; maintenance
plan; the location of required buffers; and shall note the botanical name and size at time of
planting of all plants.
19.3.1 Completion of Landscaping in new construction
All landscaping shown on the approved plan shall be completed before Issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy, or a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the Commission assuring completion
within a specific time (not to exceed one year) shall be filed with the Commission. Such bond
shall be forfeited if the work has not been completed within such time limit.
19.3.2 All landscaping, screening, fences or walls approved as part of a plan for a Special Use Permit
shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition throughout the period of the use of
the lot.
19.3.3 Natural and Unique Features
To the extent possible, existing trees, vegetation and unique site features such as stone walls, shall
be retained and protected. Existing plant materials may be used to meet all or part of the landscape
regulations. Existing trees in good condition over 12 inches in caliper in landscaped or undisturbed
113
areas shall be preserved unless approved for removal by the Department of Planning. Existing
healthy, mature trees, if properly located, shall be fully credited toward the requirements of
these regulations.
19.3.4 Storage Areas
There shall be no outside storage of materials unless the same are effectively screened by wooden
fencing, stone or brick walls, evergreen trees or shrubs at least 6 feet high. The bulk storage of
materials and all loading facilities shall be located at the rear or side of the proposed building or
existing building.
19.3.5 Refuse
The location of refuse storage areas shall be indicated on the site plan. All refuse areas shall be
screened with fencing and evergreen trees or shrubs at least 6 feet high.
19.3.6 Parking
All parking areas located between the Residential District boundary or existing residence(s) and
building(s) shall be screened.
19.3.7 Lot Maintenance
The remaining area of the lot not occupied by buildings and loading and unloading areas, parking
and storage areas, vehicular access, sidewalks, and landscape screenings shall be well maintained.
Areas disturbed from their natural condition and which are not used for structures, paved parking
areas or streets shall be planted with grass.
19.3.8 Lighting
Any lighting used to illuminate any required off-street parking or loading areas shall be arranged
and designed so that the illuminated areas shall be confined to the property where the lighting
originates. All lighting shall utilize full-cutoff fixtures. The maximum height of lighting fixtures
shall be 20 feet.
A lighting plan shall be provided with the site plan review application. The plan shall detail the
types of lighting, lighting fixtures and show projection areas. No “skyglow” or light trespass will
be allowed.
19.4 Site Development Plan Requirements
An application shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of the site development plan drawn at a
scale of one inch (1”) equals 40 feet (40’). The following information shall appear on site
development plans:
1. The words “Site Development Plan,” the name (if any) of the project and the name(s) of the
applicant and owner(s) of the property.
2. The name, address and seal of a professional engineer registered in Connecticut and
responsible for the design.
3. The date, scale and north arrow.
4. The words, “Approved by the Plainfield, Connecticut Planning and Zoning Commission,” with
the designated places for the signature of the Chairman and the date.
5. A location map showing the site, streets and aquifers at a scale of 1” = 1000 ft.
114
6. Property lines within fifty (50) feet of the site and the name(s) of owner(s) of abutting
properties and properties across abutting streets labeled on their property.
7. The location and widths of existing buildings, signs, other structures within fifty (50) feet of
the site; street names; limits of streets, curbs and sidewalks.
8. Locations of existing buildings, signs, other structures within fifty (50) feet of the site, with
identification of proposed demolitions or relocations.
9. Locations and dimensions of proposed buildings, signs and other structures.
10. A comparative table of the bulk and proposed dimensional requirements of the site for which
approval is sought.
11. Locations and dimensions of existing and proposed utility lines, including but not limited to,
water, sanitary, storm sewer, natural gas, electric and telephone lines.
12. Location of existing stone walls and exposed bedrock outcroppings.
13. Existing and proposed topography showing spot grades and contours at two-feet (2’) intervals
or less based on the NGVD Datum.
14. Any necessary retaining walls and construction details.
15. Watercourses and wetlands (as defined by the Town of Plainfield Wetlands Regulation).
16. Drainage design for roof acres and site prepared by a professional engineer.
17. Special flood hazard area of 100-year floodplains with the source of such information
identified.
18. Wetlands and aquifer location.
19. Certification that the Town’s Flood Control Ordinance has been complied with.
20. Locations of existing and proposed wells and on-site sewage disposal systems within one
hundred (100) feet of the site; location of percolation and other test holes.
21. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed open space, if any.
22. Parking facilities, showing the location, dimension and number of parking spaces, including
handicapped spaces.
23. Internal circulation system, including widths of roadways and directional signs and arrows,
pedestrian walkways, loading areas and light and utility poles and handicap access.
24. Location of buffer strips and screening, showing the types and approximate sizes of proposed
plantings at the time of planting.
25. Proposed landscaping with specific location and size.
26. Town and zoning district boundaries, properly identified.
27. Where the applicant wishes to develop in stages, the site plan shall show the entire plan, and
indicate any phase of development which will not be completed within one year after the
commencement of occupancy or use of the site.
115
SECTION 20 - Application Fee Schedule (Amended 11/13/18 Z2018-1436)
20.1 Planning and Zoning Commission*
Amendment to Zoning Regulations $400.00
Amendment to Zoning Map $400.00/parcel
Site Development Plan Review $200.00
Public Hearing Fee, if required $350.00
Special Permit which requires Site Development Plan $550.00
Special Permits which do not require Site Development Plan $400.00
Home Occupation Permit $25.00
Use and Compliance Permit $25.00
Zoning Permit (includes Certification of Zoning Compliance) $.75 / $1000.00 of estimated
Cost / ($25.00 min.)
Amendment to Subdivision Regulations $400.00
Subdivision and Resubdivision $300.00 / lot
Engineering Review** $500.00 (minimum)
Engineering Review for Storm Drainage,
Utilities and New Road Design*** $500.00 + $1.00/LF
Engineering Inspections for Approved Applications**** 25% of estimated
construction costs.
*Additional $60.00 fee for all Planning and Zoning applications per Public Act of the CT General Assembly.
**Plans may be forwarded to the Town’s Engineer for review/comment. A $500.00 review fee
shall be paid at the time the application is submitted (must be separate checks). Following
engineering review, any remaining funds shall be returned to the applicant. Should engineering
review fees exceed $500.00, the applicant shall be responsible for submitting the balance prior to
Commission action on the application. Failure to pay said balance shall constitute an incomplete
application and result in automatic denial of the application.
***Payable at time of application. Must be separate checks.
116
****Payable before the mylar plans are signed. Any remaining funds shall be returned after the
Town’s Engineer deems the project to be satisfactorily completed or stabilized. The Town’s
Engineer may be requested to perform site inspections for compliance with approved plans and
E&S controls. The applicant shall provide the Commission with a fee estimate for all site work
(excavation, grading, drainage, E&S, paving, landscaping, etc.) during the application process.
The Commission may forward the estimate to the Town’s Engineer for review of adequacy prior
to action on the application; 25% of the total fee shall be submitted, in a form acceptable to the
Commission, prior to the mylar plans being signed by the Commission to cover costs associated
with inspections by the Town’s Engineer. Remaining funds, if any, shall be returned upon
determination by the Town’s Engineer that the project is complete, or that the site is adequately
stabilized if the project is abandoned. Should inspection costs exceed the 25% submitted, the
applicant shall be required to submit such additional costs within 10 days of notification by the
Town. Should said payment not be made, it will result in non-issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy, and possible revocation of the permit, until payment is received by the Town. The
Commission reserves the right to place a lien the property for unpaid costs.
20.2 Zoning Board of Appeals*
Dealer and Repairer Location Approval $550.00
Gasoline Station Location Approval $550.00
*Additional $60.00 fee for all Zoning Board of Appeals applications per Public Act of the CT General Assembly.
Variances $550.00/Application
Dealer and Repairer Location Approval $550.00
Gasoline Station Location Approval $550.00
*Additional $60.00 fee for all Zoning Board of Appeals applications per Public Act of the CT General Assembly.
117
SECTION 21 – Conservation Subdivisions (Effective 3/20/2007 – TA-2007-11)
21.1 Findings: The Commission finds that in some cases the strict adherence to traditional land
development and subdivision techniques within the Town of Plainfield has resulted in:
1. The consumption of areas containing valuable recreational, agricultural, forest, and
other unique natural resources.
2. The construction of new public roads and other improvements requiring maintenance
by the Town of Plainfield.
3. The development of sites without specific consideration of the limitations of, or
opportunities offered by, the existing topographic and soil conditions.
4. The destruction of historic sites, geological features, severe slopes, scenic vistas,
significant stands of trees, watercourses, wetlands, agricultural lands, wildlife habitat, or other
areas of environmental value, natural beauty or historic interest.
21.2 Purpose: The purpose of this section is to:
1. Maintain and enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources,
2. Protect natural streams and water supplies,
3. Promote conservation of soils, wetlands, agricultural lands and other significant natural
features and landmarks,
4. Enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves,
nature reservations or sanctuaries, or other open spaces,
5. Enhance public recreation opportunities,
6. Preserve historic sites,
7. Promote orderly urban or suburban development.
These regulations are intended to provide for increased flexibility, balanced by increased control,
in the development of land so as to facilitate the preservation of open space, natural resources,
recreational uses, and community character by:
1. Permitting a transfer of density by way of reduction in the minimum lot size normally required
in specific zones for residential development; or,
2. Permitting the development of oversized lots as provided in Section 21.6 of these Regulations,
by incorporating open space into individual lots.
21.3 Definitions:
118
Conservation Easement. An easement which perpetually prohibits further development
or use inconsistent with, or adverse to, the enhancement, preservation, and protection of a defined
area for the benefit of fish, wildlife, plants, or other similar ecosystems, or preserves such areas
predominantly in their natural scenic or open condition; but which may, in the sole discretion of
the Commission, permit recreational and/or agricultural uses which do not involve significant
alteration or development of the restricted area in a manner which is inconsistent with, or adverse
to, the preservation and protection of the restricted area.
Land encumbered by a conservation easement as part of the minimum required open space, may
be used with approval by the Commission, for underground drainage fields for individual or
community septic systems. Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part of
the minimum required open space, as my land within the rights-of-way for underground utilities.
However, land with the rights-of-way of overhead power lines or other surface utility lines shall
not be included in the minimum required open space.
Normal Lot Size. The lot size, expressed in square feet, normally applicable to the zoning district
in which the proposed Conservation Subdivision is located.
Open Space. Land within a Conservation Subdivision that is subject to a Conservation Easement,
or other form of development restriction.
Conservation Subdivision. A subdivision approved in accordance with this Section and with
Section 6A of the Subdivision Regulations / Conservation Subdivision.
Unbuildable Area. The area, expressed in square feet, within the proposed Conservation
Subdivision which is comprised of wetlands, watercourses, flood hazard zone “A” per FEMA
maps, existing and proposed streets and highways, easements and rights-of-ways for vehicular
access, drainage and utilities, easements and rights-of-way of an undefined width shall be deemed
to be twenty-five (25’) feet in width.
Conventional Subdivision. A subdivision design that is consistent with the provisions of the
Plainfield Zoning and Subdivision Regulations that would be applicable in the absence of this
Section and Section 6A of the Plainfield Subdivision Regulations / Conservation Subdivision.
21.4 General Eligibility Requirements - Conservation Subdivision
1. Shall only be permitted in RA-60 Zoning Districts.
2. Must, except as provided for in this Section, comply with all applicable Sections of these
Regulations, the Plainfield Inland Wetland Regulations, Plainfield Subdivision Regulations,
and provisions of federal, state and local law.
3. Must provide for the dedication of Open Space in accordance with Subsection 21.8 of this
Section.
119
4. Must provide for the beneficial utilization of suitable soil and topographic conditions, and for
the protection of soils and topographic conditions not suitable for development.
5. Must comply with the State Health Code Basis Criteria for Septic System Design Minimum
Leaching System Spread (MLSS) as incorporated into the State Health Code, as may be
amended, except where sewers or community septic systems are being used.
6. Must be consistent with the intent of planning and zoning to promote the public health, safety,
and welfare of the Town of Plainfield, and the Plainfield Plan of Conservation and
Development.
7. Shall be used only for detached single-family dwellings and permitted accessory buildings.
All other uses shall require the normal lot size and be subject to approval of the Commission in
accordance with the applicable Sections of these Regulations. In addition, any other use, which
is proposed after the approval of the Conservation Subdivision, shall require an amendment to
the approval granted under the Section in accordance with the applicable Sections of the
regulations. Accessory apartments are prohibited.
21.5 Application Procedure:
a. Pre-Application Conference The Commission recommends that prior to the submission of an
application for approval of a Conservation Subdivision, the applicant initiate a pre-application
conference with the Commission and its staff to discuss conceptual aspects of the proposed
Conservation Subdivision and prepare and present a preliminary plan for informal
consideration by the Commission. The pre-application conference is recommended to permit
the general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the subject site
before the applicant proceeds with the application and the preparation of final maps, plans and
documents required to accompany such application.
Following the pre-application conference, the Commission may provide informal, nonbonding
suggestions to the applicant regarding the overall layout and design of the proposed
subdivision, and whether to proceed with an application under this Section or to adhere to the
Conventional Subdivision requirements of the applicable Sections of the Plainfield
Subdivision Regulations.
Neither the pre-application conference, the informal consideration of neither preliminary plans,
nor the Commission’s suggestions shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the application
for approval of a Conservation Subdivision.
b. Application - An application for the approval of a Conservation Subdivision shall:
1. Require approval of the Commission as a subdivision in accordance with the applicable
Sections of these Regulations and the Plainfield Subdivision Regulations.
2. Be submitted with a proper complete subdivision application form and application fees as set
forth in the fee schedule.
120
3. Be accompanied by four (4) copies of the proposed plan setting forth the information required
by this Section, the applicable Sections of these Regulations, and the Plainfield Subdivision
Regulations, as well as such additional information as the Commission may require for a
review of the proposed Conservation Subdivision under the applicable Sections of these
Regulations, or in order to reach a determination of the impact of the Conservation
Subdivision on the surrounding area. Such additional information may include, but is not
limited to the following: Information concerning surrounding land uses, building locations,
driveways, streets, topography, water courses and wetlands; utilities and other information of a
similar nature and purpose; a traffic impact study prepared by a Connecticut Licensed
Professional Engineer qualified to prepare such studies; an environmental impact statement
prepared by professionals qualified to prepare such studies and any reports prepared by the
applicant’s staff or consultants.
4. Be accompanied by copies of the proposed Certificate of Incorporation, if any, by-laws, rules
and regulations of any association or corporation of the lot owners within the proposed
Conservation Subdivision; copies of the proposed covenants and restrictions to be placed in
the deeds of conveyance to the lot owners, and copies of any proposed deeds, agreements,
conveyances and restrictions necessary for the creation of open space, including a preliminary
statement of the proposed Development Restriction.
21.6 Standards, Controls and Design Guidelines for Conservation Subdivisions:
a. Minimum Area Yard and Coverage Requirements
Minimum Lot Area – contiguous buildable area 30,000 Square Feet
Minimum Lot Frontage – on a public street or private lane 100 feet
Minimum Front Yard – as measured from the front lot line 50 feet
Minimum Side Yard 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard 50 feet
Maximum Building Height 35 feet
Separate accessory buildings shall be located behind the main dwelling and shall not be located
any closer then ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line.
b. Rear Lots
1. Rear lots shall contain at least 30,000 square feet, excluding the area of the fee-simple access
strip, shall have a minimum driveway access width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum lot
width measured at the building line of one hundred (100) feet. Access strips shall serve a
maximum of 2 lots.
2. The owner of a rear lot shall provide and maintain, as per approval specifications, the
driveway, drainage and utilities within the access strip and shall be responsible for the
continued maintenance and liability thereof. In cases where a common driveway is authorized
121
in accordance with the subdivision regulations, deed restrictions establishing concise
maintenance and liability agreements shall be submitted to the Plainfield Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and, upon approval, filed on the land records for each subject lot.
c. Density Limitations
The maximum number of lots allowed in a Conservation Subdivision shall not exceed the number
of lots allowed as if the property were to be developed as a Conventional Subdivision. To
determine this number, the applicant shall prepare a Conventional Subdivision Plan (called the
“Yield Plan”) in accordance with Section 16.4 of the Plainfield Subdivision Regulations, and the
road specifications of the Town of Plainfield. The Yield Plan may show a reasonable amount of
regulated wetland activity. The yield plan will be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for its review and approval during the applicant’s Conservation Subdivision approval
process.
d. Conformance
Any lot with reduced area approved under the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to be a
conforming lot notwithstanding the Normal Lot Size; provided, however, that such lot meets the
requirements of the other applicable sections of these Regulations and the Plainfield Subdivision
Regulations.
e. Design Guidelines
The proposed Conservation Subdivision shall meet the following applicable design guidelines:
1. Dwelling units shall be grouped allowing a portion of the parcel to remain as open space.
2. The open space in any Conservation Subdivision shall be located entirely within the
subdivision and shall be in one contiguous piece except where the Commission finds that the
purposes of Section 21.2 would be more effectively served by separated parcels. The open
space shall have a suitable shape, dimension, character and location to promote the purposes
specified in Section 21.2.
3. The Planning and Zoning Commission reserves the right to require the involvement of a
landscape planner in the design of a Conservation Subdivision.
4. Lots shall be laid out to the greatest extent feasible to achieve the following objectives listed
below in order of priority (it is recognized that some objectives may conflict with others on
any given site):
a. To place septic systems on the most suitable soils for sub-surface waste water disposal (in
unsewered areas only):
122
b. Within any woodland contained in the parcel, or along the far edges of the open fields
adjacent to any woodland (to reduce impact upon agriculture, to provide summer shade and
shelter from winter wind, and to enable new construction to be visually absorbed by
natural landscape features);
c. In locations least likely to block or interrupt scenic vistas, as seen from the public
roadway(s);
d. On the least fertile soils for agricultural uses, and in a manner which maximizes the usable
area remaining for such agricultural use;
e. In locations where the greatest number of units could be designed to take maximum
advantage of solar heating opportunities.
5. Wherever possible, wetlands should be adjacent, contiguous or included in the open space.
6. Along any part of the parcel perimeter where downsized lots abut normal sized lots a fifty-foot
buffer zone, thickly planted with fast-growing native shrubs and trees shall be required; or an
already forested strip of natural vegetation may be accepted at the discretion of the
Commission.
7. Unless prevented by ledge or other natural restraints, underground utilities shall be required in
Conservation Subdivisions.
21.7 Minimum of Open Space Required:
The minimum open space conveyance within a Conservation Subdivision shall be 50% of the total
parcel area*.
* The maximum percentage of wetlands, watercourses, and floodplains included in the minimum
area or open space required shall not exceed the percentage of wetlands, watercourses and
floodplains in the total parcel. However, developers are encouraged to preserve wetlands,
watercourses, and floodplains as open space even though these additional wetlands, watercourses
and floodplains would not be counted towards the Minimum Area of Open Space Required.
21.8 Dedication of Open Space:
The Planning & Zoning Commission shall determine the most appropriate method of disposition
after considering, among other things, the relationship of the subject parcel and its specific
characteristics to the Plan of Conservation and Development and the objectives cited in Section 5C.1;
the desirability and suitability of public access and use, and the scope of the subdivision proposal.
The following disposition options may be utilized by the Commission:
1. Conveyance in fee simple to the Town
2. Conveyance in fee simple to the State of Connecticut
3. Conveyance in fee simple to a land trust (with the concurrence of the sub-divider)
123
4. Conveyance in fee simple to a homeowners association
5. Conveyance of a conservation easement, with or without public access, to the Town
6. Conveyance of a recreation easement to the Town, the State, or a private, non-profit
recreational entity.
7. Conveyance of an agricultural easement to the Town, the State, or a private, non-profit farm
preservation entity.
8. Private ownership with the appropriate severance and conveyance of development rights
9. Any combination of the above or any suitable alternative approved by the Commission
Modification by the Commission of Designated Open Space. The Commission may modify any
application so as to designate open space in locations other than those proposed. In determining
whether the proposed entity is appropriate to own the proposed open space, or whether to require
open space in locations different from those proposed, the Commission shall consider the
following factors: The ownership of any existing open space on adjacent properties, or the
proximity to non-adjacent open space which might reasonably interconnect with the proposed
open space in the future; the proposed use of the open space for active or passive uses, and the
extent of maintenance, supervision, or management required; the potential benefits which the open
space might provide to residents of the Town or the State if it were accessible to them; the size,
shape, topography, and character of the open space; the recommendations of the Plainfield Plan of
Conservation or Development; the reports or recommendations of any State or Town agencies,
including, but not limited to, the Board of Selectmen, the Inland Wetlands and Conservation
Commission, the Northeastern Connecticut Council of Governments, and the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection.
Alteration of Open Space. Any excavation, filling or alteration of open space, any construction or
expansion of any building, structure or other improvements thereon, or any paving or surfacing or
open space subsequent to the date of approval of the Conservation Subdivision shall require an
amendment to the approval granted under this section in accordance with the applicable Sections
of the Regulations and shall be for the enhancement of the open space use only.
Evidence of Acceptance. If open space is to be owned by a private not-for-profit conservation
trust or corporation, the State of Connecticut, the Town of Plainfield, or another entity, the
application shall contain written evidence from the proposed entity satisfactory to the
Commission, stating that it is willing to accept ownership of, and responsibility for, the
preservation and maintenance of the open space.
Required Provisions. Regardless of the manner of ownership of the open space, the instrument of
conveyance must include provisions satisfactory in form and substance to the Commission to
ensure:
1. The continued use of such land for the intended purposes
2. The continuity of proper maintenance, for those portions of the open space requiring
maintenance, and when appropriate the availability of funds required for such maintenance
3. Adequate insurance protection
4. Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation, or otherwise
124
Boundary Lines. The boundary lines of all open space shall be set in the field and marked by
permanent, readily-visible markers where such lines intersect any lot line, road, or perimeter line
within the proposed Conservation Subdivision and at such other points as may be required by the
Commission to insure sufficient identification in the field.
Recording. At the time the approved Conservation Subdivision plan is filed, the applicant shall
record on the Plainfield land records all legal documents required to ensure the aforesaid
guarantees.
Right to Enforce. A right to enforce the Conservation Easement shall be conveyed to:
1. The Town of Plainfield, the State of Connecticut, or a private, not-for-profit conservation trust
or corporation dedicated to conservation or preservation purposes incases where open space is
dedicated to an association or corporation of lot owners, individual lot owner, or a private or
governmental entity; or
2. To the association or corporation of lot owners in cases where open space is dedicated to the
Town of Plainfield, the State of Connecticut, or a private, not-for-profit conservation trust or
corporation.
Any deed of conveyance shall contain language providing the holder of the Conservation
Easement with the right to obtain reimbursement of all costs it reasonably incurs, including
attorney’s fees, in any action to enforce the Conservation Easement, in which it is the prevailing
party.
Association Requirements. If the open space is to be dedicated to an association or corporation of
lot owners, then the Commission may set additional requirements, including, but not limited to,
the following:
1. Creation of the association or corporation prior to the sale of any lot;
2. Mandatory membership of the association or corporation by all original lot owners and any
subsequent owner; and
3. The association or corporation shall have the power to access and collect from each lot owner
a specified share of, and, where necessary, provide reserves for the costs associated with
maintenance, repair, upkeep, and insurance of the open space.
TOWN OF PLAINFIELD, CONNECTICUT
PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION
Subdivision
Regulations
Adopted September 29, 1971
Effective September 30, 1971
As Amended through April 1, 2013
1
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Table of Contents
As Amended Through April 1, 2013
Section
Page
1 Purpose 3
2 Title and Authority 4
3 Definitions 5
4 General Provisions 8
5 Application Procedures 9
6 Subdivision Plan Requirements 14
7 Erosion & Sediment Control Plans 18
8 Special Flood Hazard Areas/Flood Ways 20
9 Open Space Requirements 21
10 Solar Access 22
11 Design & Construction Standards 23
12 Sanitary & Water Supply Requirements 29
13 Enforcements & Appeals 32
14 Effective Date, Repeal & Amendments 33
15 Fee Schedule 34
16 Conservation Subdivisions 35
2
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
3
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Section 1 Purpose
1.1 In accordance with Section 8 - 25 of the Connecticut General statutes, the Plainfield Planning
and Zoning Commission has adopted these regulations to establish proper standards for the
design of subdivision and construction of streets and other improvements for the purpose of
providing for the orderly growth of the Town in accordance with the Plan of Conservation and
Development.
1.2 The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, approve with modifications or disapprove a
subdivision after applying these Regulations to reasonably protect the rights of individuals,
property values, public health, safety and welfare and after considering the following:
a. Land to be subdivided shall be suitable for building purposes without danger to health or
public safety and shall not result in water or air pollution, excessive noise or other menace;
b. Proper provision shall be made for water supply, storm and surface water drainage, sewage
disposal, fire protection and other services;
c. Proper provision shall be made for protection of the quality and quantity of water supplies;
d. In areas subject to flooding, proper provision shall be made for protective flood control
measures;
e. Proposed roads shall be located in accordance with the Town road system as recommended
in the Plan of Development. Existing and proposed roads and related improvements shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Town’s Engineering Standards and
Specifications so as to provide a safe and convenient system for present and prospective
traffic;
f. Proper provision shall be made for the conservation of natural, historical and cultural
resources and the preservation of open space, stream belts, scenic points, large trees,
agricultural lands and recreation areas as identified in the Plan of Development and required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission;
g. Proper provision shall be made to control soil erosion and sedimentation and to prevent the
pollution of wetlands, watercourses and water bodies;
h. Provision shall be made to encourage and permit energy efficient patterns of development
and land use in accordance with Section 8-25 (b) of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
i. Proper provision shall be made for securing the construction of streets and required
improvements in conformity with Town Engineering standards and specifications;
4
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Section 2 Title and Authority
2.1 These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Plainfield.
2.2 These regulations were prepared by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of
Plainfield in accordance with Section 8-25 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
5
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Section 3 Definitions
3.1 Certain words used in these Regulations are defined as set forth in the Section. In case of any
question over the meaning of a word, phrase or sentence whether defined herein or not, the
Commission reserves the right to make a determination thereof, being guided in such
determination by the purpose and intent of these Regulations. The word “shall” is always
mandatory. All references to the Connecticut General Statutes are to the revision of 1958, as
amended.
3.2 Agricultural Purposes: Means the pursuit of agriculture and farming as defined in Title 1, Chapter
1 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
3.3 Applicant: Refers to the person proposing a subdivision or resubdivision.
3.4 Application: Refers to the maps, texts, reports and supporting data required by these
Regulations in proposing a subdivision or resubdivision.
3.5 Board: Refers to the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Plainfield.
3.6 Bond, Maintenance: A bond furnished to the Town which guarantees for a period of two years
the work covered by a performance bond to indemnify the Town against defective workmanship
or materials.
3.7 Bond, Performance: A sum of money placed in escrow by the applicant which may be used by
the Town to complete subdivision improvements in the event that the applicant does not
complete the required improvements, including soil erosion and sediment controls.
3.8 Building: Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals or materials.
3.9 Certification: Approval by the Plainfield Planning and Zoning Commission that a soil erosion and
sediment control plan complies with the erosion and sediment control plan requirements of
these Regulations.
3.10 Commission: Refers to the Plainfield Planning and Zoning Commission.
3.11 Contiguous Buildable Area: A continuous area of land within which can be constructed a
residential building, accessory structures and supporting services. Such area shall be exclusive of
areas designated as inland wetlands or watercourses as defined in the Town’s Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Regulations, land within the limits of the 100 Year Flood Hazard Zone “A”,
6
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
easements and/or rights of ways affecting the parcel and land containing slopes in excess of 25
percent. The provision for slopes in excess of 25 percent applies to residential lots only.
3.12 Disturbed Area: An area where the ground cover or topsoil is destroyed or removed.
3.13 Easement: The right to use or control the property of another for designated purposes.
3.14 Engineering Standards and Specifications: Refers to the Engineering Standards and Specifications
of the Town of Plainfield promulgated pursuant to Ordinance Number 92.
3.15 Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
3.16 Flood plain: The terms “area of special flood hazard”, “base flood”, “base flood elevation”, and
“flood way” as used in these regulations are defined as follows:
a. Area of special flood hazard is the land in the flood plain within a community subject to one
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
b. Base flood (100 year flood) means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
c. Base flood elevation is the particular elevation of the base flood as specified on the latest
Flood insurance Rate Map prepared by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration.
d. Flood way means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation more than 1.0 foot.
3.17 Inspection: The periodic review of construction of a subdivision.
3.18 NDDH: The Northeast District Department of Health.
3.19 Open Space: Any land designated for land preserve, park or playground
purposes. The location and character of such land shall be approved by
Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 9 of these
Regulations.
3.20 Person: Includes a corporation, partnership, firm, association or any other entity.
3.21 Resubdivision: Means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision or
resubdivision if such change:
a. affects any street layout shown on such map;
b. affects any area reserved thereon for public use; or
7
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
c. diminishes the size of any lot shown thereon and creates an additional building lot, if any of
the lots shown thereon have been conveyed after the approval or recording of such map.
3.22 Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
transported or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
3.23 Soil: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
3.24 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: A plan to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation
including but not limited to a map and narrative. The map shall show existing and proposed
topography, cleared and graded areas, proposed area alterations and the location of erosion and
sediment control measures and facilities. The narrative shall describe the project, the schedule
of major activities on the land. the application of conservation practices, design criteria,
construction details and the maintenance program for any erosion and sediment control
facilities that are installed.
3.25 Street: Avenue, boulevard, road, lane, highway or any other thoroughfare between taking lines
or right-of-way lines which provides a principal means of access to property, which is improved
to allow the safe movement of traffic and which will handle storm water drainage adequately.
An accepted street is one which has become a public way by virtue of dedication to and formal
acceptance by the Town of Plainfield.
3.26 Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parcels or lots for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development expressly excluding
development for municipal, conservation or agriculture purposes and includes resubdivision.
3.27 Work: For purposes of these Regulations, means all physical improvements required by the
approved subdivision plan, other than the staking out of lots, and includes but is not limited to
sewer lines, installation of telephone and electric services, planting of trees or other landscaping
and installation of retaining walls or other structures.
8
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Section 4 General Provisions
4.1 These regulations shall apply to the subdivision and resubdivision of land within the Town of
Plainfield, Connecticut.
4.2 No person or other entity shall make a subdivision of land or sell or offer for sale lots from a
subdivision, until a plan for such subdivision has been approved by the Commission, and has
been filed or recorded by the Town Clerk, as provided for in Section 5 of these regulations.
4.3 No subdivision plan shall be filed or recorded by the Town Clerk until its approval by the
Commission is indicated upon the plan as prescribed in Section 5 of these Regulations. Any
recording of a subdivision plan without such approval shall be void.
4.4 Every subdivider shall be required to follow these Regulations and shall be familiar with them
and with other proposed and existing developments in the vicinity of such proposal before
preparing a subdivision plan.
4.5 Any land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes
without danger to health and safety. Land subject to flooding shall not be put to any use which
will aggravate flood hazard conditions and shall comply with the Flood plain Management
requirements outlined in the Zoning Regulations.
4.6 Each subdivision plan shall provide for storm water drainage, surface water drainage, sanitary
sewage disposal, fire hydrants, fire ponds and dry hydrants, underground utilities, curbs,
sidewalks and any other improvements, in amounts and locations considered necessary by the
Commission to protect public health, safety and general welfare.
4.7 Due regard shall be given to the preservation and enhancement of natural features, scenic
points, large trees, natural cover, contours of the land and other community assets.
4.8 The subdivision plan shall conform to all requirements of these Regulations and the Plan of
Conservation and Development adopted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town
Engineering Standards and Specifications. The Commission shall approve any subdivision or
resubdivision, which conforms to the standards specified in these Regulations.
4.9 No subdivision application which involves an activity or affects areas regulated pursuant to the
Town’s Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations shall be approved by the Commission
unless and until it has received approval from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Commission.
9
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Section 5 Application Procedures
5.1 The Commission and the applicant, in reviewing any proposed subdivision or resubdivision, shall
follow the procedures hereinafter specified.
5.2 Advance Discussion: An advance discussion is encouraged and may be held with the Commission
and/or the Town Planner and Engineer prior to the submission of a formal application for
subdivision approval. An advance discussion does not constitute a formal application. Neither
the applicant nor the Commission are bound by the comments made during the advance
discussion. Binding decisions can only be made by the Commission after a formal and complete
application is submitted.
5.3 Formal Application: For a formal consideration, the applicant shall submit to the Commission or
its authorized agent an application consisting of the following:
a. A written application, completed in full on a form provided by the Commission, signed by the
applicant or lawful agent. If the applicant is other than the owner of the land, such
application shall be signed by the owner of the land. A letter from the owner authorizing
such application is also acceptable.
b. Four (4) copies of the proposed plan for the development of the property showing all
information required in Section 6 of these Regulations. The Commission reserves the right to
require additional copies as necessary for review by it or other interested parties.
c. A fee in accordance with Section 15 of these Regulations.
d. Names and addresses of owners of land abutting the subject property and those across any
adjacent streets.
e. Where public improvements are proposed, an estimate of the costs of such improvements
certified by a professional engineer.
f. Calculations prepared by a licensed professional engineer evaluating and comparing site
drainage before and after development using a method approved by the Town Engineer.
g. Any proposed subdivision which will have an impact on a regulated area as defined in the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations of the Town must submit an application to
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission no later than the day the subdivision
application is filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission. Proof of such application must
be provided to the Commission at the time of subdivision application.
h. Where a proposed street, driveway or storm drainage system joins with a state highway, the
applicant shall present a copy of a letter or other document giving evidence that the
construction plans have been submitted to the Connecticut Department of Transportation
along with an application for a permit for such connection. The applicant shall be required
to submit results of the Department of Transportation’s review to the Planning and Zoning
Commission prior to a final decision on such application.
10
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
i. A certificate of public convenience and necessity as required by Section 16-262m of the
Connecticut General Statutes, if water is to be supplied by a water company by means of a
community water supply system as defined in such Section.
j. Copies of all other applications filed with local, state or federal commissions or agencies in
connection with the proposed development and the status of those applications. If such an
application is made subsequent to the filing of a subdivision or resubdivision application with
the Planning and Zoning Commission and prior to its decision on the subdivision or
resubdivision application, or if any decision is made on an application submitted to such
other commission or agency during that period, the applicant shall forward a copy of such
application and decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission immediately.
5.4 The application and accompanying materials must be submitted to the Office of the Commission
at least ten (10) days prior to the next regular meeting of the Commission. Applications received
less than ten (10) days before such meeting will be received as set forth in Section 5.5. The
commission will not be required to consider such applications on the agenda of the upcoming
meeting.
5.5 The official date of receipt of application shall be the day of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Commission immediately following the day of submission at the Office of the
Commission or 35 days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
5.6 If the Commission concludes that the application is incomplete, it may vote to reject the
application for that reason, specifying the deficiencies in the application.
5.7 The Commission may hold a public hearing on a proposed subdivision plan if, in its judgment, the
specific circumstances require such action. No plan of a resubdivision shall be acted upon
without a public hearing. If a public hearing is held, it shall commence within sixty-five (65)
days of the official date of receipt of the application by the Commission and shall be completed
within thirty (30) days thereafter.
5.8 Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published by the Commission in a
newspaper having a substantial circulation in the Town, at least twice, at intervals of not less
than two (2) days. The first notice shall be given not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than
ten (10) days, and the last not less than two (2) days before the hearing. In addition, the
applicant shall notify all owners of land within 150 feet of the subject property including those
across any adjacent streets of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. Proof of
such notice shall be provided to the Commission at or before the hearing.
5.9 In accordance with Section 8-26b of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall, prior to decision on an application, provide notice to the
appropriate Regional Planning Agency where the area of the proposed subdivision will include or
11
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
abut land in an adjoining municipality. The Regional Planning Agency shall have thirty (30) days
to submit an advisory report on the proposal. If such a report is not submitted in the time period
specified, it shall be presumed that the Agency does not disapprove of the subdivision.
5.10 In accordance with Section 8-26f of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of
any application which:
a. any portion of the property is within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of an adjoining
municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project will use streets within an
adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project will flow through and
significantly impact the drainage or sewage system within an adjoining municipality; or water
runoff from the site will impact streets or other municipal or private property within the
adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be made by registered mail within seven (7) days of
the date of receipt of the application..
5.11 A decision on an application for subdivision approval for which no hearing is held shall be
rendered within sixty-five (65) days after the official date of receipt of such application. For
applications which received a public hearing, such decision shall be rendered within sixty-five
(65) days after completion of such hearing.
5.12 The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of such periods provided the total period
of any such extension or extensions shall not exceed the total time period allowed.
5.13 In subdivisions which involve a regulated activity as defined in the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not render a decision on
an application until the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission has approved of such
plan and submitted a report of its findings. If the time for a decision by the Planning and Zoning
Commission elapses prior to the thirty-fifth day after a decision by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Commission, the time period for a decision shall be extended to thirty-five (35)
days after the decision of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission. This provision
shall not be construed to apply to any extension consented to by the applicant.
5.14 The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not render a decision on a subdivision application
until all appropriate local and regional agencies and officials (i.e. Town Planner, Town Engineer,
District Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Police, Water Pollution Control Authority and Conservation
Commission) have had the opportunity to review and comment on the application. The
commission shall not render a decision on an application until the NDDH has reviewed and
approved the subdivision.
12
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
5.15 The Commission shall approve an application if it finds that the application, maps, plans and the
accompanying documents, certificates and data conform to the requirements and standards of
these Regulations. In granting approval the Commission may modify the subdivision plan in
order to preserve the purpose and intent of these Regulations.
5.16 Approval shall include and be conditioned upon the following as may apply to a particular
application:
a. A date when construction of roads, drainage and other improvements is authorized to begin
and a date when such construction shall be completed. Such completion date shall
b. be no later that five (5) years, after the date when construction is authorized to begin.
Completion of any required road, drainage or other subdivision improvements, prior to
endorsement of the subdivision plan. In lieu of such completion and prior to endorsement,
posting of a performance bond or other security guaranteeing such completion in a form and
amount acceptable to the Board of Selectmen.
c. Presentation of conveyances for easements, rights-of-way and open spaces to the Town or
other Commission designated entity. Any open space, parks or playgrounds to be dedicated
to the Town of Plainfield and any easements for storm drainage, sanitary sewers or rights-ofway
to be dedicated to the Town shall be confirmed by written conveyance and Certificate of
Title describing the land and privileges of the Town in a form satisfactory to Town Counsel.
Easements, rights-of-way and open spaces which are not to be dedicated to the Town shall
also be confirmed by written conveyance and approved as to form by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
d. Presentation of one (1) mylar each of the approved record subdivision plan for required
signatures, incorporating all modifications and conditions specified by the Commission and
bearing original seals and signatures of the licensed surveyor and/or engineer. Three (3)
prints of such plan shall also be submitted.
5.17 The Commission shall, by majority vote, authorize the Chairman or Secretary to endorse the
subdivision plan when all conditions of approval have been met and verified by Town staff.
5.18 The endorsed subdivision plan, showing any modifications upon which final approval of the
subdivision was contingent, shall constitute the approved subdivision plan. The date of
endorsement of the subdivision by the Chairman or Secretary of the Commission as well as the
date, five (5) years from approval hence, when approval may expire as provided in Section 8-26c
of the Connecticut General Statutes shall be noted on the plan.
5.19 Within ninety (90) days after receipt of the endorsed map, the applicant shall file and record the
map in the Office of the Town Clerk. The Commission may, by resolution, extend the time for
such filing and recording for two (2) additional periods of ninety (90) days and the map shall
remain valid until the expiration of such extended time.
13
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
5.20 Before release of any subdivision performance bond, or before the Commission endorses any
subdivision plan to permit filing or recording with the Town Clerk when no bond has been
posted, the applicant shall present plans meeting the standards of these Regulations, showing
streets, drainage and other subdivision improvements as built, including the location of any
water mains, sanitary sewers and gas mains and also showing clearly where the as built plans
differ from the approved construction plans.
5.21 Before release of any subdivision performance bond, or before the Commission endorses any
record subdivision map to permit filing or recording with the Town Clerk when no bond has been
posted:
a. the roads, drainage and other required improvements in the subdivision have been
inspected and approved by the Town Engineer;
b. the as built plans shall have been submitted to the Commission as specified in Section 5.20;
c. certification from a licensed surveyor shall have been received by the Commission stating
that all required monuments and pins have been set; and
d. the applicant shall post a bond to guarantee maintenance of and to cover deficiencies in the
required road, drainage and other subdivision improvements, as determined by the
Commission. In the case of improvements which are offered for acceptance by the Town, the
maintenance bond shall terminate no earlier that two (2) years after the date of
e. acceptance of the improvements by the Town. The amount of such bond shall be ten (10)
percent of the current cost of the improvements.
14
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 6 Subdivision Plan Requirements
6.1 The maps and plans required by these Regulations shall show the information and shall be
prepared in accordance with the standards specified herein.
6.2 Maps and plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer and/or licensed land surveyor as
per Chapter 391 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Such maps and plans shall be signed and
sealed by the professional engineer and/or land surveyor as appropriate.
6.3 Where practical, the north arrow shall be consistent on all maps and plans (other than road
profiles) and shall be to the top or right side of sheet depending upon the shape of the
subdivision.
6.4 Each sheet shall include the name of the subdivision, the name of the subdivider and landowner,
the date of preparation of the map or plan and the last revision date, and scale. If it is a
resubdivision as defined in Section 3.21, the maps and plans shall be so titled.
6.5 Plan maps shall meet the accuracy standards for a class A2 Survey as specified in the Code of
Recommended Practice for Standards of Accuracy of Surveys and Maps by the State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of Connecticut. The Commission may
accept a class D survey, subject to the above- referenced code, for large parcels not
proposed for sale or development or to establish the boundary of a large parcel where only a
portion of the parcel is proposed for subdivision. That portion which is to be subdivided shall be
prepared according to the standards for a class A2 survey as specified above.
6.6 Plans shall include a signature block titled “Approved by the Plainfield Planning and Zoning
Commission” with a designated place for the signature of the chairman and a date of singing;
and “Expiration date as per Section 8.26c, Connecticut General Statutes” with a designated
place for such date;
6.7 Where required, plans shall also include a signature block titled, endorsed by the Plainfield
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Commission” with a designated place for the signature of the
Chairman and the date of signing;
6.8 As part of the formal application, the applicant shall submit four blue or black line prints of the
subdivision plan which shall consist of an index map; property history map; subdivision map; site
development plan; construction plans; and as built drawings prepared in accordance with the
requirements below.
6.9 Index map: If the proposed subdivision is divided into sections or is of such size that more than
15
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
one sheet is required, an index map shall be provided showing the entire subdivision with lots,
lot numbers, streets, street names, delineation of areas covered by each section or sheet and
match lines between sections.
6.10 Property History Map: drawn at a scale of 1” = 100’ or 1” = 200’ (corresponding to the scale of
the Assessor’s maps) indicating all divisions of property since the effective date of Plainfield’s
Subdivision Regulations (September 30, 1971). A table including dates and the names of
grantees and grantors shall accompany the map. If no divisions of property have occurred since
September 30, 1971 the land surveyor shall provide a note on the plan indicating such.
6.11 Subdivision Map: drawn to a minimum scale of 1” = 100’, on 24” x 36” polyester film (mylar)
sheets showing the following information in a neat and legible manner:
a. A location map drawn at a scale of 1” = 1,000’ or less showing the location of the subdivision
in relation to existing and proposed roads and area zoning districts, with north arrow as the
sheet;
b. Property lines drawn with dimensions, bearings or deflection angles on all straight lines and
the central angle, tangent distance and radius of all areas;
c. Width and location of existing and proposed streets, sidewalks and other rights-of-way or
easements including those for utility lines, surface drainage, sanitary and storm sewers,
water mains, catch basins, culverts or other underground structures;
d. Numbers and locations of flags delineating wetlands and watercourses as defined in the
Town of Plainfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Regulations and other regulated areas;
e. Areas within the 100 year flood hazard zone as delineated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) and as shown on the most recently amended maps prepared
by FEMA when available. The source of the flood hazard information must be indicated on
the plan. A notation shall be provided if a subdivision does not include land within the 100
year flood hazard area;
f. Contiguous buildable areas in square feet of each proposed lot;
g. Zoning setback lines for each lot;
h. Existing property lines and structures within 200 feet of the perimeter boundary of the area
to be subdivided;
i. Names of owners of land abutting the subject property and those across any adjacent streets
and the Assessor’s map information for all such properties;
j. Proposed lots and lot numbers and the area and dimensions of each lot;
k. Locations of existing and proposed pins, monuments or other property markers;
l. Existing and proposed open space, conservation and recreation areas on the tract and within
200 feet from the tract;
m. Existing contours at 2 foot intervals based upon aerial and or field survey. The land surveyor
must certify the accuracy of the topography, with a minimum acceptable class of T-2 as
specified in the Code of Recommended Practice for standards of Accuracy of Surveys and
Maps by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors of
16
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Connecticut. Areas within 200 feet of the boundary must be shown to a minimum accuracy
of T-D; and
n. Proposed street name(s), if any.
6.12 Site Development Plan: drawn to a scale of 1” = 40’, on 24” X 36” polyester film (mylar) sheets
showing the following information in a neat and legible manner:
a. All information outlined in Section 6.11 above.
b. The proposed septic system and primary and reserve areas including separation distances
from existing and proposed structures and wetlands and watercourses;
a. Location of percolation test holes and deep hole tests for each lot and test data;
b. Location of proposed water sources for each lot;
c. The location of any points of drainage discharge from or onto the tract from or onto any
street or other property;
d. Wooded areas, swamps, wetlands, watercourses, flood plains, stream belts, rock
outcroppings, specimen trees exceeding 30” dbh (diameter breast height, 5’ above the
ground), stone walls, monuments, any structures having an historical or cultural significance
and other unique and fragile natural features;
e. Archaeological sensitive areas and historic buildings and sites including those listed by the
Office of the State Historical Commission, the National Register of Historic Places or the
Town’s Survey of Historical Resources;
f. Erosion and sediment control plans prepared in accordance with Section 7 of these
Regulations with a notation that more detailed erosion and sediment control plans may be
required in the development of each lot; and
g. Where private water supplies are proposed, a notation that approval of the plan by the
Planning and Zoning Commission does not guarantee quantity or quality of water resources
and that the Zoning Officer cannot issue a Zoning Permit until the well is drilled and its
quantity and quality approved by the NDDH.
6.13 Construction Plans: showing plan and profile drawings of all proposed public improvements
drawn at scales of 1” = 40’ horizontal and 1” = 4’ vertical on 24” x 36” polyester film (mylar)
sheets showing the following information in a neat and legible manner:
a. Profile drawings and elevations shall be based on official Town, State or United States
Geological Service topographic bench marks or other permanent bench marks approved by
the Town Engineer. The bench marks used shall be noted on the plan.
b. For streets, the existing grades at the center line and both street lines and the proposed
grade at the center line at appropriate intervals; street lines and width of pavement; typical
street cross sections; and cross sections at all cross culverts;
c. Top of frame, invert, slope and size of all pipes, ditches, utility conduits, culverts, manholes,
catch basins, headwalls and watercourses, typical ditch and watercourse cross sections;
d. The location of lot lines intersecting the street line, lot numbers and street names;
e. Curbs, gutters, water mains, hydrants and special structures;
17
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
f. Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and other special structures;
g. A block for signature and date of signing by the Town Engineer;
h. A notation titled: “For location of underground electric, telephone and other public utilities,
contact appropriate utility company”;
i. Detail drawings of any bridges, box culverts, deep manholes and other special structures;
and
j. A note certifying that improvements shall be built to the Town’s Engineering Standards and
Specifications or to Connecticut Department of Transportation Form 814 if the Town
Engineering Standards and Specifications do not cover the particular improvements, their
materials and workmanship.
6.14 As-Built Drawings: Upon completion of the required public improvements, the applicant must
submit as builds drawn on polyester film (mylar) on sheets 24” by 36” together with one blue or
black line print per sheet certified by a licensed land surveyor. Such drawings shall show the
location of all items depicted on the approved construction plans as built. The specifications for
the preparation of the as built drawings shall be the same as for the preparation of the
construction plans as outlined in Section 6.13 above.
6.15 Waivers of all or part of the subdivision plan requirements outlined in this Section may be
granted by the Commission upon written request of the applicant and by a vote of three
quarters of all members of the commission in cases where conditions exist which affect the
subject land and are not generally applicable to other land in the area. The Commission may
grant such a waiver only in cases where a proposed subdivision involves establishment of lots
fronting on an existing street or in the case of a resubdivision and further provided that granting
such waiver shall not have a significant adverse effect on adjacent properties or on public health
and safety.
6.16 The commission shall state the reasons for granting such waiver and such reasons shall be clearly
stated in the minutes.
18
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Section 7 Erosion & Sediment Control Plans
7.1 A subdivision or resubdivision involving construction of streets, drainage and other
improvements, substantial or critical areas that may be subject to excavation, grading, deposit or
removal of earth or stone materials or otherwise involves a disturbed area of one half (1/2) acre
or more is required to have a certified Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan in effect prior to,
during and upon completion of construction, development and grading.
7.2 Such plans shall be developed in accordance with these Regulations using the principals outlined
in the Connecticut Guidelines for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control (1985), as amended. Soil
erosion and sedimentation control plans shall result in a development that minimizes erosion
and sedimentation during construction; is stabilized and protected from erosion when
completed; and does not cause off site erosion and/or sedimentation.
7.3 At a minimum, drawings shall be drafted according to the standards of Section 6 and shall
include but not be limited to the following:
a. A soil erosion and sediment control plan containing proper provisions to adequately control
accelerated erosion and sedimentation and reduce the danger from storm water runoff on
the proposed site based on the best available technology;
b. A narrative describing the development of the project, time schedule for all major
construction activities indicating their anticipated start and completion dates, creating and
stabilizing disturbed areas, grading operations, applying erosion and sediment control
measures and facilities on the land;
c. A detailed narrative describing the construction sequence;
d. Design criteria, construction details, detailed installation procedure and maintenance
programs for soil erosion and sediment control measures;
e. A site plan showing existing and proposed topography at two (2) foot intervals, based upon
an aerial and/or field survey, showing disturbed areas including cleared, excavated, filled or
graded areas, location of and other detailed information concerning erosion and sediment
control measures and facilities; and
f. If lots are to be developed by individual property owners a more detailed erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer which shall include but
not be limited to: floor elevations for the proposed house; proposed driveway grading;
location/elevations for septic system; footing drain outlet location and elevation; and any
other proposed drainage measures.
7.4 The Commission shall either certify that the soil erosion and sediment control plan complies
with the requirements and objectives of these Regulations and Connecticut Guidelines or deny
certification when the development proposal does not comply with these Regulations or
Guidelines.
19
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
7.5 Planned soil erosion and sediment control measures and facilities shall be installed and
maintained as scheduled according to the certified plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may require a performance guarantee as defined in Section 3.7 of these Regulations to ensure
completion of erosion and sediment control measures.
7.6 The Commission or its agent may require progress reports and verification that control measures
and facilities have been performed or installed, operated and maintained in accordance with the
certified plan and shall have the right to inspect the project site.
7.7 The Commission or its agent may issue a cease and desist order if soil erosion and sediment
control measures are not being carried out as required by the Regulations and the certified plan.
The Commission or its agent may order in writing the remedying of any condition found to be
contrary to these Regulations or the certified plan.
20
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 8 Special Flood Hazard Areas/Flood Ways
8.1 When a subdivision or resubdivision includes land in a special flood hazard area of regulated
flood way, the lots, streets, drainage and other improvements shall be reasonably safe from
damage and shall conform to the flood plain Management Requirements in the Zoning
Regulations.
8.2 The lots and improvements shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage within
the special flood hazard area and shall be capable of use without danger from flooding or flood
related damages.
8.3 All utilities and facilities such as sanitary sewer systems, water supply systems and electric and
gas systems, shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
21
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 9 Open Space Requirements
9.1 The planning and Zoning Commission may require the preservation of up to 10 percent of the
land included within all subdivisions or resubdvisions for open space, parks and playgrounds
when and in places it deems proper, unless otherwise exempted according to Section 8-25 (a) of
the Connecticut General Statutes.
9.2 Such land shall be chosen by the Commission on the basis of its value in:
a. Protecting and conserving natural, cultural and historic resources including flood plains,
wetlands, stream belts, ridgetops, rock outcroppings, stone walls, specimen trees exceeding
30” dph (diameters at breast height), prime and important farmland soils as defined by the
Soil conservation Service and other unique and fragile features;
b. Enhancing the quality of life;
c. Creating passive and active recreational opportunities;
d. Establishing buffer areas between adjoining land uses;
e. Establishing linkages connecting open spaces;
f. Adding to existing open space; and
g. Implementing the recommendations in the Plan of Development.
No privately owned reserve strips which control access to land dedicated or proposed to be
dedicated to the Town of Plainfield or other entity listed in Section 9.5 shall be permitted.
Where required by the Commission, such land shall be accessible from a public road.
9.5 Such land shall be permanently protected by a conservation easement preventing further
development or by the transfer of fee interest. The beneficiary of the easement or the recipient
of the fee interest may be a land trust organization, the Town of Plainfield, The State of
Connecticut, a homeowner’s association or other organization approved by the Commission.
9.6 The Commission may accept a fee or a combination of a fee and land from a subdivider in lieu of
the open space required by these Regulations. Such fee or combination of fee and land value of
the land to be subdivided shall be equal to not more than ten percent of the fair market value of
the land to be subdivided prior to approval of the subdivision. The fair market value shall be
determined by an appraiser jointly selected by the Commission and the applicant. The fee is
payable in accordance with Section 8-25 (a) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
9.7 The Planning Commission shall formally notify the Board of Selectmen of each open space
proposal contained in subdivision applications. The Board of Selectmen may, at its discretion,
make recommendation, size, fee, maintenance and ownership of the open space proposal.
22
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 10 Solar Access
10.1 The subdivider shall indicate on the final subdivision plan that passive solar energy techniques
which would not significantly increase the cost of the housing to the buyer after considering tax
credits, subsidies and exemptions were considered.
10.2 Passive solar and site design techniques which maximize solar heat gain, minimize heat loss and
provide thermal storage within a building during the heating season and minimize heat gain and
provide for natural cooling during the cooling season shall be considered. These techniques
include:
a. House orientation and sitting, so that the building is sited as closed to the north lot line as
possible to increase yard space for better control of shading;
b. Lot layout, so that the maximum number of building lots are placed on south facing slopes;
and
c. Landscaping, by showing the location of any new trees with their mature height including
canopy, and the planning of landscaping to facilitate the use of solar collectors and
otherwise increase solar heat gain or shade protection as appropriate.
23
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 11 Design & Construction Standards
11.1 Subdivisions shall be designed and constructed to conform to the Town of Plan of Development,
the Subdivision and Zoning Regulations, and the Town’s Engineering Standards and
Specifications.
11.2 Construction of all required improvements shall be carried out to the specifications and under
the supervision of the Town Engineer in accordance with procedures provided in the Town’s
Engineering Standards and Specifications. The Town Engineer or other appointed agent shall
have free access to the construction site at all times and shall be authorized to take material,
samples and tests as deemed necessary to determine compliance with these Regulations.
11.3 Before construction commences, the applicant and/or a representative shall meet with the
Town Engineer for a preconstruction conference. At such time the applicant will be required to
pay an inspection fee as per Section 15 of these Regulations and submit a construction schedule.
11.4 Proposed building lots shall be of such shape, size, location, topography, and character so that
buildings can be constructed and occupied without danger to public health, safety and welfare.
Land which is found to be unsuitable for occupancy and building by reason of unsuitable soils,
high water table, topography, ledge, shallow depth to bedrock or other conditions shall be
combined with another lot or lots that are suitable.
11.5 Proposed building lots must contain a minimum contiguous buildable area as defined in Section
3.11 of these Regulations which shall be equal to or greater than the minimum lot size required
by the Zoning Regulations for the District in which the subdivision is located.
11.6 Proposed building lots and streets shall be designed and arranged to make best use of the
natural terrain, avoid unnecessary regrading and to preserve substantial trees, woods and inland
wetlands and watercourses.
11.7 Each lot shall have frontage on or access to an approved Town road as required by the Plainfield
Zoning Regulations.
11.8 Whenever practical, the side lot lines of all lots shall be at right angles to the street on which the
lot faces or shall be radial to the street line.
11.9 Lots shall be graded to prevent ponding of water on the lot after construction of streets,
drainage and buildings are completed. Where filling of lots for final grading is required,
compactible fill and topsoil as required for lawn or plant growth shall be used.
24
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
11.10 Proposed streets and rights-of-way shall be planned in such a manner as to provide safe and
convenient access to proposed lots, with due consideration for accomplishing an attractive
layout and development of the land in the subdivision and neighborhood in accordance with the
Town Plan of Development.
11.11 Proposed subdivisions abutting an existing Town street shall provide for proper widening of the
right-of-way of such street to the width appropriate for the classification given such street in
accordance with the Town Plan of Development or the Board of Selectmen.
11.12 In order to determine the effect of the proposed subdivision on public safety and welfare, the
commission may require the applicant to demonstrate that:
a. The road alignment, width and grades will be in harmony with existing and proposed roads
and the Town plan of Development, especially in regard to safe intersections with such
roads;
b. The road construction will be sufficient to carry public service and emergency vehicles and
potential future traffic (computed on the basis of projected population of the proposed
subdivision) and will not significantly increase the Town’s obligation for road upgrading,
maintenance and repair which results from the development of the subdivision; and
c. Storm drainage systems will be sufficient to carry increased runoff created by the proposed
subdivision and will not significantly increase the Town’s obligation for storm drainage
systems on existing roads or other public or private lands.
11.13 Public improvements required for unimproved Town roads shall be in accordance with the
Town’s Engineering Standards and Specifications.
11.14 Where a proposed subdivision contains lots for building development purposes which front on
or have access to an accepted Town road, whether improved or unimproved, and said
road does not meet the requirements of these Regulations or of the Engineering Standards and
Specifications, the road may be improved and drainage facilities provided at the subdivider’s
expense prior to approval of the subdivision. Conditional approvals may be granted in
accordance with Section 5.16 of these Regulations. Waiver can be granted by the Commission
providing applicant shows impracticality satisfactory to the Commission.
11.15 In lieu of the required street and/or drainage improvements, the subdivider or future property
owners in the subdivision containing lots which front on or have the required access to an
accepted Town road may be required, at the discretion of the Commission, to pay a benefit
assessment to the Town of Plainfield for Town street and drainage improvement purposes in
accordance with Section 8-29 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
11.16 A benefit assessment schedule shall be maintained by the Commission. Prior to the adoption of
such schedule the Commission shall request and receive from the Board of Selectmen a report
25
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
concerning the relative costs to the Town for the future provision of the required improvements,
the relative benefits accrued the subdivider in opting for this assessment in lieu of incurring the
costs of actual street and/or drainage improvements, and its recommendations for assessments.
11.17 The benefit assessment can only be applied upon the express finding of the Commission, based
on a report from the Board of Selectmen, that the development, either by itself or in
conjunction with other proposed subdivsion(s) affecting the road frontage and related drainage
facilities of said subdivision(s), will not violate the proposes of these Regulations or of Section 8-
25 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
11.18 Whenever the Commission applies the benefit assessment, a notation shall be clearly inscribed
in the deed and on the subdivision plan that the owners of such lots in the subdivision shall be
required to pay a benefit assessment to the Town of Plainfield for Town road and drainage
improvement purposes.
11.19 Streets shall bear names which do not duplicate or closely approximate in spelling or sound
existing street names in the Town of Plainfield. Streets which extend or are in alignment with
existing streets in the Town shall bear the same name as the existing street. All street names
shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
11.20 Easements for access to and use of land or other necessary rights or restrictions, outside of a
street right-of-way, shall be provided as required by the Commission and shall be shown on the
subdivision plan with adequate survey information so that the land subject to easement may be
accurately located by field survey. All utility easements shall be accessible to maintenance
vehicles and shall be graded to a maximum slope of ten (10) percent with traffic bound gravel.
Easements may be required in the following types of cases as applicable to the particular
subdivision:
a. For access to bridges and culverts by construction and maintenance equipment which
easements shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide;
b. For storm water pipes, water mains, sanitary sewers and appurtenances, if any, which
easements shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide;
c. For use and access to storm water detention basins, retention basins and fire ponds shall be
no less that twenty (20) feet wide;
d. For identification of points or areas of storm drainage spillage rights from streets when
storm drainage conduits are not to be installed;
e. Temporary construction easements for grading and other construction work in the front
twenty-five (25) feet of each lot along a proposed street;
f. Sight line easements across corners of lots at all street intersections to assure safe line of
sight on the street and to authorize the owner of the abutting property(ies) to remove
obstructions and regrading within the easement area;
26
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
g. Easements at least ten (10) feet in width for pedestrian ways to open spaces, parks,
playgrounds schools and other public or semi-public places where the street system does not
conform to a convenient pattern of pedestrian circulation;
h. Easements may also be required for storm water pipes and facilities that may need to be
installed in the future to serve undeveloped land within the watershed that normally drains
across the area of the proposed subdivision or where natural prescriptive drainage rights
must be altered by land subdivision; and
i. Easements for pipe systems shall be located so that the pipe is positioned at least five (5)
feet from the boundary of such easement, unless otherwise directed by the Commission.
Cul-de-sac roads shall have a length of less than or equal to eight hundred (800) feet from the center
point of the intersection of an existing or proposed road to the center point of the end of the cul-desac.
A new street in excess of eight hundred (800) feet shall have two connections to a street that is a
through road. (Amended 11/13/2001)
11.21 Driveways to individual lots or interior lots shall be located, designed and constructed in
accordance with the Town’s Engineering Standards and Specifications and so as to:
a. Prevent erosion and excessive road drainage down driveways or onto the traveled way;
b. Enter onto lightly traveled roads, wherever possible;
c. Provide adequate sight lines for safe vehicle entry onto a street; and
d. Provide adequate year-round access for emergency vehicles.
11.22 Where topography and/or driveway length dictates, the Commission may require driveways to
have slopes not to exceed ten (10) percent and all-weather passable surfaces no less than ten
(10) feet wide.
11.23 Construction of driveway and drainage facilities shall be completed prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy or Town acceptance of the roads, whichever comes first.
11.24 Monuments shall be provided on both street right-of-way lines at all angle points and points of
curvature and tangent. At (800) feet of street or less. Monuments shall be made of concrete and
shall be not less that five (5) inches square by thirty (30) inches long with a suitable marked top.
After all street construction is completed, each monument shall be set in place with the marked
point set on the point of reference. Lot corners shall be marked with iron pins or concrete
monuments. Such lot markers shall be installed prior to final approval of the subdivision plan.
11.25 Street name signs of approved construction and design shall be installed at all street
intersections in locations approved by the Police Commission.
27
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
11.26 Traffic signs as required by the Police Commission, of regulation size, shape and material shall be
installed prior to Town acceptance of subdivision roads.
11.27 Where deemed necessary by the Commission and the Town Fire Marshal, fire ponds of adequate
depth and capacity shall be provided in appropriate locations, registered and approved by the
District Fire Chief.
11.28 Sidewalks shall be provided on all proposed subdivisions, on both sides of the street in all zoning
districts. On existing streets on which a new subdivision abuts, such sidewalk shall be provided,
except where the Planning and Zoning Commission decides that, based on a written report
received from the Town Engineer, the installation of sidewalks is not considered feasible at the
time the subdivision is proposed to be developed, due to existing road grades, location of
existing abutting sidewalks, topography or poor alignment of existing street lines. In such cases,
the subdivider, in addition to dedicating land for street widening purposes, in accordance with
Section 11.20 of this section shall also grant slope rights along the frontage of such street.
a. Sidewalks shall not be less than five (5) feet wide.
Sidewalks shall be laid in the street right-of-way parallel to the existing street pavement
where such exists and one (1) foot from the street right-of-way line unless a different
location is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Sidewalks shall be extended to
the curb at intersection and shall be continuous across driveways. Sidewalks at intersection
shall slope to provide handicapped access.
b. Sidewalks shall be continued to the curb line at intersections, so as to provide continuous
access for pedestrians.
c. Sidewalks at intersections shall be so designed to accommodate handicapped individuals.
d. Steps shall not be permitted on sidewalks. Sidewalks shall pitch one-forth (1/4) inch per foot
towards the street; ground between the sidewalk and the street shall pitch not less than
one-half (1/2) inch nor more than two (2) inches per foot towards the street, and the curb at
the street pavement shall not be more than seven (7) inches, or less than six (6) inches,
above the wearing surface of the road, unless physical conditions indicate a greater height is
desirable and such height is approved by the Commission.
e. Sidewalks shall be Class “C” (4,000 lb.) Portland Concrete Cement, five (5) inches in thickness,
and laid over eight (8) inches of thoroughly compacted processed gravel approved by the
Town Engineer of his designee. There shall be three-quarter (3/4) inch wide bituminous
expansion joints across the sidewalk every fifteen (15) feet apart longitudinally. Surfaces
shall be “broom-finished”.
f. Where a sidewalk crosses a private driveway, the concrete shall be reinforced with six (6)
inch x six (6) inch mesh #10 over #10 reinforcing eight inches thick and laid over twelve (12)
inches of processed gravel, thoroughly compacted. Where it is necessary for water to cross
the sidewalk at the driveway, the sidewalk shall pitch to a low point at the center (width) so
28
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
storm water will drain across the driveway to the street and not along the sidewalks parallel
to the street.
g. Cement for the sidewalks shall be poured after inspection by the Town Engineer, or his
designee, of the gravel base. No less than a complete section between the expansion joints
shall be poured at one time.
11.29 The subdivider shall maintain all improvements until they are accepted by the Town of Plainfield.
11.30 Streetlights shall be installed at all intersections of new roads and where proposed roads
intersect with existing roads. On proposed roads, the Commission can require additional
streetlights to be installed at an interval that will provide a safe environment.
11.31 Street trees shall be planted forty (40) feet on center on both sides of any street, subject to
variations necessitated by driveway or street intersections, and sidewalks. Trees shall be within
ten (10) feet of the edge of pavement.
a. Trees to be planted shall be of three (3) inch caliper dbh or larger, shall be planted,
protected and maintained using good horticultural practices and shall be a minimum of ten
(10) feet tall.
b. The species of trees shall be of the type designated by the Commission.
c. Existing trees, along the proposed street, which meet these requirements, may be
substituted for new trees at the discretion of the Commission.
29
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 12 Sanitary & Water Supply Requirements
12.1 It is the responsibility of the applicant to supply sufficient evidence to prove that water supply
and individual sewage disposal facilities can be installed to function properly, not cause a
pollution problem and be in conformance with the Connecticut Public Health Code.
12.2 Sanitary Report. Where on-site sewage disposal systems are proposed, the subdivision plan
shall be accompanied by a Sanitary Report prepared by a professional engineer which
demonstrates the feasibility for subsurface disposal of septic tank effluent for the subdivision.
The Report shall address the entire subdivision and shall include the following:
a. The general nature and development of the surrounding area shown on a map with
explanatory text;
b. Topography and natural drainage pattern including references to Soil Conservation Service
soils map with specific references to on-site sewage disposal limitations;
c. Subsurface conditions as shown by subsurface investigation, including soil absorption
characteristics, groundwater level conditions, ledge rock and general nature of the soil;
d. General description of type of development contemplated, noting type of dwelling units and
structures, number of families per structure and number of bedrooms per dwelling unit;
e. Detailed description of proposed sewage disposal facilities, indicating systems sized for
various ground conditions, materials and the generallayout or pattern to be used;
f. Special precautions that may be necessary to provide proper functioning of the proposed
disposal system;
g. Flood heights of any streams, brooks, rivers, lakes or ponds on or near the subdivision. Flood
heights shall be based upon a 100-year frequency storm;
12.3 The Sanitary Report shall contain an engineering evaluation of test results based on an extensive
subsurface investigation. The tests shall be witnessed by NDDH.
12.4 The Commission will only accept soil tests conducted at time periods designated as acceptable
by and under the supervision of NDDH. Applicants should be aware that NDDH may suspend all
soil testing during certain times or seasons of the year.
12.5 The engineering evaluation shall include a determination of whether the soil is suitable for the
absorption of septic tank effluent, and if so, how much area is required. The soil must have an
acceptable percolation rate, without interference from groundwater or impervious strata below
the level of the absorption system, which would prevent the disposal of effluent. The the
technical standard used in the evaluation shall be in accordance with commonly accepted
standards and procedures with particular reference to the Sanitary Code of the State of
Connecticut. Waiver requirements in this section may be granted upon written request to the
Commission.
30
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
12.6 The Sanitary Report shall contain a statement by the engineer that, in his/her professional
opinion, each lot for proposed development is suitable for an installation of the size described in
the Report. Any reservations or special conditions considered necessary by the engineer shall be
set forth in the Report.
12.7 The Sanitary Report shall be a well written, comprehensive and documented study, meeting all
of the above requirements and submitted to the NDDH and the Planning and Zoning
Commission for their review. Additional information may be required if, in the opinion of the
NDDH, the Sanitary Report is incomplete. The Commission shall consider the findings of the
NDDH as part of the approval process.
12.8 Hydrological Report . Every application for approval of a subdivision must include a Hydrological
Report prepared by a hydrologist or professional engineer. The Report shall address the entire
site and include the following:
a. A feasibility study comparing the options of providing public water and private water
supplies;
b. The manner in which the properties are to be provided with a domestic water supply;
c. Certification of the availability of potable water in sufficient quantities and pressure as
required by the Public Health Code;
d. Where public water is to be provided, computations to show adequacy of the pressure, flow
and storage of the water system;
e. Calculations and the basis used to evaluate potential impact on aquifer recharge and
groundwater quality;
f. Site location, geological conditions, depth to groundwater and rate of flow; and
g. Results of one private well pump test for each 10 lots in all subdivisions of 10 lots or more
which shall include: location of screen and test point;
h. Type of screen; pump rate; vertical extent of influence; field porosity;
i. Recharge rate; and zone of contribution. For subdivisions of less than 10 lots, the applicant
may be required to conduct a well pump test at the discretion of the Commission. In all
cases, a notation shall appear on the plan stating where the applicant does or does not
guarantee the availability and quality of water for each lot.
12.9 The Hydrological Report shall contain a statement by the engineer that, in his/her professional
opinion, each lot for proposed development is suitable for installation of a private water supply.
Any reservations or special conditions considered necessary by the engineer shall be set forth in
the Report.
12.10 The Hydrological Report shall be a well written, comprehensive and documented study, meeting
all of the above requirements and submitted to the NDDH and the Planning and Zoning
Commission for their review. Additional information may be required if, in the opinion of the
31
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
NDDH, the Report is incomplete. The Commission shall consider the findings of the NDDH as part
of the approval process.
12.11 Where connection to public water is not feasible, a potable, adequate and dependable water
supply shall be provided for every lot in the subdivision. Test wells may be required in areas
identified as having low groundwater yield, contamination or where previous land uses may
cause well water problems.
12.12 Drilled wells shall comply with the following:
a. Topographic and geological conditions shall be satisfactory for the purpose of providing a
potable water supply; and
b. Each well shall be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the Connecticut Department of Health.
12.12 Development should not be proposed in a manner or density to cause degradation of the
groundwater quality below drinking water standards based upon the normally expected
wastewater dilution potential of the proposed individual subdivision lots.
12.13 Whenever possible, subdivision development will be planned to enhance or maintain levels of
groundwater recharge to the aquifer.
32
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 13 Enforcement & Appeals
13.1 The Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission or an appointed agent is hereby
authorized to enforce these Regulations in accordance with the Chapter 126 of the Connecticut
General Statutes.
13.2 Appeals may be made in accordance with Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
33
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 14 Effective Date, Repeal & Amendments
14.1 These Regulations and any amendments hereto shall be in effect from the date established by
the Commission in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes.
14.2 The Town of Plainfield Subdivision Regulations made effective by the Planning and Zoning
Commission on September 30, 1971 and all amendments thereto, are repealed coincident with
the effective date of these Regulations.
14.3 Amendments may be made in accordance with Chapter 126 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
34
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
SECTION 15 Fee Schedule (Amended 4/01/11, TA-2011-01)***
15.1 All applications shall be accompanied by any fees set forth in this Section. Such fees shall be by
certified check or money order made payable to the Town of Plainfield.
15.2 No application shall be deemed complete or accepted by the Commission until the appropriate
fee is paid in full unless a waiver has been granted by the Commission.
15.3 The full application and review fees are not refundable unless an application is withdrawn
before commencement of the public hearing. The Commission shall determine the amount of
the refund.
15.4 Application and review fees are as follows:
a. Amendments to the Subdivision Regulations* $400.00
b. Subdivisions and Resubdivision Applications* $300.00/lot
c. Engineering review for storm drainage, utilities and new
road*
$300.00 +
$1.00 per
linear foot of
road
d. Inspection and supervision of infrastructure construction**
5% of
estimated cost
* Payable at time of application. Must be separate checks.
** 25% payable before construction commences. The remainder payable at 1/3, 2/3
completion and upon substantial completion.
***Additional $60.00 fee for all Planning and Zoning and Inland Wetlands applications per
Public Act of the CT General Assembly.
15.5 Upon petition, the Commission may waive, reduce or allow delayed payment of the application
or inspection fees. Such petitions shall be in writing stating fully the facts and circumstances the
Commission should consider in its determination.
15.6 The Commission shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this Section.
35
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Section 16 Conservation Subdivisions (Effective 3/20/2007 – TA-2006-12)
16.1 Purpose
:
The purpose of this section is to:
a. Maintain and enhance the conservation of natural or scenic resources,
b. Protect natural streams and water supplies,
c. Promote conservation of soils, wetlands, and other significant natural features and
landmarks,
d. Enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife
preserves, nature reservations or sanctuaries or other open spaces,
e. Enhance public recreation opportunities,
f. Preserve historic sites, and
g. Promote orderly urban or suburban development. These regulations are intended to
provide for increased flexibility, balanced by increased control, in the development of land
so as to facilitate the preservation of open space, natural resources, recreational uses, and
community character.
16.2 Definitions:
Recreational activities that require either:
Active Recreation
the use of a playing field or playground;
the installation of buildings or other structures; or
the substantial modification or grading of a tract of land.
Recreational activities that do not require either:
Passive Recreation
the use of a playing field or playground;
the installation of buildings or other structures; or
the substantial modification or grading of a tract of land.
The installation of a building or structure in connection with a particular recreational activity
shall not, in and of itself, cause the activity to be classified as “active” if the building or structure
was not necessary to allow the activity to occur. For example, the installation of posts, signs, or
water fountains along a hiking trail will not cause hiking to be deemed an active recreational use.
36
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
A cluster development, as defined by Section 8-18 of the Connecticut General statutes, in which
the dimensions that would otherwise be required for lots under the Plainfield Zoning and
Subdivision Regulations may be reduced for the purposes of encouraging the dedication and
preservation of additional open space.
Conservation Subdivision
A subdivision design that is consistent with the provisions of the Plainfield Zoning Regulations
and Subdivision Regulations that would be applicable in the absence of this Subsection 16 and
Section 21 of the Plainfield Zoning Regulations.
Conventional Subdivision
16.3
Requirements of Submitting a Conservation Subdivision Design:
Except as otherwise provided for in Section 16.12, every applicant proposing to subdivide a
parcel of land containing fifteen (15) acres or more, that has been divided, subdivided, or resubdivided
for residential use, that results in the creation of five (5) or more lots, or involves
fifteen (15) or more contiguous acres in any RA-60 zoning district, must submit a Conservation
Subdivision plan that meets the requirements of this Section and the other relevant provisions
of the these Regulations and the Plainfield Zoning Regulations. For purposes of determining the
size of the parcel proposed for subdivision, all land within the parcel, including any land not
immediately proposed for use as building lots, shall be included.
The Commission recommends that prior to the submission of an official application for
Conservation Subdivision approval, the applicant initiate a pre-application conference with the
Commission and subsequently prepare and present a preliminary plan for informal consideration
by the Commission. The preparation of the preliminary plan is recommended to facilitate the
general consideration of factors and problems affecting the development of the land before the
applicant proceeds with the official application and the preparation of final maps, plans, and
documents required for formal consideration by the Commission. The presentation of a
preliminary plan will more readily and economically facilitate alterations and changes
recommended by the Commission. Neither the pre-application conference nor the formal
consideration of the preliminary plan shall be deemed to constitute any portion of the official
and formal procedure of applying for approval of the final Conservation Subdivision plan.
16.4
General Density Limitations:
The maximum number of units for a Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by the Yield
Plan Method.
37
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
The applicant must provide a preliminary conceptual subdivision plan consisting of lot and street
layouts conforming to the Plainfield Zoning and Subdivision Regulations governing Conventional
Subdivision lots, and the Plainfield Road Ordinance. Although such yield plans shall be
conceptual in nature, and are not intended to involve significant engineering costs, they must be
realistic and must not show potential house sites or streets in areas that would not ordinarily be
legally permitted in a Conventional Subdivision layout. Consequently, yield plans must identify
physical and other features that would limit or restrict the use of the parcel for development,
including, but not limited to, topographic contours, at a contour interval of no more than two (2)
feet; inland wetlands and watercourses in areas of the property not being proposed for
development (on either the Yield Plan or the Conservation Subdivision Plan) maybe depicted as
they appear on various sources of other mapping, inland wetlands and watercourses in areas of
proposed development must be delineated by a Professional Soil Scientist; 100-year floodplains
(Flood Zones A, as shown on FEMA maps); and easements and rights-of-way affecting the parcel.
The Commission shall require that the Yield Plan include a “Property Survey” prepared in
accordance to the Standards for “Surveys and Maps in the State of Connecticut”, as adopted by
the Connecticut Association of Land Surveyors, Inc. on September 26, 1996.
Yield Plan Method
On lots that would not be served by public sewerage or a centralized private sewage treatment
facility, soil suitability for individual septic systems must be demonstrated. The Commission may
select a small percentage of lots (10 to 15%) to be tested, in areas considered to be marginal. If
all tests on the sample lots meet applicable Public Health Code requirements, the applicant’s
other lots shall be deemed suitable for septic systems, for the purpose of calculating total lot
yield. However, if any of the sample lots fail, several others (of the Commission’s choosing) shall
be tested, until all the lots in a given sample pass.
16.5 Minimum Area of Open Space Required:
The minimum percentage of land that shall be
designated as permanent open space shall be fifty (50) percent of the total parcel area.
16.6 Design Guidelines for Conservation Subdivisions:
The dimensional requirements for lots in a
Conservation Subdivision shall be as specified in Section 21.6 of the Zoning Regulations. In
designing a Conservation Subdivision, the applicant shall consider the purposes set forth in
Section 16 and Section 9 of these Regulations; the provisions and standards set forth in Section
21 of the Zoning Regulations, and the following:
a) Proposed lots and improvements should be designed and situated to minimize alteration of
natural site features to be preserved.
38
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
b) Proposed open space areas should include irreplaceable natural features located in the tract
(such as, but not limited to stream beds, significant stands of trees, individual trees of
significant size, and rock outcroppings).
c) Open space intended for recreation or other active public use should be easily accessible to
pedestrians, including to the extent feasible, the handicapped and elderly.
d) Individual lots should be arranged and situated to relate to surrounding properties, to
improve the view from, and the view of, prospective home sites, and to minimize the area
devoted to motor access and travel.
The Commission may modify any application so as to designate open space in locations other
than those proposed, if it determines that such modified location(s) will better serve purposes
and satisfy the applicable criteria and standards of these Regulations and the Zoning
Regulations.
16.7
Common Driveways:
Common driveways serving more than one dwelling unit are encouraged, especially when
interior (rear) lots are proposed and at cul-de-sacs. Minimum separation between physical
driveways is 25 feet. The applicant shall demonstrate adequate snow shelf and driveway curbcut
separations at cul-de-sacs (public or private). Common driveways may not serve as a
connecting driveway between two public streets or private laneways.
Common driveways may serve up to five (5) dwelling units in a Conservation Subdivision, and
shall be paved with bituminous concrete or gravel to a minimum width of eighteen (18) feet.
Final design is site specific and subject to the recommendation of the Town Engineer.
Bituminous concrete pavement is required where road grade is greater than or equal to 8%. The
pavement cross section shall consist of:
1. 6” rolled gravel sub-base (or as required by the Town Engineer);
2. 4” compacted processed stone base;
3. 1 ½” compacted bituminous concrete Class I pavement binder course; and
4. 1 ½” compacted bituminous concrete Class II pavement finish course.
The unpaved cross section shall consist of:
1. 8” rolled gravel sub-base (or as required by the Town Engineer);
2. 4” compacted processed stone finish course.
Where common driveways exceed 1,000 feet in length, a pull-off (8’ wide x 20’ deep) shall be
provided at 300-foot intervals.
39
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
All common driveways are to be maintained by either a Homeowner’s Association, or through
the establishment of private maintenance and liability agreements, and are to remain private in
perpetuity in a form acceptable to the Commission, which shall be subject to review by the Town
Counsel. Appropriate easements shall be provided for travel, utilities, snow storage and pull-off,
hammerhead turnaround, and associated snow shelves.
16.8
Conservation Subdivision Streets:
New public streets serving a Conservation Subdivision shall be paved to a minimum width of
twenty (20) feet (bituminous concrete) with a cross slope from center crown to gutter of no less
than 3/8”/foot. Final design is site specific and subject to the recommendation of the Town
Engineer.
Curbing and formal closed drainage systems (e.g. culverts, catch basins, etc.) are to be held to a
minimum, except as provided below. Curbing shall be required: where a road is in a cut
situation with surrounding land pitching toward the road; at a low point in the road with catch
basins to collect stormwater runoff; and where a closed drainage system is required. Curbing is
not required: where land generally has flat slopes; where the road is in a fill situation and sheet
flow away from the road is advantageous; and where no closed drainage system is required. A
closed drainage system is required where drainage structures (e.g. catch basins) are necessitated
by site conditions and subdivision design.
All dead-end streets shall terminate in a cul-de-sac. In general dead-end streets shall not exceed
1,300 feet in length and shall serve no more than twelve (12) dwelling units, except that waivers
for cul-de-sac streets serving not more than sixteen (16) dwelling units may be granted by the
Commission in instances where the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that street length,
topography, natural features, site layout and emergency vehicle access are adequate to properly
served the proposed dwellings three-quarters (3/4) of the commission quorum present must
vote in favor for waiver to be granted.
All new public streets shall be designed to the standards of these regulations, and to the
standards of the Plainfield Road Ordinance, except where expressly modified by this chapter.
16.9
Conservation Subdivision Private Lanes:
Private lanes may serve up to ten (10) dwelling units in a Conservation Subdivision. All private
lanes shall be paved with 3” bituminous concrete (1 ½” Class I and 1 ½” Class II) or gravel to a
minimum width of twenty (20) feet. Final design is site specific and subject to the
recommendation of the Town Engineer. Private lanes may not serve as a connecting road
between two public streets.
40
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
Bituminous concrete pavement is required: where road grade is greater than or equal to 6%,
where a closed drainage system is required; and where curbing is required. The Commission
may waive the requirement for bituminous concrete pavement (three quarters (3/4) of the
Commission quorum present must vote in favor for waiver to be granted), in instances or road
grade greater than 6% but not more than 8%, if the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates site
design, use and physical features of the site can sustain and support a twenty (20) feet wide
gravel street.
Curbing and formal closed drainage systems are to be held a minimum, except as provided
below. Curbing shall be required: where a road is in a cut situation with surrounding land
pitching toward the road; at a low point in the road with catch basins to collect stormwater
runoff; and where a closed drainage system is required. Curbing is not required; where the land
generally has flat slopes; where the road is in a fill situation and sheet flow away from the road is
advantageous; and where no closed drainage system is required. A closed drainage system is
required where drainage structures (e.g. catch basins) are necessitated by site conditions and
subdivision design. The cross slope from center crown to gutter shall be no less than 3/8” /foot.
Pavement cross-section shall consist of:
1. 6” rolled gravel sub-base (or as required by the Town Engineer);
2. 4” compacted processed stone base;
3. 1 ½” compacted bituminous concrete Class I pavement binder course; and
4. 1 ½” compacted bituminous concrete Class II pavement finish course.
Unpaved cross sections shall consist of:
1. 8” rolled gravel sub-base (or as required by the Town Engineer;
2. 4” compacted processed stone finish course.
All dead-end private lanes shall terminate in a cul-de-sac with an outside radius of travel way of
fifty (50) feet. If a center island is proposed, the width of the travel way around the island shall
be at least twenty (20) feet. Where roads exceed 1,000 feet in length, a hammerhead
turnaround (12’ wide x 20’ deep) shall be provided at intervals of three hundred (300) feet
(except the last 1,000 feet of roadway may be served by the cul-de-sac). For example, a 3,000
feet long private lane would have hammerheads at 1,000 feet and 2,000 feet, and a cul-de-sac at
3,000 feet.
All private lanes are to be maintained by a Homeowner’s association, and are to remain private
in perpetuity in a form acceptable to the Commission, which shall, at the Commission’s
discretion, be subject to review by the Town Counsel. Appropriate easements shall be provided
for travel, utilities, snow storage, maintenance, stormwater drainage and to accommodate any
41
Subdivision Regulations
TOW N O F P L A I N F I E L D
hammerhead turnaround and associated snow shelf. All private lanes shall be identified on the
subdivision plans.
16.10
Indemnification:
If a Conservation Subdivision contains a private lane or common driveway, a note shall be placed
on the final Conservation Subdivision plan, and in the deed to the property stating: “This
subdivision is serviced by a private lane (and/or common driveway), The Town of Plainfield will
provide no maintenance, repair or school bus service along this private lane (and/or common
driveway).”
16.11
Dedication of Open Space:
The dedication of open space shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 5C.8
of the Plainfield Zoning Regulations.
16.12 Modification or Exception:
(TA-2008-08) (Effective 10/01/08)
An applicant may apply to the Commission for a modification or exception to the Conservation
Subdivision plan requirements. The purpose of the modification or exception is to provide
flexibility with regard to parcels of land for which a Conservation Subdivision would be
impractical due to existing physical conditions or limitations, would create an undue hardship, or
would be substantially detrimental to the character of, or property in, surrounding areas. In
evaluating, approving or disapproving an application for such modification or exception, the
Commission may consider the following criteria:
1. The nature of the proposed development
2. The nature of the resources present on the land
3. The size of the subdivision
4. Road access
5. The shape of the parcel
6. Any undue hardships that the creation of a Conservation Subdivision would cause
7. Any other factor the Commission deems appropriate
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
1
T O W N O F P L A II N F II E L D
IIN L AN D WE T L AN D S AN D WAT E R COU R S E S REG U L AT II ON S
As Amended Through November 13, 2012
Tablle off Conttentts
SECTION PAGE
1 Title and Authority ........ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 3
2 Definitions ........ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 5
3 Inventory of Regulated Areas .... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 10
4 Permitted Uses as of Right and Non-regulated Uses ....... ............ ............ ............ 11
5 Activities Regulated by the State ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 14
6 Regulated Activities to be Licensed ........ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 16
7 Application Requirements ......... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 17
8 Application Procedures . ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 21
9 Public Hearings ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 23
10 Considerations for Decision ....... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 24
11 Decision Process and Permit ..... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 27
12 Action by Duly Authorized Agent ........... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 30
13 Bond and Insurance ...... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 31
14 Enforcement .... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 32
15 Amendments ... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 34
16 Appeals ............ .................. ....... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 37
17 Conflict and Severance . ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 38
18 Other Permits .. ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 39
19 Application Fees ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 40
20 Records Retention and Disposition ........ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 42
21 Effective Date of Regulations .... ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 44
Fee Schedule/Fee Chart ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ ............ 45
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
2
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
3
SECTION 1
TITLE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 The inland wetlands and watercourses of the State of Connecticut are an indispensable
and irreplaceable but fragile natural resource with which the citizens of the state have
been endowed. The wetlands and watercourses are an interrelated web of nature
essential to an adequate supply of surface and underground water; to hydrological
stability and control of flooding and erosion; to the recharging and purification of
groundwater; and to the existence of many forms of animal, aquatic and plant life.
Many inland wetlands and watercourses have been destroyed or are in danger of
destruction because of unregulated use by reason of the deposition, filling or removal
of material, the diversion or obstruction of water flow, the erection of structures and
other uses, all of which have despoiled, polluted and eliminated wetlands and
watercourses. Such unregulated activity has had, and will continue to have, a
significant, adverse impact on the environment and ecology of the state of Connecticut
and has and will continue to imperil the quality of the environment thus adversely
affecting the ecological, scenic, historic and recreational values and benefits of the state
for its citizens now and forever more. The preservation and protection of the wetlands
and watercourses from random, unnecessary, undesirable and unregulated uses,
disturbance or destruction is in the public interest and is essential to the health, welfare
and safety of the citizens of the state. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations
to protect the citizens of the state by making provisions for the protection,
preservation, maintenance and use of the inland wetlands and watercourses by
minimizing their disturbance and pollution; maintaining and improving water quality in
accordance with the highest standards set by federal, state or local authority;
preventing damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; preventing loss of fish and other
beneficial aquatic organisms, wildlife and vegetation and the destruction of the natural
habitats thereof; deterring and inhibiting the danger of flood and pollution; protecting
the quality of wetlands and watercourses for their conservation, economic, aesthetic,
recreational and other public and private uses and values; and protecting the state's
potable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, misuse
and mismanagement by providing an orderly process to balance the need for the
economic growth of the state and the use of its land with the need to protect its
environment and ecology in order to forever guarantee to the people of the state, the
safety of such natural resources for their benefit and enjoyment and for the benefit and
enjoyment of generations yet unborn.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
4
1.2 These regulations shall be known as the "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses
Regulations of the Town of Plainfield."
1.3 The Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of Plainfield was
established in accordance with an ordinance adopted February 14, 1974 and shall
implement the purposes and provisions of these regulations and the Inland Wetlands
and Watercourses Act in the Town of Plainfield.
1.4 These regulations have been adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in
accordance with the provisions of the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and these
regulations.
1.5 The Agency shall enforce the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act and shall issue,
issue with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny permits for all
regulated activities in the Town of Plainfield pursuant to sections 22a-36 to 22a-45,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
5
SECTION 2
DEFINITIONS
2.1 As used in these regulations:
"Act" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Act, sections 22a-36 through
22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
"Agency" means the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of
Plainfield.
"Bogs" are areas distinguished by evergreen trees and shrubs underlain by peat
deposits, poor drainage, and highly acidic conditions.
"Clear-cutting" means the harvest of timber in a fashion which removes all trees down
to a two inch diameter at breast height.
"Commissioner of Environmental Protection" means the commissioner of the State of
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection.
"Continual flow" means a flow of water which persists for an extended period of time;
this flow may be interrupted during periods of drought or during the low flow period of
the annual hydrological cycle, June through September, but it recurs in prolonged
succession.
"Deposit" includes, but shall not be limited to fill, grade, dump, place, discharge or
emit.
"Designated agent" means an individual(s) designated by the Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses Agency of the Town of Plainfield to carry out its functions and purposes.
"Discharge" means emission of any water, substance, or material into wetlands or
watercourses whether or not such substance causes pollution.
"Disturb the natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse" means
to alter the inland wetlands and watercourses by reason of removal or deposition of
material, clearing the land, altering or obstructing water flow, or pollution.
"Essential to the farming operation" means that the proposed activity is necessary and
indispensable to sustain farming activities on an existing farm.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
6
"Farming" means use of land for the growing of crops, raising of livestock or other
agricultural use.
“Feasible” means able to be constructed or implemented consistent with sound
engineering principles.
"Management practice" means a practice, procedure, activity, structure or facility
designed to prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage or to
maintain or enhance existing environmental quality. Such management practices
include, but are not limited to: erosion and sedimentation controls; restrictions on land
use or development; construction setbacks from wetlands or watercourses; proper
disposal of waste materials; procedures for equipment maintenance to prevent fuel
spillage; construction methods to prevent flooding or disturbance of wetlands and
watercourses; procedures for maintaining continuous stream flows; confining
construction that must take place in watercourses to times when water flows are low
and fish and wildlife will not be adversely affected.
"Marshes" are areas with soils that exhibit aquic moisture regimes and are
distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs and the dominance of soft-stemmed
herbaceous plants. The water table in marshes is at or above the ground surface
throughout the year and areas of open water six inches or more in depth is common,
but seasonal water table fluctuations are encountered.
"Material" means any substance, solid or liquid, organic or inorganic, including but not
limited to: soil, sediment, aggregate, land, gravel, clay, bog, peat, mud, debris, sand,
refuse or waste.
"Municipality" means the Town of Plainfield.
"Nurseries" means land used for propagating trees, shrubs or other plants for
transplanting, sale, or for use as stock for grafting.
“Ordinary high water mark” means a mark on the land caused by the presence and
action of water, which presence and action is so common and usual and so long
continued in all ordinary years so as to mark upon the land a distinction between the
abutting upland and the watercourse. Such mark may be found examining the bed and
bank of any watercourse and ascertaining thereon an abrupt change in the
characteristics of soil and vegetation or slope of the land.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
7
"Permit" means the whole or any part of any license, certificate or approval or similar
form of permission which may be required of any person by the provisions of these
regulations and the Act or other municipal, state and federal law.
"Permittee" means the person to whom a permit has been issued.
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization or legal entity of any kind, including municipal corporations, governmental
agencies or subdivisions thereof.
"Pollution" means harmful thermal effect or the contamination or rendering unclean or
impure of any waters of the state by reason of any waste or other materials discharged
or deposited therein by any public or private sewer or otherwise so as directly or
indirectly to come in contact with any waters. This includes, but is not limited to,
erosion and sedimentation resulting from any filling, and clearing or excavation activity.
“Prudent” means economically and otherwise reasonable in light of the social benefits
to be derived from the proposed regulated activity provided cost may be considered in
deciding what is prudent and further provided a mere showing of expense will not
necessarily mean an alternative is imprudent.
"Regulated activity" means any operation within or use of a wetland or watercourse
involving removal or deposition of material, or any obstruction, construction, alteration
or pollution, of such wetlands or watercourses, but shall not include the specified
activities in section 4 of these regulations. Furthermore, any clearing, grubbing,
grading, paving, excavating, filling, constructing, depositing or removing of material and
discharging of storm water on the land within 100 feet measured horizontally from the
boundary of any wetland or watercourse is a regulated activity. At its discretion, the
Agency may rule that any other activity located within such upland review area or in
any other non-wetland or non-watercourse area may have an adverse impact on
wetlands or watercourses and is a regulated activity.
"Regulated area" means any wetlands or watercourses as defined in these regulations
and the area 100’ beyond their limits.
"Remove" includes, but shall not be limited to, drain, excavate, mine, dig, dredge, suck,
grub, clear cut timber, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
"Rendering unclean or impure" means any alteration of the physical, chemical or
biological properties of any waters of the state, including, but not limited to, change in
odor, color, turbidity or taste.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
8
"Significant impact activity" means any activity, including, but not limited to, the
following activities which may have a major effect or significant impact.
1. Any activity involving deposition or removal of material which will or may have a
major effect or significant impact on the regulated area or on another part of
the inland wetland or watercourse system.
2. Any activity which substantially changes the natural channel or may inhibit the
natural dynamics of a watercourse system.
3. Any activity which substantially diminishes the natural capacity of an inland
wetland or watercourse to: support desirable fisheries, wildlife, or other
biological life; prevent flooding; supply water; assimilate waste; facilitate
drainage; provide recreation or open space; or perform other functions.
4. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause substantial
turbidity, siltation or sedimentation in a wetland or watercourse.
5. Any activity which causes a substantial diminution of flow of a natural
watercourse or groundwater levels of the regulated area.
6. Any activity which is likely to cause or has the potential to cause pollution of a
wetland or watercourse.
7. Any activity which damages or destroys unique wetland or watercourse areas or
such areas having demonstrable scientific or educational value.
"Soil scientist" means an individual duly qualified in accordance with standards set by
the federal Office of Personnel Management.
"Swamps" are areas with soils that exhibit aquatic moisture regimes and are
distinguished by the dominance of wetland trees and shrubs.
"Submerged lands" means those lands which are inundated by water on a seasonal or
more frequent basis.
"Town" means the Town of Plainfield.
"Waste" means sewage or any substance, liquid, gaseous, solid or radioactive, which
may pollute or tend to pollute any of the wetlands or watercourses of the Town.
"Watercourses" means rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes, ponds, marshes,
swamps, bogs, and all other bodies of water, natural or artificial, vernal or intermittent,
public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the Town or
any portion thereof not regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35,
inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes. Intermittent watercourses shall be
delineated by a defined permanent channel and bank and the occurrence of two or
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
9
more of the following characteristics: (a) evidence of scour or deposits of recent
alluvium or detritus, (b) the presence of standing or flowing water for duration longer
than a particular storm incident, and (c) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation.
"Wetlands" means land, including submerged land as defined in this section, not
regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35, inclusive, of the Connecticut
General Statutes, which consists of any of the soil types designated as poorly drained,
very poorly drained, alluvial and flood plain by the National Cooperative Soils Survey, as
it may be amended from time to time, of the Soil Conservation Service of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA). Such areas may include filled, graded, or excavated
sites which possess an aquatic (saturated) soil moisture regime as defined by the USDA
Cooperative Soil Survey.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
10
SECTION 3
INVENTORY OF REGULATED AREAS
3.1 The map of regulated areas entitled "Inland Wetlands and Watercourses, Town of
Plainfield, Connecticut" delineates the general location and boundaries of inland
wetlands and the general location of watercourses. Copies of this map are available for
inspection at the office of the Town Clerk or the Agency. In all cases, the precise
location of regulated areas shall be determined by the actual character of the land, the
distribution of wetland soil types and location of watercourses. The Agency may use
aerial photography, remote sensing imagery, resource mapping, soils maps, site
inspection observations or other information in determining the location of the
boundaries of wetlands and watercourses.
3.2 Any owner who disputes the designation of any part of his or her land as a regulated
area on the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map, may petition the Agency to
change the designation in accordance with section 15 of these regulations. All petitions
for a map change shall be submitted in writing and shall include all relevant facts and
circumstances which support the change. The petitioner shall provide proof that the
designation is inapplicable. The Agency may require such an owner to provide an
accurate delineation of regulated areas in accordance with section 15 of these
regulations.
3.3 The Agency or its designated agent(s) shall maintain a current inventory of regulated
areas within the town. The Agency may amend its map as more accurate information
becomes available. Any person may petition for an amendment to the map.
Petitioners shall bear the burden of proof for all requested map amendments. Such
proof may include, but not be limited to, aerial photography, remote sensing imagery,
resource mapping or other available information. Such map amendments are subject to
the public hearing process outlined in section 15 of these regulations.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
11
SECTION 4
PERMITTED USES AS OF RIGHT & NON-REGULATED USES
4.1 The following operations and uses shall be permitted in inland wetlands and
watercourses, as of right:
a. grazing, farming, nurseries, gardening and harvesting of crops and farm ponds of
three acres or less essential to the farming operation. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not be construed to include road construction or the erection of
buildings not directly related to the farming operation, relocation of watercourses
with continual flow, filling or reclamation of wetlands or watercourses with
continual flow, clear cutting of timber except for the expansion of agricultural crop
land, or the mining of top soil, peat, sand, gravel or similar material from wetlands
or watercourses for the purposes of sale;
b. a residential home (A) for which a building permit has been issued or (B) on a
subdivision lot, provided the permit has been issued or the subdivision has been
approved by a municipal planning, zoning or planning and zoning commission as of
the effective date of promulgation of the municipal regulations pursuant to
subsection (b) of section 22a-42a, or as of July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, and
further provided no residential home shall be permitted as of right pursuant to this
subdivision unless the building permit was obtained on or before July 1, 1987. Any
person claiming a use of wetlands permitted as a right under this subdivision shall
document the validity of said right by providing a certified copy of the building
permit and a site plan showing proposed and existing topographic contours, house
and well locations, septic system, driveway, approval dates or other necessary
information to document his or her right hereunder;
c. boat anchorage or mooring, not to include dredging or dock construction;
d. uses incidental to the enjoyment or maintenance of residential property, such
property defined as equal to or smaller than the largest minimum residential lot site
permitted anywhere in the municipality (provided that in any town where there are
no zoning regulations establishing minimum residential lot sites, the largest
minimum lot site shall be two acres) and containing a residence. Such incidental
uses shall include maintenance of existing structures and landscaping, but shall not
include removal or deposition of significant amounts of material from or into a
wetland or watercourse, or diversion or alteration of a watercourse.
e. construction and operation, by water companies as defined by section 16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes or by municipal water supply systems as provided for
in Chapter 102, of the Connecticut General Statutes, of dams, reservoirs and other
facilities necessary to the impounding, storage and withdrawal of water in
connection with public water supplies except as provided in sections 22a-401
through 22a-403 of the Connecticut General Statutes [and];
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
12
f. maintenance relating to any drainage pipe which existed before the effective date
of any municipal regulations adopted pursuant to section 22a-42a of the
Connecticut General Statutes or July 1, 1974, whichever is earlier, provided such
pipe is on property which is zoned as residential but which does not contain
hydrophytic vegetation. For purposes of this subdivision, “maintenance” means the
removal of accumulated leaves, soil, and other debris whether by hand or machine,
while the pipe remains in place; and
g. withdrawals of water for fire emergency purposes
4.2 The following operations and uses shall be permitted as non-regulated uses in wetlands
and watercourses, provided they do not disturb the natural and indigenous character of
the wetland or watercourse by removal or deposition of material, alteration or
obstruction of water flow or pollution of the wetland or watercourse:
a. conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, shellfish, and wildlife. Such operation
or use may include, but is not limited to, minor work to control erosion, or to
encourage proper fish, wildlife and silviculture management practices.
b. outdoor recreation including the use of play and sporting areas, golf courses, field
trials, nature study, hiking, horseback riding, swimming, skin and scuba diving,
camping, boating, water skiing, trapping, hunting, fishing and shell fishing and
cross-country skiing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated; and
c. the installation of a dry hydrant by or under the authority of a municipal fire
department, provided such dry hydrant is only used for firefighting purposes and
there is no alternative access to a public water supply. For purposes of this section,
“dry hydrant” means a non-pressurized pipe system that: (A) is readily accessible to
fire department apparatus from a proximate public road, (B) provides for the
withdrawal of water by suction to such fire department apparatus, and (C) is
permanently installed into an existing lake, pond or stream that is a dependable
source of water.
4.3 All activities in wetlands or watercourses involving filling, excavating, dredging, clear
cutting, clearing, or grading or any other alteration or use of a wetland or watercourse
not specifically permitted by this section and otherwise defined as a regulated activity
by these regulations shall require a permit from the Agency in accordance with section
6 of these regulations.
4.4 To carry out the purposes of this section, any person proposing to carry out a permitted
or non-regulated operation or use of a wetland or watercourse that may disturb the
natural and indigenous character of the wetland or watercourse shall, prior to
commencement of such operation or use, notify the Agency on a form provided by it,
and provide the Agency with sufficient information to enable it to properly determine
that the proposed operation and use is a permitted or non-regulated use of the
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
13
wetland or watercourse. The Agency or its designated agent shall rule that the
proposed operation or use is a permitted or a non-regulated use or operation or that a
permit is required. Such ruling shall be in writing and shall be made no later than the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency following the meeting at which the
request was received. The designated agent for the Agency may make such ruling on
behalf of the Agency at any time.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
14
SECTION 5
ACTIVITIES REGULATED BY THE STATE
5.1 In addition to any permit or approval required by the Agency, the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection shall regulate activities in or affecting wetlands or
watercourses subject to the following jurisdiction.
a. Construction or modification of any dam pursuant to sections 22a-401 through
22a-411 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
b. Construction, encroachment or placement of any obstruction within stream channel
encroachment lines pursuant to sections 22a-342 through 22a-349a of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
c. Construction or placement of any structure or obstruction within the tidal, coastal
or navigable waters of the state pursuant to sections 22a-359 through 22a-363 or in
designated tidal wetlands pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
d. Diversion of water, including withdrawals of surface or groundwater in excess of
fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per day or any piping, culverting, channelization,
relocation, damming or other alteration of the location of flow of any surface
waters of the state where the tributary watershed area above the point of such
alteration is 100 acres or larger, pursuant to sections 22a-365 through 22a-378a of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
e. Discharges into the waters of the state pursuant to section 22a-430 of the
Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
f. Discharge of fill or dredged materials into the wetlands and watercourses of the
state pursuant to section 401 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, for
activities regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the
Federal Clean Water Act.
5.2 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
regulated activities in or affecting wetlands or watercourses, undertaken by any
department, agency or instrumentality of the State of Connecticut, except any local or
regional board of education, pursuant to sections 22a-39 or 22a-45a of the Connecticut
General Statues..
5.3 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
tidal wetlands designated and regulated pursuant to sections 22a-28 through 22a-35 of
the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
5.4 The Commissioner of Environmental Protection shall have exclusive jurisdiction over
activities authorized under a dam repair or removal order issued by the Commissioner
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
15
of Environmental Protection under section 22a-402 or a dam construction permit issued
by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under sections 22a-403 or 22a-41 of
the Connecticut General Statutes. Any person receiving such dam repair or removal
order or dam construction permit shall not be required to obtain a permit from a
municipal wetlands agency for any action necessary to comply with said dam order or
to carry out the activities authorized by said dam permit.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
16
SECTION 6
REGULATED ACTIVITIES TO BE LICENSED
6.1 No person shall conduct or maintain a regulated activity without first obtaining a permit
for such activity from the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of
Plainfield.
6.2 Any person found to be conducting or maintaining a regulated activity without the prior
authorization of the Agency, or violating any other provision of these regulations, shall
be subject to the enforcement proceedings and penalties prescribed in section 14 of
these regulations and any other remedies as provided by law.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
17
SECTION 7
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
7.1 Any person intending to conduct a regulated activity or to renew or amend a permit to
conduct such activity, shall apply for a permit on a form provided by the Agency. The
application shall contain the information described in this section and any other
information the Agency may reasonably require. Application forms may be obtained in
the offices of the Plainfield Town Clerk or the Agency.
7.2 If an application to the Town of Plainfield Planning and Zoning Commission for
subdivision or resubdivision of land involves land containing a wetland or watercourse,
the applicant shall, in accordance with Section 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26, as applicable, of the
Connecticut General Statutes, submit an application for a permit to the Agency in
accordance with this section, no later than the day the application is filed with such
planning and zoning commission.
7.3 The application shall contain such information as is necessary for a fair and informed
determination thereon by the Agency.
7.4 A prospective applicant may request the Agency to determine whether or not a
proposed activity involves a significant impact activity.
7.5 All applications shall include the following information in writing or on maps or
drawings:
a. the applicant's name, home and business mailing addresses and telephone
numbers;
b. the owner's name, mailing address and telephone number and written consent of
the land owner if the applicant is not the owner of the land upon which the subject
activity is proposed;
c. the applicant's interest in the land;
d. the geographical location of the land which is the subject of the proposed activity
and a description of the land in sufficient detail to allow identification of the inland
wetlands and watercourses, the area(s) (in acres or square feet) of wetlands or
watercourses to be disturbed, soil type(s), and wetland vegetation;
e. the purpose and a description of the proposed activity and proposed erosion and
sedimentation controls and other management practices and mitigation measures
which may be considered as a condition of issuing a permit for the proposed
regulated activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1) prevent or minimize
pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or enhance existing
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
18
environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
f. alternatives considered and subsequently rejected by the applicant and why the
alternative as set forth in the application was chosen; all such alternatives shall be
diagrammed on a site plan or drawing;
g. a site plan showing the proposed activity and existing and proposed conditions in
relation to wetlands and watercourses and identifying any further activities
associated with, or reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are
made inevitable by the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact
on wetlands or watercourses;
h. names and mailing addresses of adjacent land owners;
i. statement by the applicant that the applicant is familiar with all the information
provided in the application and is aware of the penalties for obtaining a permit
through deception or through inaccurate or misleading information;
j. authorization for the members and agents of the Agency to inspect the subject land,
at reasonable times, both before and after a final decision has been issued;
k. a completed DEP reporting form; the Agency shall revise or correct the information
provided by the applicant and submit the form to the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection in accordance with section 22a-39-14 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies;
l. any other information the Agency deems necessary to the understanding of what
the applicant is proposing; and
m. submission of the appropriate filing fee based on the fee schedule established in
section 19 of these regulations.
7.6 If the proposed activity involves a significant impact activity as determined by the
Agency, additional information, based on the nature and anticipated effects of the
activity, including but not limited to the following, is required:
a. site plans for the proposed activity and the land which will be affected thereby
which show existing and proposed conditions, wetland and watercourse
boundaries, land contours, boundaries of land ownership, proposed alterations and
uses of wetlands and watercourses, and other pertinent features of the land and
the proposed activity, prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the state.
(The plan should contain an original signature and stamp.)
b. engineering reports and analyses and additional drawings to fully describe the
proposed activity including any filling, excavation, drainage or hydraulic
modifications to watercourses and the proposed erosion and sedimentation control
plan;
c. mapping of soil types consistent with the categories established by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey of the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service; the
wetlands shall be delineated in the field by a soil scientist and the soil scientist’s
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
19
field delineation shall be depicted on the site plans as well as original signature and
stamp ( if available).
d. a description of the ecological communities and functions of the wetlands or
watercourses involved with the application and the effects of the proposed activity
on these communities and wetland functions;
e. a description of how the applicant will change, diminish, or enhance the ecological
communities and functions of the wetlands or watercourses involved in the
application and each alternative, and a description of why each alternative
considered was deemed neither feasible nor prudent;
f. analysis of chemical or physical characteristics of any fill material; and
g. management practices and other measures designed to mitigate the impact of the
proposed activity.
7.7 The applicant shall certify whether:
a. any portion of the property on which the regulated activity is proposed is located
within 500 feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. traffic attributable to the completed project on the site will use streets within the
adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. sewer or water drainage from the project site will flow through and impact the
sewage or drainage system within the adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
7.8 Three (3) copies of all application materials shall be submitted to comprise a complete
application unless an applicant is otherwise directed, in writing, by the Agency.
7.9 Any application to renew or amend an existing permit shall be filed with the Agency in
accordance with section 8 of these regulations at least sixty-five (65) days prior to the
expiration date of the permit. Any application to renew or amend such an existing
permit shall contain the information required under section 7 of these regulations
provided:
a. the application may incorporate the documentation and record of the prior
application;
b. the application shall describe the extent of work completed at the time of filing and
the schedule for completing the activities authorized in the permit;
c. the application shall state the reason why the authorized activity was not initiated
or completed within the time specified in the permit;
d. the application shall describe any changes in facts or circumstances involved with or
affecting wetlands or watercourses or use of the land for which the permit was
issued;
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
20
e. the Agency may, prior to the expiration of a permit, accept an untimely application
to renew such permit if the authorized activity is ongoing and allow the
continuation of work beyond the expiration date if, in its judgment, the permit is
likely to be renewed and the public interest or environment will be best served by
not interrupting the activity;
7.10 Any application to renew a permit shall be granted upon request of the permit holder
unless the Agency finds that there has been a substantial change in circumstances
which requires a new permit application or an enforcement action has been undertaken
with regard to the regulated activity for which the permit was issued provided no
permit shall be valid for more than ten years, and further provided that any permit
issued prior to July 1, 2011 that did not expire prior to May 9, 2011 shall be valid for no
more than fourteen years.
7.11 For any permit application involving property subject to a conservation or preservation
restriction, the following shall apply:
a. for purposes of this section, “conservation restriction” means a limitation, whether
or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any
deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land
described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision
of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to retain land or
water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic or open condition or in
agricultural, farming, forest or open space use.
b. for purposes of this section, “preservation restriction” means a limitation, whether
or not stated in the form of a restriction, easement, covenant or condition, in any
deed, will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land
described therein, including, but not limited to, the state or any political subdivision
of the state, or in any order of taking such land whose purpose is to preserve
historically significant structures or sites.
c. no person shall file a permit application, other than for interior work in an existing
building or for exterior work on an existing building that does not expand or alter
the footprint of such existing building, relating to property that is subject to a
conservation restriction or a preservation restriction unless the applicant provides
proof that the applicant has provided written notice of such application, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the party holding such restriction, including, but
not limited to, any state agency that holds such restriction, not later than sixty days
prior to the filing of the permit application.
d. in lieu of such notice pursuant to subsection 7.11c, the applicant may submit a
letter from the holder of such restriction or from the holder’s authorized agent,
verifying that the application is in compliance with the terms of the restriction.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
21
SECTION 8
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
8.1 All petitions, applications, requests or appeals shall be submitted to the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of Plainfield.
8.2 When an application to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity upon an
inland wetland or watercourse is filed and any portion of such wetland or watercourse
is within five hundred feet of the boundary of another municipality, the applicant shall
give written notice of the application by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the
same day to the inland wetlands agency of such other municipality.
8.3 The Agency shall, in accordance with Connecticut General Statutes sections 8-7b(f) and
22a-42b, notify the clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any
application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in
which:
a. any portion of the property affected by a decision of the agency is within five
hundred (500) feet of the boundary of an adjoining municipality;
b. a significant portion of the traffic to the completed project on the site will use
streets within the adjoining municipality to enter or exit the site;
c. a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on the site will
flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within the
adjoining municipality; or,
d. water run-off from the improved site will impact streets or other municipal or
private property within the adjoining municipality.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail; return receipt requested and shall be
mailed within seven (7) days of the date of receipt of the application, petition, appeal,
request or plan.
8.4 When an application is filed to conduct or cause to be conducted a regulated activity
upon an inland wetland or watercourse, any portion of which is within the watershed of
a water company as defined in section 16-1 of the Connecticut General Statutes, the
applicant shall provide written notice of the application to the water company provided
such water company has filed a map showing the boundaries of the watershed on the
land records of the municipality in which the application is made and with the inland
wetlands agency of such municipality. Such notice shall be made by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of the date of the
application. The water company, through a representative, may appear and be heard
at any hearing on the application. Documentation of such notice shall be provided to
the Agency.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
22
8.5 The date of receipt of a petition, application, request or appeal shall be the day of the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of
submission to such Agency or its agent of such petition, application, request or appeal,
or thirty-five days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
8.6 At any time during the review period, the applicant shall provide such additional
information as the Agency may reasonably require. Requests for such additional
information shall not stay the time limitations as set forth in subsection 11.2 of these
regulations.
8.7 All applications shall be open for public inspection.
8.8 Incomplete applications may be denied.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
23
SECTION 9
PUBLIC HEARINGS
9.1 The Inland Wetlands Agency shall not hold a public hearing on an application unless the
Inland Wetlands Agency determines that the proposed activity may have a significant
impact on wetlands or watercourses, a petition signed by at least twenty-five persons
who are eighteen years of age or older and who reside in the municipality in which the
regulated activity is proposed, requesting a hearing is filed with the Agency not later
than fourteen days after the date of receipt of such application or the Agency finds that
a public hearing regarding such application would be in the public interest. The agency
may issue a permit without a public hearing provided no petition provided for in this
section is filed with the agency on or before the fourteenth day after the receipt of the
application. Such hearing shall be held no later than sixty-five days after the receipt of
such application. All applications and maps and documents relating thereto shall be
open for public inspection. At such hearing, any person or persons may appear and be
heard and may be represented by agent or by attorney.
9.2 Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than
two days, the first not more than fifteen days and not fewer than ten days, and the last
not less than two days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a
general circulation in each town where the affected wetland and watercourse is
located.
9.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) of record of abutting land
no less than fifteen days prior to the day of the hearing.
9.4 In the case of any application which is subject to the notification provisions of
subsection 8.3 of these regulations, a public hearing shall not be conducted until the
clerk of the adjoining municipality(ies) has received notice of the pendency of the
application. Proof of such notification shall be entered into the hearing record.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
24
SECTION 10
CONSIDERATIONS FOR DECISION
10.1 The Agency may consider the following in making its decision on an application:
a. The application and its supporting documentation.
b. Public comments, evidence and testimony.
c. Reports from other agencies and commissions including but not limited to the Town
of Plainfield:
1. Conservation Commission
2. Planning and Zoning Commission
3. Building Official
4. Health Officer
5. Town Planner
6. Town Engineer
d. The Agency may also consider comments on any application from the Windham
County Soil and Water Conservation District, the Northeast Regional Planning
Commission or other regional organizations (i.e. Council of Elected Officials);
agencies in adjacent municipalities which may be affected by the proposed activity,
or other technical agencies or organizations which may undertake additional studies
or investigations.
e. Non-receipt of comments from agencies and commissions listed in subdivisions
10.1.c and d above within the prescribed time shall neither delay nor prejudice the
decision of the Agency.
10.2 Criteria for Decision. In carrying out the purposes and policies of sections 22a-36 to 22a-
45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes, including matters relating to
regulating, licensing and enforcing of the provisions thereof, the Agency shall take into
consideration all relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
a. the environmental impact of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or
watercourses;
b. the applicant’s purpose for, and any feasible and prudent alternatives to, the
proposed regulated activity which alternatives would cause less or no
environmental impact to wetlands or watercourses;
c. the relationship between the short term and long term impacts of the proposed
regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses and the maintenance and
enhancement of long-term productivity of such wetlands or watercourses;
d. irreversible and irretrievable loss of wetland or watercourse resources which would
be caused by the proposed regulated activity, including the extent to which such
activity would foreclose a future ability to protect, enhance or restore such
resources, and any mitigation measures which may be considered as a condition of
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
25
issuing a permit for such activity including, but not limited to, measures to (1)
prevent or minimize pollution or other environmental damage, (2) maintain or
enhance existing environmental quality, or (3) in the following order of priority:
restore, enhance and create productive wetland or watercourse resources;
e. the character and degree of injury to, or interference with, safety, health or the
reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened by the proposed
regulated activity; and
f. impacts of the proposed regulated activity on wetlands or watercourses outside the
area for which the activity is proposed and future activities associated with or
reasonably related to, the proposed regulated activity which are made inevitable by
the proposed regulated activity and which may have an impact on wetlands or
watercourses.
10.3 In the case of an application which received a public hearing pursuant to a finding by
the Agency that the proposed activity may have a significant impact on wetlands or
watercourses, a permit shall not be issued unless the Agency finds on the basis of the
record that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist. In making this finding the
Agency shall consider the facts and circumstances set forth in subsection 10.2 of this
section. The finding and the reasons therefor shall be stated on the record in writing.
10.4 In the case of an application which is denied on the basis of a finding that there may be
feasible and prudent alternatives to the proposed regulated activity which have less
adverse impact on wetlands or watercourses, the Agency shall propose on the record in
writing the types of alternatives which the applicant may investigate provided this
subsection shall not be construed to shift the burden from the applicant to prove that
he is entitled to the permit or to present alternatives to the proposed regulated
activity.
10.5 For the purposes of this section, (1) “wetlands or watercourses” includes aquatic, plant
or animal life and habitats in wetlands or watercourses, and (2) “habitats” means areas
or environments in which organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
10.6 A municipal inland wetlands agency shall not deny or condition an application for a
regulated activity in an area outside wetlands or watercourses on the basis of an impact
or effect on aquatic, plant or animal life unless such activity will likely impact or affect
the physical characteristics of such wetlands or watercourses.
10.7 In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base
its decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not
in the hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision. A conclusion
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
26
that a feasible and prudent alternative does not exist does not create a presumption
that a permit should be issued. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that his
application is consistent with the purposes and policies of these regulations and
sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General Statutes.
10.8 In the case of an application where the applicant has provided written notice pursuant
to subsection 7.11c of these regulations, the holder of the restriction may provide proof
to the inlands wetlands agency that granting of the permit will violate the terms of the
restriction. Upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such
restriction, the inlands wetlands agency shall not grant the permit approval.
10.9 In the case of an application where the applicant fails to comply with the provisions of
subsections 7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations, (1) the party holding the conservation
or preservation restriction, other than a state agency that holds such restriction, may,
not later than fifteen days after the receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an
appeal with the inland wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such
agency relating to appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall reverse the permit
approval upon a finding that the requested land use violates the terms of such
restriction; or (2) the state agency that holds such restriction may, not later than thirty
days after receipt of actual notice of permit approval, file an appeal with the inland
wetlands agency, subject to the rules and regulations of such agency relating to
appeals. The inland wetlands agency shall immediately reverse such permit approval if
the commissioner of the state agency that holds such restriction certifies that the land
use authorized in such permit violates the terms of such conservation or preservation
restriction.
10.10 Nothing in subsections 7.11c or 7.11d of these regulations shall be construed to
prohibit the filing of a permit application or to require such written notice when the
activity that is the subject of such permit application will occur on a portion of property
that is not restricted under the terms of such conservation or preservation restriction.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
27
SECTION 11
DECISION PROCESS AND PERMIT
11.1 The Agency, or its duly authorized agent acting pursuant to Section 12 of these
regulations, may, in accordance with Section 10 of these regulations, grant the
application as filed or grant it upon other terms, conditions, limitations or modifications
of the regulated activity designed to carry out the purposes and policies of the Act, or
deny the application. Such terms may include any reasonable measures which would
mitigate the impacts of the regulated activity and which would (a) prevent or minimize
pollution or other environmental damage, (b) maintain or enhance existing
environmental quality, or (c) in the following order of priority: restore, enhance and
create productive wetland or watercourse resources. Such terms may include
restrictions as to the time of year in which a regulated activity may be conducted,
provided the Agency, or its agents, determines that such restrictions are necessary to
carry out the policy of sections 22a-36 to 22a-45, inclusive, of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
11.2 No later than sixty-five (65) days after receipt of an application, the Agency may hold a
public hearing on such application. At such hearing any person or persons may appear
and be heard and may be represented by agent or attorney. The hearing shall be
completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement. Action shall be taken on
applications within thirty-five (35) days after completion of a public hearing. In the
absence of a public hearing, action shall be taken on applications within sixty-five (65)
days from the date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or
more extensions of the periods specified in this subdivision, provided the total
extension of all such periods shall not be longer than sixty-five (65) days, or may
withdraw the application. The failure of the Agency to act within any time period
specified in this subdivision, or any extension thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute
approval of the application. An application deemed incomplete by the Agency shall be
withdrawn by the applicant or denied by the Agency.
11.3 The Agency shall state upon its record the reasons and bases for its decision and, in the
case of any public hearing, such decision shall be based fully on the record of such
hearing and shall be in writing and shall, as applicable and in accordance with section
10 of these regulations, incorporate a statement relative to the consideration of
feasible and prudent alternatives.
11.4 The Agency shall notify the applicant and any person entitled to such notice of its
decision within fifteen (15) days of the date of the decision by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its order in the issuance or
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
28
denial of the permit, to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the
town wherein the inland wetland or watercourse lies. In any case in which such notice
is not published within such fifteen day period, the applicant may provide for the
publication of such notice within ten days thereafter.
11.5 If an activity authorized by an inland wetland permit also involves an activity which
requires a zoning or subdivision approval, special zoning permit, or variance or special
exception, under sections 8-3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statues, the
Agency shall file a copy of the decision and report on the application with the Town of
Plainfield Planning and Zoning Commission within fifteen days of the date of the
decision thereon.
11.6 Any permit issued by the Agency for the development of land for which an approval is
required under chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a of the Connecticut General Statutes
shall be valid until the approval granted under such chapter expires or for ten years,
whichever is earlier. Any permit issued by the Agency for any activity for which an
approval is not required under chapter 124, 124b, 126 or 126a shall be valid for not less
than two years and not more than five years.
11.6.1 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.6 of these regulations, any permit issued
by the Agency prior to July 1, 2011 that was in effect and did not expire prior to May 9,
2011 shall be valid for a period not less than nine years after the date of such approval.
11.7 No permit issued by the Agency shall be assigned or transferred without the written
permission of the Agency.
11.8 If a bond or insurance is required in accordance with section 13 of these regulations,
the Agency may withhold issuing the permit until such bond or insurance is provided.
11.9 General provisions in the issuance of all permits:
a. The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant
and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked.
b. All permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or
future rights or powers of the Agency or the Town of Plainfield, and convey no
rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject
to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws
or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity.
c. If the activity authorized by the Agency’s permit also involves an activity which
requires zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, variance or special
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
29
exception under sections 8.3(g), 8-3c, or 8-26 of the Connecticut General Statutes,
no work pursuant to the wetland permit may begin until such approval is obtained.
d. In constructing the authorized activities, the Permittee shall implement such
management practices consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit as
needed to control storm water discharges and to prevent erosion and
sedimentation and to otherwise prevent pollution of wetlands and watercourses.
e. Permits are not transferable without the prior written consent of the Agency.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
30
SECTION 12
ACTION BY DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT
12 .1 The Agency may delegate to its duly authorized agent the authority to approve or
extend an activity that is not located in a wetland or watercourse when such agent finds
that the conduct of such activity would result in no greater that a minimal impact on
any wetlands or watercourses provided such agent has completed the comprehensive
training program developed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection pursuant
to section 22a-39 of the Connecticut General Statutes. Requests for such approval shall
be made on a form provided by the Agency and shall contain the information listed
under Section 7.5 of these regulations and any other information the Agency may
reasonably require. Notwithstanding the provisions for receipt and processing
applications prescribed in Sections 8, 9 and 11 of these regulations, such agent may
approve or extend such an activity at any time.
12.2 Any person receiving such approval from such agent shall, within ten days of the date of
such approval, publish, at the applicant’s expense, notice of the approval in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the town wherein the activity is located or
will have an effect. Any person may appeal such decision of such agent to the Agency
within fifteen days after the publication date of the notice and the Agency shall
consider such appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided such meeting is
no earlier than three business days after receipt by such Agency or its agent of such
appeal. Any person may appear and be heard at the meeting held by the Agency to
consider the subject appeal. The Agency shall, at its discretion, sustain, alter, or reject
the decision of its agent or require an application for a permit in accordance with
Section 7 of these regulations.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
31
SECTION 13
BOND AND INSURANCE
13.1 Upon approval of the application and prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
be required to file a bond with such surety in such amount and in a form approved by
the Agency based on an estimate provided by the applicant to the Agency and
approved by the Town Engineer.
13.2 The bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
32
SECTION 14
ENFORCEMENT
14.1 The Agency may appoint an agent or agents to act in its behalf with the authority to
inspect property, except a private residence, and issue notices of violation or cease and
desist orders and carry out other actions or investigations necessary for the
enforcement of these regulations. In carrying out the purposes of this section, the
Agency or its duly authorized agent shall take into consideration the criteria for decision
under section 10.2 of these regulations.
14.2 The Agency or its agent may make regular inspections, at reasonable hours, of all
regulated activities for which permits have been issued under these regulations.
14.3 If the Agency or its designated agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining
any activity, facility or condition which is in violation of the Act or these regulations, the
Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
a. Issue a written order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person
conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to immediately
cease such activity or to correct such facility or condition. Within ten (10) calendar
days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the
person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why the order should not
remain in effect. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing and
within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing notify the person by certified
mail that the original order remains in effect, that a revised order is in effect, or that
the order has been withdrawn. The Agency shall publish notice of its decision in a
newspaper having general circulation in the municipality. The original order shall be
effective upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises
or withdraws the order. The issuance of an order pursuant to this subsection shall
not delay or bar an action pursuant to section 22a-44(b) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, as amended.
b. Suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the Permittee has not complied with the
terms, conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of
the work as set forth in the application including application plans. Prior to revoking
or suspending any permit, the Agency shall issue notice to the Permittee, personally
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the facts or conduct
which warrants the intended action. The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the
Permittee an opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its permit and any
and all requirements for retention of the permit. The Permittee shall be notified of
the Agency's decision to suspend, revoke, or maintain a permit by certified mail
within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish notice
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
33
of the suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation in the
municipality.
c. Issue a notice of violation to such person conducting such activity or maintaining
such facility or condition, stating the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of the
Agency, and prescribing the necessary action and steps to correct the violation
including, without limitation, halting work in wetlands or watercourses. The Agency
may request that the individual appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a written reply to
the notice or file an application for the necessary permit. Failure to carry out the
action(s) directed in a notice of violation may result in issuance of the order
provided in subdivision 14.3.a or other enforcement proceedings as provided by
law.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
34
SECTION 15
AMENDMENTS
15.1 These regulations and the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map for the Town of
Plainfield may be amended, from time to time, by the Agency in accordance with
changes in the Connecticut General Statutes or regulations of the Connecticut
Department of Environmental Protection or as new information regarding soils and
inland wetlands and watercourses become available.
15.2 An application filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the applicable inland
wetlands regulations as of the date of the receipt of such application shall not be
required thereafter to comply with any change in inland wetland regulations, including
changes to setbacks and buffers, taking effect on or after the date of such receipt and
any appeal from the decision of such Agency with respect to such application shall not
be dismissed by the Superior Court on the grounds that such a change has taken effect
on or after the date of such receipt. The provisions of this section shall not be
construed to apply (1) to the establishment, amendment or change of boundaries of
inland wetlands or watercourses or (2) to any change in regulations necessary to make
such regulations consistent with the provisions of the Act as of the date of such receipt.
15.3 These regulations and the Town of Plainfield Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map
shall be amended in the manner specified in section 22a-42a of the Connecticut
General Statutes, as amended. The Agency shall provide the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection with a copy of any proposed regulations and notice of the
public hearing to consider any proposed regulations or amendments thereto, except
map amendments, at least thirty-five days before the public hearing on their adoption.
15.4 Petitions requesting changes or amendments to the map entitled "Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses, Plainfield, Connecticut”, shall contain at least the following information:
a. the petitioner's name, mailing address and telephone number;
b. the address, or location, of the land affected by the petition;
c. the petitioner's interest in the land affected by the petition
d. map(s) showing the geographic location of the land affected by the petition and the
existing and the proposed wetland(s) and watercourse(s) boundaries on such land in
accurate detail together with the documentation supporting such proposed
boundary locations; and
e. the reasons for the requested action.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
35
15.5 Any person who submits a petition to amend the map entitled, “Inland Wetlands and
Watercourses, Plainfield, Connecticut”, shall bear the burden of proof for all requested
map amendments. Such proof may include, but is not limited to, professional
interpretation of aerial photography and remote sensing imagery, resource mapping,
soils mapping, or other information acceptable to the Agency. If such person is the
owner, developer or contract purchaser of the land which is the subject of the petition,
or if such person is representing the interests of such an owner, developer or
purchaser, in addition to the information required in subsection 15.4, the petition shall
include:
a. the name, mailing address and telephone number of the owner(s) of such land and
owner(s) agent or other representative;
b. the names and mailing addresses of the owners of abutting land;
c. documentation by a soil scientist of the distribution of wetland soils on said land.
Such documentation shall at a minimum include the report of the soil scientist
documenting the location of wetland soils on the land and a map of the said land
indicating the flag locations set by the soil scientist and defining the boundaries of
wetland soil types; and
d. map(s) showing any proposed development of the land in relation to existing and
proposed wetland and watercourse boundaries.
15.6 Watercourses shall be delineated by a soil scientist, geologist, ecologist or other
qualified individual.
15.7 A public hearing shall be held on petitions to amend the regulations and the Inland
Wetlands and Watercourses Map. Notice of the Public Hearing shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the municipality where the land that is the
subject of the hearing is located at least twice at intervals of not less than two days, the
first not more than fifteen days nor less than ten days, and the last not less than two
days, before the date set for the hearing. All materials including maps and documents
relating to the petition shall be open for public inspection.
15.8 The Agency shall hold a public hearing on a petition to amend the regulations and the
Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map within sixty-five (65) days after receipt of such
petition. The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days after
commencement. The Agency shall act upon the changes requested in such petition
within sixty-five (65) days after the completion of such hearing. At such hearing, any
person or persons may appear and be heard and may be represented by agent or
attorney. The petitioner may consent to one or more extensions of any period
specified in this subsection provided the total extension of all such periods shall not be
for longer than sixty-five (65) days or may withdraw such petition. Failure of the
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
36
Agency to act within any time period specified in this subsection, or any extension
thereof, shall not be deemed to constitute approval of the petition.
15.9 The Agency shall make its decision and state, in writing, the reasons why the change in
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Map was made.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
37
SECTION 16
APPEALS
16.1 Appeal on actions of the Agency shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
section 22a-43 of the Connecticut General Statutes, as amended.
16.2 Notice of such appeal shall be served upon the Agency and the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
38
SECTION 17
CONFLICT AND SEVERANCE
17.1 If there is a conflict among the provisions of these regulations, the provision which
imposes the most stringent standards for the use of wetlands and watercourses shall
govern. The invalidity of any word, clause, sentence, section, part, subsection,
subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other
part which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
17.2 If there is a conflict between the provisions of these regulations and the provisions of
the Act, the provisions of the Act shall govern.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
39
SECTION 18
OTHER PERMITS
18.1 Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirements for the applicant to obtain
any other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of
Plainfield, the State of Connecticut or the Government of the United States including
any approval required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Obtaining such assents, permits or licenses is the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
40
SECTION 19
APPLICATION FEES
19.1 Method of Payment. All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the
Agency by certified check or money order payable to the Town of Plainfield at the time
the application is filed with the Agency.
19.2 No application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the correct
application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the Agency
pursuant to subsection 19.7 of these regulations.
19.3 The application fee is non-refundable.
19.4 Definitions. As used in this section:
“Residential uses” means activities carried out on property developed for permanent
housing or being developed to be occupied by permanent housing.
“Commercial uses” means activities carried out on property developed for industry,
commerce, trade, recreation, or business or being developed to be occupied for such
purposes, for profit or non-profit.
“Other uses” means activities other than residential or commercial uses.
19.5 Fee Schedule. Application fees shall be based on a fee schedule (See Fee Chart
attached). The fee schedule may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of
the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency of the Town of Plainfield.
19.6 Exemption. Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Plainfield
are exempt from all fee requirements.
19.7 Waiver. The applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed
payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and
circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this subsection.
The Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that:
a. The activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the
environment or to the public health and safety and the applicant would reasonably
be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the amount
of the application fee, or
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
41
b. The amount of the application fee is clearly excessive in relation to the cost to the
Town for reviewing and processing the application.
The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this subsection.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
42
SECTION 20
RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION
20.1 The Agency and the Town Clerk for the Town of Plainfield shall retain complete
administrative records of Agency actions and dispose of such records in accordance
with the retention/disposition schedules set for in subsection 20.2.
20.2 The public records administrator of the Connecticut State Library established the
following new records retention/disposition schedules for municipal Inland Wetlands
Agencies effective April 24, 1989:
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
43
RECORD TITLE MINIMUM RETENTION TOWN CLERK REQUIRED IN AGENCY
Applications (including. 10 years -
supporting materials)
Decision Letters 10 years Permanent
Approved Site Plans 10 years -
Legal Notices 10 years Permanent
Staff and Public Written 10 years -
Testimony (hearing records)
Minutes of Meetings & 15 years Permanent
Public Hearings
Tapes, Audio-Inland 4 years -
Wetland Matters
Notices of Violation 10 years -
& Orders
Text of Changes Adopted Continuous Update/ -
In Regulations Permanent
General Correspondence 5 years -
Issued or Received
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
44
SECTION 21
EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS
21.1 These regulations are effective upon filing in the Office of the Town Clerk and
publication of a notice of such filing in a newspaper having general circulation in
the Town of Plainfield.
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
45
FEE SCHEDULE & FEE CHART
Fee Schedule
a. State Fee (applied to all applications) $60.00
b. Regulated Uses - (Section 6)
Residential Uses $100.00 Plus: $100.00/LOT (If subdiv.)
Plus: Fee from Fee Chart
Commercial Uses-Industrial Uses $200.00 Plus $100.00/LOT (If subdiv.)
Plus: Fee from Fee Chart
All Other Uses $200.00 Plus $100.00/LOT (If subdiv.)
Plus Fee from Fee Chart
c. Permitted and Non-regulated Uses – (Section 4)
Permitted Uses as of Right – (Subsection 4.1) No Charge
Non-regulated Uses – (Subsection 4.2) No Charge
d. Significant Activity Fee – (Subsection 7.6) $300.00
e. Map Amendment Petitions – (Subsection 15.3) $300.00
Plus: Fee from Schedule B
f. Modification of Previous Approval $50.00
(Subsection 7.9)
g. Agent Approval $100.00
(There shall be no fee for correcting typographical or other errors)
Town of Plainfield
Inland Wetland and Watercourse Regulations
46
Fee Chart
The fees for applicants who commence a regulated activity without a permit shall be 200% of
the fees (except the State fee) unless the Commission, by a majority vote, agrees to reduce the
fee to 100% in which case the applicant shall pay the standard fee.
STATE FEE
$60.00
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL
$200.00 +
$100.00/lot (subdiv.)
RESIDENTIAL
$100.00 +
$100.00/lot (subdiv.)
ALL OTHER
$200.00 +
$100.00/lot (subdiv.)
SIGNIFICANT ACTIVITY FEE
$300.00
(See Section 2 - Definitions)
If Agency determines otherwise, refund or applicant pays this fee.
DISTURBED AREA IN
WETLANDS OR
WATERCOURSE = AREA S.F.
II. MORE THAN 100 S.F. &
LESS THAN 5,000 S.F. OF
DISTURBED WETLANDS
AREA -100 S.F. ÷ 100 x 5 + I = $
I. LESS THAN 100
S.F. OF DISTURBED
WETLANDS
$10.00
III. MORE THAN 5,000 S.F.
OF DISTURBED WETLANDS
AREA - 5,000 S.F. ÷ 100 x 10
+ I + II = $
Town of Plainfield, Connecticut
Aquifer Protection
Agency
MUNICIPAL
AQUIFER PROTECTION
AREA REGULATIONS
Adopted: April 10, 2012
Effective: April 24, 2012
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1 Title and Authority 3
2 Definitions 4
3 Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries 11
4 Prohibited and Regulated Activities 13
5 Activities Regulated by the State 15
6 Application for an Exemption from Prohibition or Regulation 15
7 General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures 16
8 Registration Requirements 17
9 Permit Requirements 20
10 Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications 24
11 Bond and Insurance Relevant to Permit Applications 24
12 Best Management Practices 25
13 Other State, Federal and Local Laws 27
14 Enforcement 28
15 Amendments 29
16 Appeals 29
17 Conflict and Severance 30
18 Application and Registration Fees 31
19 Effective Date of Regulations 33
3
SECTION 1. Title and Authority
(a) Aquifers are an essential natural resource and a major source of public drinking water for
the State of Connecticut. Use of groundwater will increase as the population grows and
opportunities for new surface water supplies diminish due to the rising cost of land and
increasingly intense development. At the same time, numerous drinking water wells have
been contaminated by certain land use activities, and others are now threatened. To
address this problem, Connecticut has established the Aquifer Protection Area Program
(Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb) to identify critical water supply
aquifers and to protect them from pollution by managing land use. Protection requires
coordinated responsibilities shared by the state, municipality and water companies to
ensure a plentiful supply of public drinking water for present and future generations. It is
therefore the purpose of these regulations to protect aquifer protection areas within the
Town of Plainfield by making provisions for:
(1) implementing regulations consistent with state regulations and An Act Concerning
Aquifer Protection Areas, Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb
(“the Act”);
(2) delineating aquifer protection areas on the city/town zoning or inland wetland and
watercourse areas maps;
(3) regulating land use activity within the aquifer protection area including: prohibiting
certain new activities; registering existing regulated activities; and issuing permits for
new regulated activities at registered facilities; and
(4) administering and enforcing these regulations.
(b) These regulations shall be known as the Aquifer Protection Area Regulations (the "APA
Regulations") of the Town of Plainfield.
(c) These regulations were adopted and may be amended, from time to time, in accordance
with the provisions of §22a-354p of An Act Concerning Aquifer Protection Areas, the
Connecticut General Statutes §22a-354a to §22a-354bb and the Regulations of Connecticut
State Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10.
(d) The Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Plainfield is established as the Aquifer
Protection Agency (the "Agency") in accordance with the "Ordinance for the Establishment
of an Aquifer Protection Agency," (the "APA Ordinance") effective April 29, 2004, and shall
implement the purposes and provisions of the APA Ordinance and the Act.
(e) The Agency shall administer all provisions of the Act and shall approve or deny registrations,
issue permits, issue permits with terms, conditions, limitations or modifications, or deny
permits for all regulated activities in aquifer protection areas in the Town of Plainfield
pursuant to the Act.
4
SECTION 2. Definitions
(a) As used in these regulations, the following definitions apply:
(1) "Affected water company" means “affected water company” as defined in §22a-354h
of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(2) “Agency” means the board or commission authorized by the municipality under §22a-
354o of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(3) “Agriculture” means “agriculture” as defined in the §1-1(q) of the Connecticut
General Statutes;
(4) "Applicant" means, as appropriate in context, a person who applies for an exemption
under §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, a permit under
§22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or a permit under
Section 9 of the APA Regulations;
(5) "Application” means, as appropriate in context, an application for an exemption under
§22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, an application for a
permit under §22a-354i-8 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or an
application for a permit under Section 9 of the APA Regulations;
(6) "Aquifer protection area" means "aquifer protection area" as defined in §22a-354h of
the Connecticut General Statutes and any extension of such area approved by the
Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies;
(7) "Area of contribution" means "area of contribution" as defined in §22a-354h of the
Connecticut General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(8) "Bulk storage facility" means property where oil or petroleum liquids are received by
tank vessel, pipeline, railroad car or tank vehicle for the purpose of storage for
wholesale distribution;
(9) “Certified Hazardous Materials Manager” means a hazardous materials manager
certified by the Institute of Hazardous Materials Management and who is qualified by
reason of relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct
audits of regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable laws and identify
appropriate pollution prevention practices for such activities;
(10) "Commissioner" means the commissioner of environmental protection, or his or her
agent;
5
(11) "Domestic sewage" means "domestic sewage" as defined in §22a-430-3(a) the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(12) "Facility" means property where a regulated activity is conducted by any person,
including without limitation any buildings located on the property that are owned or
leased by that person; and includes contiguous land owned, leased, or for which there
is an option to purchase by that person;
(13) "Floor drain" means any opening in a floor or surface which opening or surface
receives materials spilled or deposited thereon;
(14) "Hazardous material" means (A) any hazardous substance as defined in 40 CFR 302.4
and listed therein at Table 302.4, excluding mixtures with a total concentration of less
than 1% hazardous substances based on volume, (B) any hazardous waste as defined
in §22a-449(c)-101 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, (C) any pesticide
as defined in §22a-47 of the Connecticut General Statutes, or (D) any oil or petroleum
as defined in §22a-448 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(15) "Hazardous waste" means "hazardous waste" as defined in §22a-449(c)-101 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(16) "Industrial laundry" means a facility for washing clothes, cloth or other fabric used in
industrial operations;
(17) "Infiltration device" means any discharge device installed below or above the ground
surface that is designed to discharge liquid to the ground;
(18) "Inland wetland and watercourse areas map" means a map pursuant to §22a-42a of
the Connecticut General Statutes;
(19) "ISO 14001 environmental management system certification" means a current ISO
14001 environmental management system certification issued by an ISO 14001
environmental management system registrar that is accredited by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) - American Society for Quality (ASQ) National
Accreditation Board (ANAB);
(20) "Level A mapping" means the lines as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared
by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354c, §22a-354d or §22a-354z of the
Connecticut General Statutes encompassing the area of contribution and recharge
areas;
(21) "Lubricating oil" means oil that contains less than 1% chlorinated solvents and is used
for the sole purpose of lubricating, cutting, grinding, machining, stamping or
quenching metals;
(22) "Municipality" means "municipality" as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut
6
General Statutes;
(23) "Owner" means the owner or lessee of the facility in question;
(24) "De-icing chemical" means sodium chloride, calcium chloride, or calcium magnesium
acetate;
(25) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
trust, corporation, limited liability company, municipality, agency, political or
administrative subdivision of the state, or other legal entity of any kind;
(26) "Pollution" means “pollution” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General
Statutes;
(27) “Pollution prevention” means the use of processes and materials so as to reduce or
minimize the amount of hazardous materials used or the quantity and concentration
of pollutants in waste generated;
(28) "Professional engineer" means a professional engineer licensed in accordance with
Chapter 391 of the Connecticut General Statutes, and who is qualified by reason of
relevant specialized training and relevant specialized experience to conduct audits of
regulated activities to ensure compliance with applicable law and identify appropriate
pollution prevention practices for such activities;
(29) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works” means “publicly owned treatment works” as
defined in §22a-430-3 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(30) "Public service company" means "public service company" as defined in §16-1 of the
Connecticut General Statutes;
(31) “Public supply well" means “public supply well” as defined in §19-13-B51b of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(32) "Recharge area" means “recharge area” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut
General Statutes and as mapped in accordance with §22a-354b-1 of the Regulations
of Connecticut State Agencies;
(33) “Registered regulated activity” means a regulated activity which has been registered
under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 8 of
the APA Regulations, and is conducted at the facility identified in such registration;
(34) "Registrant" means a person, who or which, has submitted a registration for an
existing regulated activity under §22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies or Section 4 of the APA Regulations;
(35) "Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, which are located or
7
conducted, wholly or partially, in an aquifer protection area, except as provided for in
§22a-354i-5(c) and §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or
Section 4 of the APA Regulations:
(A) underground storage or transmission of oil or petroleum, to the extent such
activity is not pre-empted by federal law, or hazardous material, except for (i)
an underground storage tank that contains number two (2) fuel oil and is
located more than five hundred (500) feet from a public supply well subject to
regulation under §22a-354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes,
or (ii) underground electrical facilities such as transformers, breakers, or cables
containing oil for cooling or insulation purposes which are owned and operated
by a public service company,
(B) oil or petroleum dispensing for the purpose of retail, wholesale or fleet use,
(C) on-site storage of hazardous materials for the purpose of wholesale sale,
(D) repair or maintenance of vehicles or internal combustion engines of vehicles,
involving the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, including solvents,
lubricants, paints, brake fluids, transmission fluids or the generation of
hazardous wastes,
(E) salvage operations of metal or vehicle parts,
(F) wastewater discharges to ground water other than domestic sewage and
stormwater, except for discharges from the following that have received a
permit from the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-430 of the Connecticut
General Statutes: (i) a pump and treat system for ground water remediation, (ii)
a potable water treatment system, (iii) heat pump system, (iv) non-contact
cooling water system, (v) swimming pools,
(G) car or truck washing, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(H) production or refining of chemicals, including without limitation hazardous
materials or asphalt,
(I) clothes or cloth cleaning service which involves the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials including without limitation dry-cleaning solvents,
(J) industrial laundry activity that involves the cleaning of clothes or cloth
contaminated by hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity
are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment
works,
(K) generation of electrical power by means of fossil fuels, except for (i) generation
8
of electrical power by an emergency engine as defined by §22a-174-22(a)(2) of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, or (ii) generation of electrical
power by means of natural gas or propane,
(L) production of electronic boards, electrical components, or other electrical
equipment involving the use, storage or disposal of any hazardous material or
involving metal plating, degreasing of parts or equipment, or etching
operations,
(M) embalming or crematory services which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(N) furniture stripping operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials,
(O) furniture finishing operations which involve the use, storage or disposal of
hazardous materials, unless all waste waters from such activity are lawfully
disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(P) storage, treatment or disposal of hazardous waste subject to a permit under
§22a-449(c)-100 to §22a-449(c)-110, inclusive, of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies,
(Q) biological or chemical testing, analysis or research which involves the use,
storage or disposal of hazardous material, unless all waste waters from such
activity are lawfully disposed of through a connection to a publicly owned
treatment works, and provided that on-site testing of a public supply well by a
public water utility is not a regulated activity,
(R) pest control services which involve storage, mixing or loading of pesticides or
other hazardous materials,
(S) photographic finishing which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous
materials, unless all waste water from such activity are lawfully disposed of
through a connection to a publicly owned treatment works,
(T) production or fabrication of metal products which involves the use, storage or
disposal of hazardous materials including (i) metal cleaning or degreasing with
industrial solvents, (ii) metal plating, or (iii) metal etching,
(U) printing, plate making, lithography, photoengraving, or gravure, which involves
the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(V) accumulation or storage of waste oil, anti-freeze or spent lead-acid batteries
which are subject to a general permit issued by the Commissioner under §22a9
208(i) and §22a-454(e)(1) of the Connecticut General Statutes,
(W) production of rubber, resin cements, elastomers or plastic, which involves the
use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(X) storage of de-icing chemicals, unless such storage takes place within a weathertight
water-proof structure for the purpose of retail sale or for the purpose of
de-icing parking areas or access roads to parking areas,
(Y) accumulation, storage, handling, recycling, disposal, reduction, processing,
burning, transfer or composting of solid waste which is subject to a permit
issued by the Commissioner pursuant to §22a-207b, §22a-208a, and §22a-208c
of the Connecticut General Statute, except for a potable water treatment sludge
disposal area,
(Z) dying, coating or printing of textiles, or tanning or finishing of leather, which
activity involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous materials,
(AA) production of wood veneer, plywood, reconstituted wood or pressure-treated
wood, which involves the use, storage or disposal of hazardous material, and
(BB) pulp production processes that involve bleaching;
(36) "Release" means "release" as defined in §22a-133k-1 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies;
(37) "State aquifer protection regulations" means §22a-354i-1 to §22a-354i-10, inclusive,
of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies;
(38) "Storage" means the holding or possession of any hazardous material;
(39) "Storage tank" means a stationary device which is designed to store hazardous
materials, and is constructed of non-earthen materials including without limitation
concrete, steel, fiberglass or plastic;
(40) "Topographic feature" means an object, whether natural or man-made, located on
the earth surface and of sufficient size that it appears on a 1:24,000 scale topographic
quadrangle map drawn by the United States Geological Survey;
(41) "Underground" when referring to a storage tank or storage tank component means
that ten percent or more of the volumetric capacity of such tank or component is
below the surface of the ground and that portion which is below the surface of the
ground is not fully visible for inspection;
(42) “Vehicle” or "vehicles" means a “vessel” as defined by §15-170 of the Connecticut
General Statutes, and any vehicle propelled or drawn by any non-muscular power,
10
including without limitation an automobile, aircraft, all-terrain vehicle, tractor, lawn
mower or snowmobile;
(43) "Waters” means “waters” as defined in §22a-423 of the Connecticut General Statutes;
(44) "Well field" means “well field” as defined in §22a-354h of the Connecticut General
Statutes; and
(45) "Zoning district map" means any map showing zoning districts prepared in accordance
with maps adopted pursuant to §8-3 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
11
SECTION 3. Delineation of Aquifer Protection Area Boundaries
(a) The zoning, planning, or planning and zoning commission shall delineate the aquifer
protection areas on the Town of Plainfield zoning district map or, if zoning district maps do
not exist, the inland wetland and watercourse areas map adopted pursuant to §22a-42a the
Connecticut General Statutes. Such delineation shall consist of the combined areas of
contribution and recharge areas as shown on Level A maps approved or prepared by the
Commissioner.
(1) Such boundaries shall be delineated within one hundred twenty (120) days after being
notified by the Commissioner that an aquifer protection area is located partially or
entirely within the Town of Plainfield.
(2) Notice of such delineation shall be published in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in the affected area. Such notice shall include at least the following:
(A) a map or detailed description of the subject aquifer protection area; and
(B) the name, telephone number, and address of a representative of the Agency
who may be reached for further information.
(b) In order to clarify the location of an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency may apply
to the Commissioner to extend such boundary to coincide with the nearest property line,
municipal boundary or topographic feature pursuant to §22a-354i-4 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies. Such extension shall, at a minimum, fully encompass the
aquifer protection areas bounded by the approved level A mapping but shall not exceed the
distance necessary to clarify the location of the aquifer protection area or to facilitate the
administration of regulations pertaining thereto. An aquifer protection area boundary may
not be extended without prior written approval of the Commissioner.
(1) Any request by the Agency to the Commissioner for extension of an aquifer protection
area boundary shall include at least the following:
(A) A map to scale delineating (i) the aquifer protection area boundary mapped
under Section 3(a) of the APA regulations and (ii) the proposed extension of the
aquifer protection area boundary;
(B) A certification by the chairperson or duly authorized agent of the Agency that
notice of such request has been provided to all owners of property within the
proposed extended aquifer protection area and all affected water companies in
accordance with the following:
(i) Such notice shall include at least the following:
(aa) A map showing the aquifer protection area boundaries and the
proposed extension of such boundaries,
12
(bb) the name, address, and telephone number of a representative of
the Agency who may be contacted for further information, and
(cc) a statement that any person may, not later than thirty (30) days
after said notification, submit to the Agency written comments on
such proposed boundary extension;
(ii) Such notice shall be effectuated by the following:
(aa) Delivery of notice by certified mail to those individuals and entities
identified in Subsection (b)(1)(B) of this Section, or
(bb) the publication of a notice in a newspaper having substantial
circulation in the affected area; and posting of notice near the
proposed boundaries of the subject aquifer protection area of at
least four signs each of which shall be at least four square feet in
size (2' x 2'); and
(C) A summary of comments received by such Agency regarding the proposed
boundary extension and the Agency’s response.
(2) Not later than sixty (60) days after receiving the Commissioner's written approval of
a request to extend an aquifer protection area boundary, the Agency shall cause such
boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsection (a) of this Section.
(c) No person may challenge the boundaries of the aquifer protection area under the APA
Regulations unless such challenge is based solely on a failure by the Agency to properly
delineate the boundaries in accordance with §22a-354n of the Connecticut General
Statutes.
(d) A map of the location and boundaries of the aquifer protection areas, or regulated areas,
shall be available for inspection in the Office of the Town Clerk or the Agency.
(e) If the Level A mapping is amended in accordance with §22a-354b-1(i) or §22a-354b-1(j) of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies, the Agency shall cause the amended aquifer
protection area boundary to be delineated in accordance with Subsections (a) or (b) of this
Section.
13
SECTION 4. Prohibited and Regulated Activities
(a) All regulated activities are prohibited in aquifer protection areas, except as specified in
Subsection (b) of this Section.
(b) The following regulated activities are not prohibited in aquifer protection areas:
(1) a registered regulated activity which is conducted in compliance with §22a-354i-9 of
the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 12 of the APA Regulations;
(2) a regulated activity which has received a permit issued pursuant to §22a-354i-8 of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies or Section 9 of the APA Regulations; and
(3) a regulated activity which is on any municipally owned site undergoing remedial
action pursuant to 40 CFR 271 at the time the applicable aquifer protection area is
designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetland map, provided: (1)
no such regulated activity substantially commenced or was in active operation for the
five-year period preceding the date that the applicable aquifer protection area is
designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland wetland map, and (2) any
person who engages in such regulated activity within the ten-year period commencing
on the date that such applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal
zoning district map or inland wetland map registers such regulated activity on a form
prescribed by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection and in accordance with
the provisions of section 22a-354i-7 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
(c) The following are not regulated activities:
(1) Any activity conducted at a residence without compensation;
(2) any activity involving the use or storage of no more than two and one-half (2.5) gallons
of each type of hazardous material on-site at any one time, provided the total of all
hazardous materials on-site does not exceed fifty-five (55) gallons at any one time;
(3) any agricultural activity regulated pursuant to §22a-354m(d) of the Connecticut
General Statutes;
(4) any activity provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
(A) such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an
impermeable floor,
(B) such activity involves no more than 10% of the floor area in the building where
the activity takes place,
(C) any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such
14
building at all times,
(D) all waste waters generated by such activity are lawfully disposed through a
connection to a publicly owned treatment works, and
(E) such activity does not involve (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion
engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with
such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above
ground storage of more than one hundred and ten (110) gallons of hazardous
materials;
(5) any activity solely involving the use of lubricating oil provided all the following
conditions are satisfied:
(A) such activity does not involve cleaning of metals with chlorinated solvents at
the facility,
(B) such activity takes place solely within an enclosed building in an area with an
impermeable floor,
(C) any hazardous material used in connection with such activity is stored in such
building at all times, and
(D) such activity does not involve: (i) repair or maintenance of internal combustion
engines, including without limitation, vehicles, or equipment associated with
such vehicles, (ii) underground storage of any hazardous material, or (iii) above
ground storage of more than one hundred ten (110) gallons of such lubricating
oil and associated hazardous waste; and
(6) any activity involving the dispensing of oil or petroleum from an above-ground storage
tank or tanks with an aggregate volume of two thousand (2000) gallons or less
provided all the following conditions are satisfied:
(A) such dispensing activity takes place solely on a paved surface which is covered
by a roof,
(B) the above-ground storage tank(s) is a double-walled tank with overfill alarms,
and
(C) all associated piping is either above ground, or has secondary containment.
(d) Determination of a non-regulated activity
(1) Any person proposing to carry out a non-regulated activity, as set forth in Section 4(c)
of these regulations, in an aquifer protection area shall, prior to commencement of
such activity, notify the Agency or its duly authorized agent on a form provided by the
15
Agency. Such form shall provide sufficient information to enable the Agency or its duly
authorized agent to properly determine that the proposed activity is a regulated
activity or a non-regulated activity within the aquifer protection area.
(2) If such activity is determined to be a non-regulated activity, then no further action
under the APA Regulations is necessary.
SECTION 5. Activities Regulated by the State
(a) The Commissioner shall exclusively regulate activities within aquifer protection areas that
are specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall regulate
all other regulated activities.
(b) Any person conducting regulated activities that are within the authority of the
Commissioner shall submit a registration or obtain a permit or exemption from the
Commissioner prior to engaging in such activity. The Commissioner shall process
applications for those regulated activities.
(c) The Agency may submit an advisory decision to the Commissioner for consideration on any
permit regulated under this Section in accordance with the Connecticut General Statutes
§22a-354p(g).
SECTION 6. Application for an Exemption from Prohibition or Regulation
(a) The owner or operator of a regulated activity may seek an exemption from the
Commissioner pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
Any person seeking an exemption from the Commissioner shall concurrently submit a copy
of the application for an exemption to the Agency and any affected water company.
(b) The Agency may submit written comments to the Commissioner on any exemption
regulated under this Section in accordance with §22a-354i-6(c) of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies within sixty (60) days of the agency receipt of copy of the
application.
16
SECTION 7. General Registration, Permit Application and Transfer Procedures
(a) All applications for permits and registrations shall contain sufficient information for a fair
and informed determination of the issues. The Agency may request additional information
from the applicant for this purpose.
(b) The day of receipt of a registration, permit application or transfer form shall be the day of
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Agency, immediately following the day of
submission of the application to the Agency or its duly authorized agent, or thirty-five (35)
days after such submission, whichever is sooner.
(c) At any time during the review period, the Agency may require the applicant or registrant to
provide additional information about the regulated activity. Requests for additional
information shall not stay the time limitations for registrations and permits as set forth in
Sections 8 and 9 of the APA Regulations.
(d) All permit applications and registrations shall be open for public inspection.
(e) Incomplete permit applications and registrations may be denied without prejudice.
(f) No permit or registration issued under Sections 8 or 9 of the APA Regulations shall be
assigned or transferred except with written approval by the Agency.
(g) The Agency shall notify the town clerk of any adjoining municipality of the pendency of any
application, petition, appeal, request or plan concerning any project on any site in which:
(1) any portion of the property affected by a decision of such agency is within five-hundred
feet of the boundary of the adjoining municipality; (2) a significant portion of the traffic to
the completed project on the site will use streets within the adjoining municipality to enter
or exit the site; (3) a significant portion of the sewer or water drainage from the project on
the site will flow through and significantly impact the drainage or sewerage system within
the adjoining municipality; or (4) water runoff from the improved site will impact streets or
other municipal or private property within the adjoining municipality. Such notice shall be
made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be mailed within seven days of
the date of receipt of the application, petition, request or plan. Such adjoining municipality
may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any hearing on any such application,
petition, appeal, request or plan.
17
SECTION 8. Registration Requirements
(a) Any person engaged in a regulated activity which substantially commenced, or was in active
operation within the past five (5) years, or with respect to which a municipal building permit
was issued, either (A) before the effective date of the state aquifer protection regulations, or
(B) before the date an applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning
district map or inland wetland and watercourse areas map, whichever occurs later, or for any
municipally owned site undergoing remedial action pursuant to 40 CFR 271, any person who
engages in a regulated activity within the ten (10) year period commencing on the date the
applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or inland
wetlands map, shall register the activity in accordance with this Section unless such person
has pending an application for an exemption pursuant to §22a-354i-6 of the Regulations of
Connecticut State Agencies.
(1) The Commissioner shall process registrations for those regulated activities specified
in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General Statutes. The Agency shall process
registrations for all other regulated activities.
(2) If the regulated activity is not specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General
Statutes, the person engaged in such activity shall submit a registration to the Agency
not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after adoption of regulations pursuant
to §22a-354p of the Connecticut General Statutes, or the designation the aquifer
protection area pursuant to §22a-354i-2 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, whichever occurs later. Any municipally owned site undergoing remedial
action pursuant to 40 CFR 271, the person engaged in such regulated activity shall
submit a registration within the ten (10) year period commencing on the date the
applicable aquifer protection area is designated on a municipal zoning district map or
inland wetlands map. Any person submitting a registration pursuant to the
requirements of this subsection shall simultaneously file a copy of the registration
with the Commissioner, Commissioner of Public Health and the affected water
company.
(b) All registrations shall be provided on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be
accompanied by the correct registration fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA
Regulations. Such registration forms may be obtained from the Plainfield Town Clerk or the
Agency. Such registration forms shall include at least the following information in writing
or on maps or drawings:
(1) The name, business telephone number, street address and mailing address of the:
(A) Registrant; if the registrant is a corporation or limited partnership, the full name
of the facility and such corporation or limited partnership as registered with the
Connecticut Secretary of State, and any officer or governing or managing body
of any partnership, association, firm or corporation,
18
(B) owner of such facility if different than the registrant, and
(C) manager or operator overseeing the operations of such facility;
(2) the location of such facility, using street address or other appropriate method of
location, and a map showing the property boundaries of the facility on a 1:24,000
scale United States Geological Survey topographic quadrangle base;
(3) an identification of the regulated activity or activities conducted at the facility, as
described in Section 2(a)(35) of the APA Regulations, which regulated activity or
activities shall consist of any regulated activity which substantially commenced, was
in active operation, or with respect to which a municipal building permit was issued
within the past five years; and
(4) a certification by the registrant that the subject regulated activity is in compliance
with the best management practices set forth in Section 12(a) of the APA Regulations,
as follows, signed after satisfying the statements set forth in the following
certification:
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in
this registration and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable
investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining
the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in
this document or certification may be punishable as a criminal offense under
§53a-157b of the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.”
(c) When deemed necessary to protect a public supply well subject to regulation under §22a-
354c or §22a-354z of the Connecticut General Statutes, the Agency may:
(1) require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval a
storm water management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA
Regulations. If so required, the storm water management plan shall be implemented
by the registrant immediately upon its approval; or
(2) require, by written notice, any registrant to submit for review and written approval
the materials management plan prepared in accordance with Section 12(a) of the
APA Regulations. If so required, the materials management plan shall be implemented
by the registrant immediately upon its approval.
(d) If the Agency determines that a registration is incomplete, it shall reject the registration and
notify the registrant of what additional information is required and the date by which it shall
be submitted.
(e) If the registration is determined to be complete, and the regulated activity is eligible for
19
registration, the Agency shall send written notification of such registration to the registrant.
Such registration shall be determined to be complete and eligible if the registrant has not
otherwise received a notice of rejection from the Agency, not later than one hundred and
eighty (180) days after the date the registration is received by the Agency.
(f) The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all registrations:
(1) The Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the registrant
and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
inaccurate, the registration may be modified, suspended or revoked;
(2) all registrations issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present
or future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey
no rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject
to any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws
or regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
(3) a complete registration shall expire five (5) years from the date of receipt of such
registration by the Agency;
(4) the registrant shall apply to the Agency to renew the registration on a form prescribed
by the Agency for a facility prior to expiration of such registration; and
(5) If a registered regulated activity is out of business or inactive when registration
renewal is required, a five (5) year allowance shall be in effect from the date the
registration expires. If the registrant has not applied to renew the registration within
five (5) years of the date the registration expires, the facility is no longer eligible for
registration.
(g) If a regulated activity which is eligible for registration in accordance with Subsection (a) of
this Section fails to be registered or if the registrant of an active registered activity fails to
apply for renewal prior to expiration, the Commissioner or municipal aquifer protection
agency, as appropriate, may accept a late registration at their discretion, subject to the
limitations in Subsection (f)(5) of this Section.
(h) Any person wishing to assume the benefits under a registration for regulated activities shall
apply to transfer such registration on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the
Agency.
20
SECTION 9. Permit Requirements
(a) Any person may apply for a permit to add a regulated activity to a facility where a registered
regulated activity occurs.
(b) The Agency shall process permit applications for those registrants that have registered
pursuant to Section 8 of the APA Regulations. The Commissioner shall process permit
applications for regulated activities specified in §22a-354p(g) of the Connecticut General
Statutes and for those registrants that have registered pursuant to §22a-354i-7(b)(1) of the
Regulations of Connecticut State Agencies.
(c) Action shall be taken on permit applications within sixty-five (65) days after the completion
of a public hearing or in the absence of a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days from the
date of receipt of the application. The applicant may consent to one or more extensions of
either of these timeframes, provided the total extension of all such periods is sixty-five (65)
days or less.
(d) An application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the Agency and shall be
accompanied by the correct application fee in accordance with Section 18 of the APA
Regulations. Such permit application forms may be obtained from the Plainfield Town Clerk
or the Agency. Simultaneously with filing an application, the applicant shall send a copy of
the application to the Commissioner, the Commissioner of Public Health and the affected
water company. An application shall include the following information:
(1) The information as required for a registration under Section 8(b) of the APA
Regulations shall be provided for the proposed regulated activity;
(2) a confirmation and certification that the existing and proposed activity:
(A) remains and shall remain in compliance with Section 12(a) of the APA
Regulations,
(B) shall not increase the number of underground storage tanks used for storage of
hazardous materials, and
(C) remains and shall remain in compliance with all local, state, and federal
environmental laws;
(3) a materials management plan in accordance with Section 12(a) of the APA
Regulations;
(4) a storm water management plan in accordance with Section 12(b) of the APA
Regulations;
(5) the following environmental compliance information with respect to environmental
violations which occurred at the facility where the regulated activities are conducted,
21
within the five years immediately preceding the date of the application:
(A) any criminal conviction involving a violation of any environmental protection
law,
(B) any civil penalty imposed in any state or federal judicial proceeding, or any
penalty exceeding five thousand dollars imposed in any administrative
proceeding, and
(C) any judicial or administrative orders issued regarding any such violation
together with the dates, case or docket numbers, or other information which
identifies the proceeding. For any such proceeding initiated by the state or
federal government, the Agency may require submission of a copy of any official
document associated with the proceeding, the final judgment or order;
(6) any additional information deemed necessary by the Agency regarding potential
threats to the ground water and proposed safeguards; and
(7) the following certification signed by the applicant and the individual responsible for
preparing the application, after satisfying the statements set forth in the certification:
"I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in
this document and all attachments, and I certify, based on reasonable
investigation, including my inquiry of those individuals responsible for obtaining
the information, the submitted information is true, accurate and complete to the
best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that any false statement made in
the submitted information is punishable as a criminal offense under §53a-157b of
the Connecticut General Statutes and any other applicable law.”
(e) The Commissioner, any affected water company or the Commissioner of Public Health may,
not later than thirty (30) days after receiving a copy of an application for a permit under this
Section, submit to the Agency written comments on such application. The Agency shall give
due consideration to any such comments, and shall provide a copy of the decision to the
Commissioner, the affected water company and the Commissioner of Public Health.
(f) To carry out the purposes of the Act, the Agency may grant an application as filed, grant it
upon such terms, conditions, limitations or modifications necessary, or deny it. The Agency
shall state upon the record the reason for its decision.
(g) The Agency may hold a public hearing on an application for a permit in accordance with
Section 10 of the APA regulations.
(h) The Agency shall not issue a permit unless a complete application has been received and
the applicant demonstrates to the Agency's satisfaction that all requirements of this Section
of the APA regulations have been satisfied and all of the following standards and criteria
22
have been met:
(1) the proposed regulated activity shall take place at a facility where a registered
regulated activity occurs;
(2) the proposed regulated activity shall not increase the number, or storage capacity of
underground storage tanks used for hazardous materials except for the replacement
of an existing underground storage tank in accordance with Section 12(a)(3) of the
APA Regulations;
(3) the materials management plan and storm water management plan have been
satisfactorily prepared in accordance with Sections 12(a) and 12(b) of the APA
Regulations;
(4) the applicant has submitted a confirmation and certification that all regulated
activities remain and shall remain in compliance with all local, state and federal
environmental laws in accordance with Subsection (d)(2) of this Section;
(5) the applicant’s compliance record does not indicate (A) that any noncompliance
resulted from indifference to or disregard for the legal requirements, (B) an
unwillingness or inability to devote the resources necessary to comply and remain in
compliance, or (C) that instances of noncompliance have led to serious environmental
harm, harm to human health or safety, or a substantial risk of such harm;
(6) the proposed regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with Section 12 of
the APA Regulations;
(7) the existing regulated activity is being conducted in accordance with Section 12 of the
APA Regulations; and
(8) the certification required under Subsection (d)(7) of this Section has been signed by
the applicant and the individual responsible for preparing the application.
(i) The Agency may impose reasonable conditions or limitations on any permit issued under
this Section to assure protection of the ground water, including, but not limited to the
following:
(1) best management practices in addition to those set forth in Section 12 of the APA
Regulations; and
(2) ground water monitoring.
(j) The following general provisions shall be included in the issuance of all permits:
(1) the Agency has relied in whole or in part on information provided by the applicant
and if such information subsequently proves to be false, deceptive, incomplete or
23
inaccurate, the permit may be modified, suspended or revoked;
(2) all permits issued by the Agency are subject to and do not derogate any present or
future rights or powers of the Commissioner, Agency, or municipality, and convey no
rights in real estate or material nor any exclusive privileges, and are further subject to
any and all public and private rights and to any federal, state, and municipal laws or
regulations pertinent to the subject land or activity;
(3) the permit shall expire ten (10) years from the date of issuance of such permit by the
Agency; and
(4) a person shall apply to the Agency to renew the permit on a form prescribed by the
Agency prior to expiration of such permit. Such renewal shall be granted upon request
by the Agency unless a substantial change in the permitted activity is proposed, or
enforcement action with regard to the regulated activity has been taken, in which
case, a new permit application shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with
the provisions of this Section.
(k) The Agency shall notify the applicant or permittee within fifteen (15) days of the date of the
decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the Agency shall cause notice of its
order in issuance or denial of a permit to be published in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the municipality in which the aquifer protection area is located.
(l) A permittee may request a modification of a permit from the Agency. Such request shall be
on a form prescribed by the Agency, and shall include the facts and reasons supporting the
request. The Agency may require the permittee to submit a new application for a permit or
renewal in lieu of a modification request.
(m) A person wishing to assume the benefits under a permit for regulated activities shall apply
to transfer such permit on a form prescribed by the Agency and submitted to the Agency.
24
SECTION 10. Public Hearings Regarding Permit Applications
(a) If the Agency decides to hold a public hearing regarding an application for a permit to
conduct a regulated activity within an aquifer protection area, such hearing shall commence
no later than sixty-five (65) days after the receipt of such application.
(b) Notice of the hearing shall be published at least twice at intervals of not less than two (2)
days, the first not more than fifteen (15) days and not fewer than ten (10) days, and the last
not less than two (2) days before the date set for the hearing in a newspaper having a
general circulation in each city/town where the affected aquifer, or any part thereof, is
located.
(c) The Agency shall send to any affected water company, at least ten (10) days before the
hearing, a copy of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any affected water
company may, through a representative, appear and be heard at any such hearing.
(d) All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection.
(e) At such hearing any person or persons may appear and be heard.
(f) The hearing shall be completed within thirty-five (35) days of its commencement.
(g) The applicant may consent to an extension of the time frames in Subsections (a) or (f) of
this Section, provided the total extension of all such periods, including any extensions
provided in Section 9(c), totals sixty-five (65) days or less.
(h) In reaching its decision on any application after a public hearing, the Agency shall base its
decision on the record of that hearing. Documentary evidence or other material not in the
hearing record shall not be considered by the Agency in its decision.
(i) The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the Agency’s decision in accordance with
Section 9(k) of the APA Regulations.
SECTION 11. Bond and Insurance Relevant to Permit Applicants
(a) An applicant may be required to file a bond as a condition of the permit.
(b) Any bond or surety shall be conditioned on compliance with all provisions of these
regulations and the terms, conditions and limitations established in the permit.
25
SECTION 12. Best Management Practices
(a) Every regulated activity shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
(1) hazardous materials may be stored above ground within an aquifer protection area
only in accordance with the following conditions:
(A) hazardous material shall be stored in a building or under a roof that minimizes
storm water entry to the hazardous material storage area, except that a roof is
not required for a bulk storage facility as defined in Section 2 of the APA
Regulations,
(B) floors within a building or under a roof where hazardous material may be stored
shall be constructed or treated to protect the surface of the floor from
deterioration due to spillage of any such material,
(C) a structure which may be used for storage or transfer of hazardous material
shall be protected from storm water run-on, and ground water intrusion,
(D) hazardous material shall be stored within an impermeable containment area
which is capable of containing at least the volume of the largest container of
such hazardous material present in such area, or 10% of the total volume of all
such containers in such area, whichever is larger, without overflow of released
hazardous material from the containment area,
(E) hazardous material shall not be stored with other hazardous materials that are
incompatible and may create a hazard of fire, explosion or generation of toxic
substances,
(F) hazardous material shall be stored only in a container that has been certified to
meet state or federal specifications for containers suitable for the transport or
storage of such material,
(G) hazardous material shall be stored only in an area that is secured against unauthorized
entry by the public, and
(H) the requirements of this subdivision are intended to supplement, and not to
supersede, any other applicable requirements of federal, state, or local law,
including applicable requirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976;
(2) no person shall increase the number of underground storage tanks used to store
hazardous materials;
(3) an underground storage tank used to store hazardous materials shall not be replaced
26
with a larger tank unless (A) there is no more than a 25% increase in volume of the
larger replacement tank, and (B) the larger replacement tank is a double-walled tank
with co-axial piping, both meeting new installation component standards pursuant to
§22a-449(d)-1(e) and §22a-449(d)-102 of the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies, and with interstitial monitoring;
(4) no person shall use, maintain or install floor drains, dry wells or other infiltration
devices or appurtenances which allow the release of waste waters to the ground,
unless such release is permitted by the Commissioner in accordance with §22a-430 or
§22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes; and
(5) a materials management plan shall be developed and implemented in accordance
with the following:
(A) a materials management plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information with respect to the subject regulated activity:
(i) a pollution prevention assessment consisting of a detailed evaluation of
alternatives to the use of hazardous materials or processes and practices
that would reduce or eliminate the use of hazardous materials, and
implementation of such alternatives where possible and feasible,
(ii) a description of any operations or practices which may pose a threat of
pollution to the aquifer, which shall include the following:
(aa) a process flow diagram identifying where hazardous materials are
stored, disposed and used, and where hazardous wastes are
generated and subsequently stored and disposed,
(bb) an inventory of all hazardous materials which are likely to be or will
be manufactured, produced, stored, utilized or otherwise handled,
and
(cc) a description of waste, including waste waters generated, and a
description of how such wastes are handled, stored and disposed,
(iii) the name, street address, mailing address, title and telephone number of
the individual(s) responsible for implementing the materials management
plan and the individual(s) who should be contacted in an emergency,
(iv) a record-keeping system to account for the types, quantities, and
disposition of hazardous materials which are manufactured, produced,
utilized, stored, or otherwise handled or which are discharged or emitted;
such record-keeping system shall be maintained at the subject facility and
shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business
hours by the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency,
27
and
(v) an emergency response plan for responding to a release of hazardous
materials. Such plan shall describe how each such release could result in
pollution to the underlying aquifer and shall set forth the methods used or
to be used to prevent and abate any such a release;
(B) when a materials management plan is required under either Section 8(c) or 9(d)
of the APA Regulations, such materials management plan shall be completed
and certified by a professional engineer or a certified hazardous materials
manager, or, if the facility where the regulated activity is conducted has
received and maintained an ISO 14001 environmental management system
certification, then the registrant may complete and certify the materials
management plan; and
(C) the materials management plan shall be maintained at the subject facility and
shall be made available thereat for inspection during normal business hours by
the Commissioner and the municipal aquifer protection agency.
(b) The development and implementation of a storm water management plan required for
regulated activities in accordance with Sections 8(c) and 9(d) of the APA Regulations, shall
be as follows: A storm water management plan shall assure that storm water run-off
generated by the subject regulated activity is (i) managed in a manner so as to prevent
pollution of ground water, and (ii) shall comply with all of the requirements for the General
Permit of the Discharge of Storm Water associated with a Commercial Activity issued
pursuant to §22a-430b of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 13. Other State, Federal and Local Laws
(a) Nothing in these regulations shall obviate the requirement for the applicant to obtain any
other assents, permits or licenses required by law or regulation by the Town of Plainfield,
State of Connecticut and the Government of the United States including any approval
required by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Obtaining such
assents, permits or licenses are the sole responsibility of the applicant.
(b) No person shall conduct any regulated activity within an aquifer protection area which
requires zoning or subdivision approval without first having obtained a valid certificate of
zoning or subdivision approval, special permit, special exception or variance, or other
documentation establishing that the proposal complies with the Town of Plainfield zoning
or subdivision regulations.
28
SECTION 14. Enforcement
(a) The Agency may appoint a duly authorized agent to act in its behalf with the authority to
issue notices of violation or cease and desist orders.
(b) If the Agency or its duly authorized agent finds that any person is conducting or maintaining
any activity, facility or condition which violates any provision of these regulations, the
Agency or its duly authorized agent may:
(1) Issue a notice of violation.
(A) The notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, the jurisdiction of
the Agency, and the necessary action required to correct the violation including
without limitation halting the activity in the aquifer protection area.
(B) The Agency may request that the person appear at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Agency to discuss the unauthorized activity, and/or provide a
written reply to the notice or file an application for the necessary permit or
registration. Failure to carry out the action(s) directed in a notice of violation
may result in issuance of an order under Subsection (2) of this Section or other
enforcement proceedings as provided by law.
(2) Issue a written order.
(A) Such order shall be issued by certified mail, return receipt requested to such
person conducting such activity or maintaining such facility or condition to
cease such activity immediately or to correct such facility or condition. The
Agency shall send a copy of such order to any affected water company by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
(B) Within ten (10) days of the issuance of such order the Agency shall hold a
hearing to provide the person an opportunity to be heard and show cause why
the order should not remain in effect. Any affected water company may testify
at the hearing. The Agency shall consider the facts presented at the hearing
and, within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing, notify the person by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that the original order remains in effect,
that a revised order is in effect, or that the order has been withdrawn.
(3) Suspend or revoke registration or permit.
(A) The Agency may suspend or revoke a registration or a permit if it finds, after a
hearing, that the registrant or permittee has not complied with the terms,
conditions or limitations set forth in the registration or the permit. Prior to
revoking or suspending any registration or permit, the Agency shall issue notice
to the registrant or the permittee, personally or by certified mail, return receipt
29
requested, setting forth the facts or conduct that warrants the intended action.
(B) The Agency shall hold a hearing to provide the registrant or permittee an
opportunity to show that it is in compliance with its registration or permit. The
Agency shall notify the registrant or permittee of its decision by certified mail
within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision. The Agency shall publish
notice of a suspension or revocation in a newspaper having general circulation
in the Town of Plainfield.
(c) An order issued pursuant to Subsection (b)(2) of this Section shall be effective upon
issuance, shall remain in effect until the Agency affirms, revises, or withdraws the order,
and shall not delay or bar an action pursuant to Subsection (b)(3) of this Section.
(d) A court may assess criminal and or civil penalties to any person who commits, takes part in,
or assists in any violation of any provision of the APA regulations in accordance with §22a-
354s(b) and §22a-354s(c) of the Connecticut General Statutes.
SECTION 15. Amendments
(a) These regulations may be amended, changed or repealed in accordance with §22a-354p(b)
of the Connecticut General Statutes.
(b) If a complete application is filed with the Agency which is in conformance with the APA
regulations as of the date of its filing, the permit issued shall not be required to comply with
any changes in regulations taking effect on or after the filing date. The provisions of this
Section shall not apply to the establishment, amendment, or change of the boundaries of
the aquifer protection area or to any changes in the APA Regulations necessary to make the
regulations consistent with Chapter 446i of the Connecticut General Statutes as of the date
of the Agency’s decision.
SECTION 16. Appeals
(a) Appeal of the Agency’s regulation, order, decision or action shall be made in accordance
with §22a-354q of the Connecticut General Statutes.
30
SECTION 17. Conflict and Severance
(a) If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations, the provision that
imposes the most stringent standards shall govern. The invalidity of any word, clause,
sentence, section, part, subsection, subdivision or provision of these regulations shall not
affect the validity of any other part that can be given effect without such valid part or parts.
(b) If there is a conflict between the provisions of the APA Regulations and the Act, the
provisions of the Act shall govern.
31
SECTION 18. Registration and Permit Application Fees
(a) All fees required by these regulations shall be submitted to the Agency by certified check or
money order payable to the Town of Plainfield at the time the registration or permit
application is filed with the Agency.
(b) No registration or permit application shall be granted or approved by the Agency unless the
correct registration/application fee is paid in full or unless a waiver has been granted by the
Agency pursuant to Subsection (f) of this Section.
(c) The registration or permit application fee is nonrefundable.
(d) Registration or permit application fees shall be based on the following schedule:
Fee Schedule
Facility Size
Small (< 1 acre) Medium (1-5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
Registrations:
Industrial $100 $250 $400
Commercial $100 $250 $400
Other $100 $250 $400
Fee Schedule (continued)
Facility Size
Small (< 1 acre) Medium (1-5 acres) Large (> 5 acres)
Permits:
Industrial $200 $300 $400
Commercial $200 $300 $400
Other $200 $300 $400
Materials Management
Plan Reviews
$200 $300 $400
Storm water Management
Plan Reviews
$200 $300 $400
Public Hearing $350 $350 $350
Facility
Inspection/Monitoring
$100/ea $250/ea $400/ea
Regulation Petition $1000 $100 $100
Transfer Fee $50 $100 $100
(e) Boards, commissions, councils and departments of the Town of Plainfield are exempt from
all fee requirements.
32
(f) The registrant or applicant may petition the Agency to waive, reduce or allow delayed
payment of the fee. Such petitions shall be in writing and shall state fully the facts and
circumstances the Agency should consider in its determination under this Section. The
Agency may waive all or part of the application fee if the Agency determines that:
(1) the activity applied for would clearly result in a substantial public benefit to the
environment or to the public health and safety and the registrant or applicant would
reasonably be deterred from initiating the activity solely or primarily as a result of the
amount of the registration or permit application fee; or
(2) the amount of the registration or permit application fee is clearly excessive in relation
to the cost to the City/Town for reviewing and processing the application.
(g) Extra Assessments
In the event that additional expenses, including but not limited to outside consultants,
experts, or legal advisors are incurred in processing the registration or permit application
the applicant/registrant may be assessed an additional fee to cover said costs. Said fees
are to be estimated by the duly authorized agent and submitted with the application fee
and held until the application is completely processed after which time any residual funds
pertaining to this assessment are to be returned to the applicant/registrant.
For the purpose of this assessment, an “outside consultant” means a professional who is
not an employee of the Town of Plainfield including but not limited to engineering,
environmental, hydrogeology and hazardous materials management professionals.
(h) The Agency shall state upon its record the basis for all actions under this Section.
33
SECTION 19. Effective Date of Regulations
The APA Regulations, APA boundaries and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon (1)
the Commissioner’s determination that such regulations are reasonably related to the purpose
of ground water protection and not inconsistent with the Regulations of Connecticut State
Agencies §22a-354i-1 through §22a-354i-10 and (2) filing in the Office of the City/Town Clerk.
Adopted Date: April 10, 2012
DEP Approval Date: July 17, 2012
Effective Date: April 24, 2012
Revision Date: ___________________